


City of Prineville CHARTER

To provide for the government of the city of Prineville, Crook County, Oregon; and to repeal all charter provisions of the city enacted prior to the time that this charter takes effect.

Be it enacted by the people of the city of Prineville, Crook County, Oregon:


Chapter I NAMES AND BOUNDARIES


Section 1. Title.

This charter may be referred to as the 2010 Charter.


Section 2. Name.

The City of Prineville, Oregon, continues as a municipal corporation with the name City of Prineville.


Section 3. Boundaries.

The city includes all territory within its boundaries as they now exist or are legally modified. The city will maintain as a public record an accurate and current description of the boundaries.


Chapter II POWERS


Section 4. Powers.

The city has all powers that the constitutions, statutes and common law of the United States and Oregon expressly or impliedly grant or allow the city, as fully as this charter specifically enumerated each of those powers.

The city shall have the power to build, acquire, own and operate railways operated by steam, electric, or other power within and without its boundaries and running from such city to other towns, cities, and points without its boundaries, and to acquire right-of-way, easements or real property within and without its boundaries for any such purpose.


Section 5. Construction.

The charter will be liberally construed so that the city may exercise fully all powers possible under this charter and under United States and Oregon law.


Section 6. Distribution.

The Oregon Constitution reserves initiative and referendum powers as to all municipal legislation to city voters. This charter vests all other city powers in the council except as the charter otherwise provides. The council has legislative authority by ordinance, administrative authority by resolution and quasi-judicial authority by order.


Chapter III COUNCIL


Section 7. Council.

The council consists of a mayor and six councilors nominated and elected from the city at large.


Section 8. Mayor.

The mayor presides over and facilitates council meetings, preserves order, enforces council rules, and determines the order of business under council rules. The mayor is a voting member of the council and has no veto authority. With the consent of the council, the mayor appoints members of commissions and committees established by ordinance or resolution.

The mayor must sign all records of council decisions. The mayor serves as the political head of city government.


Section 9. Council President. 

At its first meeting after this charter takes effect and thereafter at its first meeting of each odd-numbered year, the council shall elect a president from it membership. The president presides in the absence of the mayor and acts as mayor when the mayor is unable to perform duties.


Section 10. Rules.

The council must by resolution adopt rules to govern its meetings.


Section 11. Meetings.

The council must meet at least once a month at a time and place designated by its rules, and may meet at other times in accordance with the rules.


Section 12. Quorum.

A majority of the council members is a quorum to conduct business, but a smaller number may meet and compel attendance of absent members as prescribed by council rules.


Section 13. Vote Required.

The express approval of a majority of a quorum of the council is necessary for any council decision, except when this charter requires approval by a majority of the council.


Section 14. Record.

A record of council meetings must be kept in a manner prescribed by the council rules.


Chapter IV LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY


Section 15. Ordinances.

The council will exercise its legislative authority by adopting ordinances. The enacting clause for all ordinances must state "The People of the City of Prineville ordain as follows:".


Section 16. Ordinance Adoption.

(a)    Except as authorized by subsection (b), adoption of an ordinance requires approval by a majority of the council at two meetings.

(b)    The council may adopt an ordinance at a single meeting by the unanimous approval of at least a quorum of the council, provided the proposed ordinance is available in writing to the public at least one week before the meeting.

(c)    Any substantive amendment to a proposed ordinance must be read aloud or made available in writing to the public before the council adopts the ordinance at that meeting.

(d)    After the adoption of an ordinance, the vote of each member must be entered into the council minutes.

(e)    After adoption of an ordinance, the city custodian of records must endorse it with the date of adoption and the custodian's name and title.


Section 17.  Effective Date of Ordinances.

Ordinances normally take effect on the 30th day after adoption, or on a later day provided in the ordinance. An ordinance may take effect as soon as adopted or other date less than 30 days after adoption if it contains an emergency clause.


Chapter V ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY


Section 18. Resolutions.

The council will normally exercise its administrative authority by approving resolutions. The approving clause for resolutions may state, "The City of Prineville resolves as follows."


Section 19. Resolution Approval.

(a)    Approval of a resolution or any other council administrative decision requires approval by the council at one meeting.

(b)    Any substantive amendment to a resolution must be read aloud or made available in writing to the public before the council adopts the resolution at that meeting.

(c)    After approval of a resolution or other administrative decision, the vote of each member must be entered into the council minutes.

(d)    After approval of a resolution, the city custodian of records must endorse it with the date of approval and the custodian's name and title.


Section 20. Effective Date of Resolutions.

Resolutions and other administrative decisions take effect on the date of approval, or on a later day provided in the resolution.


Chapter VI QUASI-JUDICIAL AUTHORITY


Section 21. Orders.

The council will normally exercise its quasi-judicial authority by approving orders. The approving clause for orders may state "The City of Prineville orders as follows:".


Section 22. Order Approval.

(a)    Approval of an order or any other council quasi-judicial decision requires approval by the council at one meeting.

(b)    Any substantive amendment to an order must be read aloud or made available in writing to the public at the meeting before the council adopts the order.

(c)    After approval of an order or other council quasi-judicial decision, the vote of each member must be entered in the council minutes.

(d)    After approval of an order, the city custodian of records must endorse it with the date of approval, the custodian's name and title.


Section 23. Effective Date of Orders.

Orders and other quasi-judicial decisions take effect on the date of final approval, or on a later day provided in the order.


Chapter VII ELECTIONS


Section 24. Councilors.

The term of a councilor in office when this charter is adopted is the term for which the councilor was elected. At each general election after the adoption, three councilors will be elected for four-year terms.


Section 25. Mayor.

The term of the mayor in office when this charter is adopted continues until the beginning of the first odd-numbered year after adoption. At every general election after the adoption, a mayor will be elected for a two-year term.


Section 26. State Law.

City elections must conform to state law except as this charter or ordinances provide otherwise. All elections for city offices must be nonpartisan.


Section 27. Qualifications.

(a)    The mayor and each councilor must be a qualified elector under state law, and reside within the city for at least one year immediately before election or appointment to office.

(b)    No person may be a candidate at a single election for more than one city office.

(c)    Neither the mayor nor a councilor may be employed by the city.

(d)    The council is the final judge of the election and qualifications of its members.


Section 28. Terms.

The term of an officer elected at a general election begins at the first council meeting of the year immediately after the election, and continues until the successor qualifies and assumes the office.


Section 29. Oath.

The mayor and each councilor must swear or affirm to faithfully perform the duties of office and support the constitutions and laws of the United States and of Oregon.


Section 30. Vacancies:

The mayor or a council office becomes vacant:

(a)    Upon the incumbent's:

(1)    Death,

(2)    Adjudicated incompetence, or

(3)    Recall from the office.

(b)    Upon declaration by the council after the incumbent's:

(1)    Failure to qualify for the office within 10 days of the time the term of office is to begin.

(2)    Absence from the city for 30 days without council consent, or from all council meetings within a 60-day period,

(3)    Ceasing to reside in the city,

(4)    Ceasing to be a qualified elector under state law,

(5)    Conviction of a public offense punishable by loss of liberty,

(6)    Resignation from the office, or

(7)    Removal under Section 32(i).


Section 31. Filling Vacancies.

A mayor or councilor vacancy will be filled by appointment by a majority of the remaining council members. The appointee's term of office runs from appointment until expiration of the term of office of the last person elected to that office. If a disability prevents a council member from attending council meetings or a member is absent from the city, a majority of the council may appoint a councilor pro tem.


Chapter VIII APPOINTIVE OFFICERS


Section 32. City Manager.

(a)    The office of city manager is established as the administrative head of the city government. The city manager is responsible to the mayor and council for the proper administration of all city business. The city manager will assist the mayor and council in the development of city policies, and carry out policies established by ordinances and resolutions.

(b)    A majority of the council must appoint and may remove the manager. The appointment must be made without regard to political considerations and solely on the basis of education and experience in competencies and practices of local government management.

(c)    The manager shall reside in the City unless a majority of the council allows otherwise.

(d)    The manager may be appointed for a definite or an indefinite term, and may be removed at any time by a majority of the council. The council must fill the office by appointment as soon as practicable after the vacancy occurs.

(e)    The manager must:

(1)    Attend all council meetings unless excused by the mayor or council;

(2)    Make reports and recommendations to the mayor and council about the needs of the city;

(3)    Administer and enforce all city ordinances, resolutions, franchises, leases, contracts, permits, and other city decisions;

(4)    Appoint, supervise and remove city employees;

(5)    Organize city departments and administrative structure;

(6)    Prepare and administer the annual city budget;

(7)    Administer city utilities and property;

(8)    Encourage and support regional and intergovernmental cooperation;

(9)    Promote cooperation among the council, staff and citizens in developing city policies and building a sense of community;

(10)Perform other duties as directed by the council;

(11) Delegate duties, but remain responsible for acts of all subordinates.

(f)    The manager has no authority over the council or over the judicial functions of the municipal judge.

(g)    The manager and other employees designated by the council may sit at council Meetings but have no vote. The manager may take part in all council discussions.

(h)    When the manager is temporarily disabled from acting as manager or when the office of the manager becomes vacant, the council must appoint a manager pro tem. The manager pro tem has the authority and duties of manager, except that a pro tem manager may appoint or remove employees only with council approval.

(i)    No council member may directly or indirectly attempt to coerce the manager or a candidate for the office of manager in the appointment or removal of any city employee, or in administrative decisions regarding city property or contracts. Violation of this prohibition is grounds for removal from office by a majority of the council after a public hearing. In council meetings, councilors may discuss or suggest anything with the manager relating to city business.


Section 33. Municipal Court and Judge.

(a)    A majority of the council may appoint and remove a municipal judge. A municipal judge will hold court in the city at such place as the council directs.

The court will be known as the Municipal Court.

(b)    All proceedings of this court will conform to state laws governing justices of the peace and justice courts.

(c)    All areas within the city and areas outside the city as permitted by state law are within the territorial jurisdiction of the court.

(d)    The municipal court has jurisdiction over every offense created by city ordinance.

The court may enforce forfeitures and other penalties created by such ordinances.

(e)    The municipal judge may:

(1)    Render judgments and impose sanctions on persons and property;

(2)    Order the arrest of anyone accused of an offense against the city;

(3)    Commit to jail or admit to bail anyone accused of a city offense;

(4)    Issue and compel obedience to subpoenas;

(5)    Compel witnesses to appear and testify and jurors to serve for trials before the court;

(6)    Penalize contempt of court;

(7)    Issue processes necessary to enforce judgments and orders of the court;

(8)    Issue search warrants; and

(9)    Perform other judicial and quasi-judicial functions assigned by ordinance.

(f)    The council may appoint and may remove municipal judges pro tem.

(g)    The council may transfer some or all of the functions of the municipal court to an appropriate state court.


Chapter IX PERSONNEL


Section 34. Compensation.

The council must authorize the compensation of city officers and employees as part of its approval of the annual city budget.


Chapter X PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS


Section 35. Procedure.

The council may by ordinance provide for procedures governing the making, altering, vacating, or abandoning of a public improvement. A proposed public improvement may be suspended for six months upon remonstrance by owners of the real property to be specially assessed for the improvement. The number of owners necessary to suspend the action will be determined by ordinance.


Section 36. Special Assessments.

The procedure for levying, collecting and enforcing special assessments for public improvements or other services charged against real property will be governed by ordinance, or if there is no ordinance, by state law.


Chapter XI MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS


Section 37. Debt.

City indebtedness may not exceed debt limits imposed by state law. A charter amendment is not required to authorize city indebtedness.


Section 38. Ordinance Continuation.

All ordinances consistent with this charter in force when it takes effect remain in effect until amended or repealed.


Section 39. Repeal.

All charter provisions adopted before this charter takes effect are repealed.


Section 40. Severability.

The terms of this charter are severable. If any provision is held invalid by a court, the invalidity does not affect any other part of the charter.


Section 41. Time of Effect.

This charter takes effect July 1, 2010.


TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS

Chapter

10.    GENERAL PROVISIONS


CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS

Section

10.01    Title of code

10.02    Interpretation

10.03    Application to future ordinances

10.04    Captions

10.05    Definitions

10.06    Rules of interpretation

10.07    Severability

10.08    Reference to other sections

10.09    Reference to offices

10.10    Errors and omissions

10.11    Official time

10.12    Reasonable time

10.13    Ordinances repealed

10.14    Ordinances unaffected

10.15    Effective date of ordinances

10.16    Repeal or modification of ordinance

10.17    Ordinances which amend or supplement code

10.18    Section histories; statutory references

10.99    General penalty

Cross-reference:

Ordinances generally, see Charter, Ch. VIII


10.01 TITLE OF CODE.

This codification of ordinances by and for Prineville shall be designated as the Code of Prineville and may be so cited.


10.02 INTERPRETATION.

Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.


10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.

All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless otherwise specifically provided.


10.04 CAPTIONS.

Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.


10.05 DEFINITIONS.

(A) General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their technical import.

(B) Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, or MUNICIPALITY. The City of Prineville, Oregon.

CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of Prineville, Oregon.

CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code as modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or sections.

COUNTY. Crook County, Oregon.

MAY. The act referred to is permissive.

MONTH. A calendar month.

OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.

OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office, employee, commission or department of this city unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation, copartnership, limited liability company (LLC), trustee, lessee or receiver. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.

PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.

SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.

SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.

STATE. The State of Oregon.

SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading. Not all chapters have subchapters.

WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.

YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.


10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.

The construction of all ordinances of this city shall be by the following rules, unless such construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance.

(A) AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written "and/or," if the sense requires it.

(B) Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, such requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of such act by an authorized agent or deputy.

(C) Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if applicable.

(D) General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.


10.07 SEVERABILITY.

If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or application.


10.08 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.

Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.


10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.

Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer or employee of this city exercising the powers, duties or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.


10.10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.

If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and the word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of such error.


10.11 OFFICIAL TIME.

The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws, shall be the official time within this city for the transaction of all city business.


10.12 REASONABLE TIME.

(A) In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt performance of such act or the giving of such notice.

(B) The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day be Sunday, it shall be excluded.


10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.

This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.


10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.

All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.


10.15 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.

All ordinances passed by the legislative body shall take effect as provided in Ch. VIII of the City Charter.


10.16 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.

(A) Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.

(B) No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted, created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted, enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided.

(C) When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly provided.


10.17 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.

(A) If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its place.

(B) Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this code, the proper number of such chapter or section. In addition to such indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.


10.18 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.

(A) As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage date of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending ordinances, if any, are listed following the text of the code section.

Example: (Ord. 161, passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. 170, passed 1-1-70; Am. Ord. 180, passed 1-1-80; Am. Ord. 185, passed 1-1-85)

(B) (1) If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.

Example: (O.R.S. 192.410) (Ord. 180, passed 1-17-80; Am. Ord. 185, passed 1-1-85).

(2) If a statutory cite is set forth as a "statutory reference" following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for further information.

Example:

§ 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.

This city shall make available to any person for inspection or copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.

Statutory reference:

For provisions concerning the inspection of public records, see O.R.S. 192.420


10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.

(A) Any person violating any provision of this code for which no other specific penalty is provided shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $500, subject to division (B) of this section.

(B) Any person violating any provision of this code which is identical to a state statute containing a lesser penalty shall, upon conviction, be punished by the penalty prescribed by state statute.

(C) Each calendar date on which a violation occurs constitutes a separate violation.


TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION

Chapter

30.    CITY COUNCIL

31.    CITY OFFICERS

32.    DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS

33.    POLICE DEPARTMENT

34.    (RESERVED)

35.    ELECTIONS

36.    COURTS

37.    TAXATION AND FINANCE

38.    SMOKE-FREE CITY FACILITIES

39.    REIMBURSEMENT DISTRICTS FOR PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS

40.    SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT CHARGE

41.    PROPERTY OWNERS CLAIM FOR COMPENSATION

42.    CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS CHECKS


CHAPTER 30: CITY COUNCIL

Section

30.01    Regular meetings

30.02    Special meetings

30.03    Study sessions

30.04    Open meetings

30.05    Order of business

30.06    Items to be acted on generally

30.07    New business

30.08    Reading of minutes

30.09    Committees

30.10    Public members addressing Council

30.11    Voting

30.12    Resolutions

30.13    Robert’s Rules of Order

30.14    Adjournment

Cross reference:

Powers of city, see Charter, Ch. II

Form of government, see Charter, Ch. III

Council, see Charter, Ch. IV

Vacancies of office, see Charter, Ch. VII

Ordinances, see Charter, Ch. VIII

Emergencies, see § 31.05


30.01 REGULAR MEETINGS.

(A) The Council shall meet in regular session on the second and fourth Tuesdays of each month and the first Monday in January in the Council chambers at the time set by the Council. A meeting may be canceled with the concurrence of a majority of the Council, but in no event shall there be less than one meeting per month. (’91 Code, § 1-8.1)

(B) If the regular meeting date of the Council falls on a legal holiday, as defined by ORS Chapter 187, the Council shall meet on the following day in the Council chambers and the meeting shall be a regular meeting. (’91 Code, § 1-8.2)

(Ord. 954, passed 3-12-91)

Cross reference:

Meetings, see Charter, Ch. IV, § 13


30.02 SPECIAL MEETINGS.

Special meetings of the Council may be called at any time on the request of two members of the Council, by the Mayor, or by the President of the Council in the Mayor’s absence, by giving notice of the meeting to the Council members and the public in a manner and for a time as circumstances may permit, but with a view to obtaining the largest possible attendance of Council members.

(’91 Code, § 1-8.3) (Ord. 954, passed 3-12-91)

Cross reference:

Special meetings, see Charter, Ch. IV, § 13


30.03 STUDY SESSIONS.

Study sessions of the Council shall be held in accordance with state statutes whenever special circumstances require such a session, and the session shall be called by either the Mayor, City Manager or two Council members.

(’91 Code, § 1-8.5) (Ord. 954, passed 3-12-91)


30.04 OPEN MEETINGS.

All meetings, other than executive sessions, shall be open to the public.

(’91 Code, § 1-8.6) (Ord. 954, passed 3-12-91)

Cross reference:

Proceedings open to the public, see Charter, Ch. IV, § 16


30.05 ORDER OF BUSINESS.

The order of business at each Council meeting shall be in accordance with the agenda prepared by the City Manager.

(’91 Code, § 1-8.7) (Ord. 954, passed 3-12-91)


30.06 ITEMS TO BE ACTED ON GENERALLY.

Normally, only those items on the agenda shall be acted on by the Council. Matters deemed to be emergencies or of an urgent nature by the Mayor, a Council member, the City Manager or City Attorney may be submitted for Council consideration and action.

(’91 Code, § 1-8.8) (Ord. 954, passed 3-12-91)


30.07 NEW BUSINESS.

The Mayor or a Council member may bring before the Council any new business under the "other matters" portion of the agenda. These matters need not be specifically listed on the agenda, but formal action on the matters shall be deferred until a subsequent Council meeting unless deemed urgent.

(’91 Code, § 1-8.9) (Ord. 954, passed 3-12-91)


30.08 READING OF MINUTES.

(A) Minutes of any Council meeting shall be provided by sound, video or digital recording, or written minutes. In the case of written minutes, unless the reading of the minutes of a previous Council meeting is requested by a majority of the Council, the minutes may be approved without reading if copies had been previously furnished to each of the Council members.

(B) If minute meetings are recorded by sound, video, or digital recording a written summary of topics on the recording, members of the governing body present at the meeting, and the results of all votes and the vote of each member by name (hereinafter "brief") shall be provided to each Council member. Unless the reading of the brief of a previous Council meeting is requested by a majority of the Council, the brief may be approved without reading if copies had been previously furnished to each of the Council members.

(’91 Code, § 1-8.10) (Ord. 954, passed 3-12-91; Am. Ord. 1154, passed 7-8-08)


30.09 COMMITTEES.

Committees shall be approved by the Council as needed.

(’91 Code, § 1-8.11) (Ord. 954, passed 3-12-91; Am. Ord. 1064, passed 1-26-99)


30.10 PUBLIC MEMBERS ADDRESSING COUNCIL.

(A) Any public member desiring to address the Council shall stand and wait to be recognized by the presiding officer. After recognition, the person’s name and address shall be stated for the record and the remarks shall be limited to the question under discussion. All remarks and questions shall be addressed to the presiding officer and not to any individual Council member, staff member or other person. No person shall enter into any discussion without being recognized by the presiding officer.

(B) Any public member addressing the Council shall be limited to five minutes unless further time is granted by the presiding officer. No public member shall be allowed to speak more than once upon any one subject until every other public member choosing to speak thereon has spoken.

(C) After a motion has been made or after a public hearing has been closed, no public member shall address the Council without first securing permission from the majority of the Council.

(’91 Code, § 1-8.12) (Ord. 954, passed 3-12-91)


30.11 VOTING.

Every member shall vote when a question is taken, unless the Council excuses the member for a special reason; but no member shall be permitted to vote on any subject in which he/she has a direct pecuniary interest. Two members may demand the ayes and nays on any question. If not otherwise controlled by Charter provision, the concurrence of a majority of the members of the Council present at a Council meeting shall be necessary to decide any question before the Council.

(’91 Code, § 1-8.13) (Ord. 954, passed 3-12-91)

Cross reference:

Vote required, see Charter, Ch. IV, § 19


30.12 RESOLUTIONS.

Each resolution shall be read only once before being voted on, and that reading may be by title only unless any member of the Council requests the resolution be read in full. A resolution is effective immediately upon passage.

(’91 Code, § 1-8.14) (Ord. 954, passed 3-12-91)


30.13 ROBERT’S RULES OF ORDER.

Robert’s Rules of Order Revised shall be used as the guideline for conduct of Council meetings, except in those cases where specific provisions contrary to Robert’s Rules are provided in this chapter.

(’91 Code, § 1-8.15) (Ord. 954, passed 3-12-91)


30.14 ADJOURNMENT.

Any meeting may be adjourned to a time, place and date certain, but not beyond the next regular meeting.

(’91 Code, § 1-8.4) (Ord. 954, passed 3-12-91)


CHAPTER 31: CITY OFFICERS

Section

City Manager

31.01    Office created

31.02    City Council role

31.03    Powers and duties

31.04    Bond

31.05    Emergencies

General Manager of Railway

31.15    Office created

31.16    Duties and responsibilities

31.17    Financial reporting

City Recorder

31.25    Appointment

31.26    Duties

31.27    Recorder pro tem

Cross reference:

Clerk of Council, see Charter, Ch. I, § 22

Powers and duties of officers, see Charter, Ch. V

Vacancies in office, see Charter, Ch. VII

CITY MANAGER


31.01 OFFICE CREATED.

There is hereby created the office of City Manager for the city, and the appointee to the office shall have general supervision, direction and control over all nonelective officers and public employees of the city in the exercise of their duties and of all the work of all city departments, other than the office of Municipal Judge, which is specifically exempted from the operation of this subchapter.

(’91 Code, § 1-1.1) (Ord. 1158, passed 10-28-08)


31.02 CITY COUNCIL ROLE.

Except for the purpose of inquiry, the City Council and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the City Manager and neither the City Council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the City Manager either publicly or privately.

(’91 Code, § 1-1.2) (Ord. 1158, passed 10-28-08)


31.03 POWERS AND DUTIES.

(A) Generally. The powers and duties of the City Manager shall be as follows:

(1) To prepare the annual budget and submit it to the City Council, together with a message describing the important features thereof, and to be responsible for its administration after adoption.

(2) To supervise the purchase of all materials, supplies and equipment for which funds are provided in the budget; to let contracts necessary for the operation or maintenance of city services pursuant to state law and city ordinances; to advise the City Council on the advantages and disadvantages of contracts and bid proposals. No purchase shall be made, contract let or obligation incurred for any item or service that exceeds the current budget appropriation without a supplemental appropriation by the City Council. The Manager may issue rules governing purchasing procedures within the administrative organization as the City Council shall approve.

(3) To act as administrative head of all departments of the city government; to appoint, and when necessary for the good of the service, suspend or remove all officers and employees of the city except as otherwise provided by the City Charter, and except as he/she may authorize the head of a department or office to appoint, suspend or remove subordinates in the department or office. Whenever necessary to fill a vacancy in administrative positions that are required by Charter to be appointments of the City Council, the City Manager shall submit the names of qualified individuals for the appointment. The Manager may recommend the removal or suspension of any appointee when it would be in the best interests of the city, and the City Council shall give full weight to the Manager’s recommendations. All recommendations for appointment or removal shall be based solely on the merit, qualifications or disqualifications of the official concerned, without regard to his/her political beliefs or affiliations. In the appointment or dismissal of public employees other than department heads, the Manager shall consult with the head of the department charged with responsibility for the employee.

(4) To prepare and submit to the City Council, as of the end of the fiscal year, a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city for the preceding year.

(5) To periodically advise the City Council of the financial condition of the city and from time to time make recommendations as to the future needs of the city.

(6) To recommend to the City Council from time to time the adoption of such measures and ordinances as he/she deems necessary or expedient for the health, safety or welfare of the community or for the improvement of the administrative services.

(7) When not inconsistent with the Charter, and with the approval of the City Council, to consolidate or combine offices, positions, departments or units under his/her jurisdiction.

(8) To attend all meetings of the City Council unless excused therefrom and to take part in the discussion of all matters coming before the City Council. He/she shall be entitled to notice of all regular and special meetings of the City Council.

(9) To see that all ordinances are enforced and that the provisions of all franchises, leases, contracts, permits and privileges granted by the city are observed.

(10) To meet with private citizens and interested groups seeking information or bringing complaints and to attempt to resolve any problems tactfully and fairly.

(11) To recommend to the City Council a standard schedule of pay for each employee in the city service, including minimum, intermediate and maximum rates.

(12) To serve as City Recorder and City Treasurer and be responsible for the duties of those offices.

(B) Additional duties. The City Manager shall perform such other duties as may be required by the City Council not inconsistent with the City Charter or ordinances.

(’91 Code, §§ 1-1.3, 1-1.5) (Ord. 1158, passed 10-28-08)

Cross reference:

Recorder, see Charter, Ch. V, § 22


31.04 BOND.

The City Manager shall furnish a surety bond, to be approved by the City Council, the bond to be conditioned upon the faithful performance of his/her duties and shall be in an amount as the City Council shall specify. The premium for the bond shall be paid by the city.

(’91 Code, § 1-1.4) (Ord. 1158, passed 10-28-08)


31.05 EMERGENCIES.

(A) The conditions required for the declaration of a state of emergency within the city shall be as set forth in ORS 401.025(4), which provides: "Emergency includes any man-made or natural events or circumstance causing or threatening the loss of life, injury to person or property, human suffering or financial loss, and includes, but is not limited to, fire, explosion, flood, severe weather, drought, earthquake, volcanic activity, spills or releases of oil or hazardous material as defined in ORS 466.605, contamination, utility or transportation emergencies, disease, blight, infestation, crisis influx of migrants unmanageable by the county, civil disturbance, riot, sabotage and war."

(B) A declaration of a state of emergency within the city may be issued by the City Council or the City Manager or the City Manager’s designee (the City Manager or designee are hereafter referred to as "City Manager"). The City Manager may issue a directive establishing the city department heads who shall have the authority to declare an emergency if the City Manager is unavailable at the time the emergency occurs. If an emergency is declared by a department head pursuant to the City Manager’s directive, then the City Manager shall resume authority to manage the emergency as soon as the City Manager is available. Any declaration of emergency by the City Manager shall be subject to review for ratification or other action that the City Council deems appropriate at an emergency meeting called as soon as practicable after the declaration of emergency, or if convening an emergency meeting is impracticable, at the next meeting of the City Council. A declaration of a state of emergency shall be terminated by the City Council when the state of emergency ceases to exist.

(C) The City Council may by resolution establish procedures to prepare for and carry out any activity to prevent, minimize, respond to or recover from an emergency. The resolution may provide for coordination with Crook County, the State of Oregon, or any other state of federal agency. The City Manager shall have the authorization to take action that includes, but is not limited to, the following measures:

(1) Redirect city funds for emergency use and suspend standard city procurement measures;

(2) Establish a curfew which fixes the hours during which all persons other than officially authorized personnel may not be upon the public streets or other public places;

(3) Prohibit or limit the number of persons who may gather or congregate upon any public street, public place, or any outdoor place;

(4) Barricade streets and prohibit vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or regulate the same on any public street leading to the emergency area for such distance as may be deemed necessary under the circumstances;

(5) Evacuate persons;

(6) Prohibit the sale of alcoholic beverages;

(7) Prohibit or restrict the sale of gasoline or other flammable liquids;

(8) Prohibit the sale, carrying or possession of any weapons or explosives of any kind on public streets, public places or any outdoor place;

(9) Curtail or suspend commercial activity;

(10) Turn off water, gas or electricity;

(11) Order such other measures as are necessary for the protection of life or property, or for the recovery from the emergency;

(12) Adopt temporary emergency regulations to implement the foregoing powers, as necessary.

(D) The City Manager shall have the authority, in addition to the authority provided in this section, to carry out the emergency duties or functions as prescribed by the resolution establishing procedures to deal with an emergency.

(E) No person shall knowingly violate any regulation promulgated pursuant to this section and imposed in a state of emergency declared under this section. Violation of an emergency regulation shall be a Class A misdemeanor.

(F) In the event of a conflict between provisions of this section and any other ordinance of the city, the provisions of this section shall control.

(G) Any findings by any court of competent jurisdiction that any portion of this section is unconstitutional or invalid shall not invalidate any other provision of this section.

(Ord. 1146, passed 8-28-07)

GENERAL MANAGER OF RAILWAY


31.15 OFFICE CREATED.

The office of General Manager of the City Railway is hereby created. The General Manager shall be qualified in the management of railway operations and shall be subject to other qualification criteria as the City Manager may deem necessary. The City Manager shall have the responsibility for the hiring, setting of salary, conditions of employment and termination of the General Manager. The General Manager shall have the general supervision, direction and control over the operations and maintenance of the City Railway and its employees, subject to approval by the City Manager to whom he/she shall be directly responsible in the operations of the City Railway.

(Ord. 1041, passed 3-11-97; Am. Ord. 1185, passed 12-13-11)


31.16 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.

The General Manager of the City Railway shall have such other duties and responsibilities concerning operation and maintenance of the railway as may be approved or directed by City Manager.

(Ord. 1041, passed 3-11-97; Am. Ord. 1185, passed 12-13-11)


31.17 FINANCIAL REPORTING.

The General Manager of the City Railway shall devise means and methods of reporting to the City Council the monthly financial condition of the railway and annual financial forecast for operation of the railway.

(Ord. 1041, passed 3-11-97)

CITY RECORDER


31.25 APPOINTMENT.

The City Manager shall appoint a City Recorder.

(Ord. 1175, passed 9-28-10)


31.26 DUTIES.

The City Recorder shall have the following duties:

(A) Act as Clerk of the Council, prepare Council meeting agendas; disseminate information to Council members and others; keep records of the City Council as required by law, and sign ordinances, resolutions, orders, and other documents, as necessary or convenient;

(B) Arrange for and prepare meeting sites with necessary supplies and equipment. Take necessary action to comply with public meeting laws;

(C) Attend City Council meetings; attest Mayor’s, other city official’s, or city employee’s signatures when necessary or convenient;

(D) Maintain custody of and assume responsibility for all official city records and archives, including ordinances, resolutions, orders, minutes of meetings, agreements, contracts, franchises, deeds, easements, other similar documents, and other documents designated by City Manager;

(E) Serve as the city’s election official. Conduct city elections in cooperation with the Crook County Clerk. Distribute and receive nominating petitions, and documents concerning ballot measures;

(F) Such other duties as assigned by the City Manager.

(Ord. 1175, passed 9-28-10)


31.27 RECORDER PRO TEM.

In the absence of the City Recorder, the City Manager shall appoint a person to serve as City Recorder, pro tem.

(Ord. 1175, passed 9-28-10)


CHAPTER 32: DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS

Section

Planning Commission

32.01    Establishment

32.02    Members

32.03    Chairman and Vice Chairman

32.04    Procedures

32.05    Advisory committees

32.06    Powers

32.07    Recommendations

32.08    Expenditures

Contract Review Board

32.25    Establishment; powers and duties

32.26    Rules

Cross reference:

Crook County-City of Prineville Airport

Commission, see T.S.O. Table IV

Fire Department, see Ch. 95

Police Department, see Ch. 33

PLANNING COMMISSION1


32.01 ESTABLISHMENT.

There is hereby created a City Planning Commission (hereinafter referred to as the Commission) for the city.

(’91 Code, § 1-2.1) (Ord. 715, passed 1-8-74; Am. Ord. 1161, passed 1-13-09)


32.02 MEMBERS.

The Commission shall consist of seven members to be appointed by the City Council for four-year terms, or until their respective successors are appointed and qualified; provided, that in the first instance, the terms of the initial members shall be staggered for one, two, three or four years. Any vacancy shall be filled by the City Council for the unexpired term of the predecessor in office. All of the members of the Commission shall serve without compensation. At least five members of the Commission shall reside within Prineville city limits. Not more than two members of the Commission may be residents of the current Urban Growth Boundary of the city. No more than two voting members shall be engaged principally in the buying, selling or developing of real estate for profit as individuals, or be members of any partnership or officers or employees of any corporation that is engaged principally in the buying, selling or developing of real estate for profit. No more than two voting members shall be engaged in the same kind of business, trade or profession.

(’91 Code, § 1-2.2) (Ord. 715, passed 1-8-74; Am. Ord. 927, passed 9-27-88; Am. Ord. 1013, passed 8-1-94; Am. Ord. 1161, passed 1-13-09)


32.03 CHAIRMAN AND VICE CHAIRMAN.

The Commission shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman, both of whom shall be members of the Commission.

(’91 Code, § 1-2.3) (Ord. 715, passed 1-8-74; Am. Ord. 1161, passed 1-13-09)


32.04 PROCEDURES.

(A) Four members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum.

(B) The Commission may make and alter rules and regulations governing the transaction of its business consistent with laws of this state and with the City Charter and ordinances.

(C) The Commission shall meet at least once a month, at such times and places as may be fixed by the Commission.

(D) Special meetings may be called at any time by the Chairman or by three members by written notice served upon each member of the Commission at least 24 hours before the time specified for the proposed meeting, and after compliance with ORS Chapter 192.

(’91 Code, § 1-2.5) (Ord. 715, passed 1-10-74; Am. Ord. 1161, passed 1-13-09. Formerly 32.05)


32.05 ADVISORY COMMITTEES.

(A) For the purpose of obtaining citizen participation, the Commission may establish advisory committees on specific planning categories such as but not limited to land use, economics, housing, transportation, solid waste, natural resource management, open space and recreation.

(B) The Commission shall consult with each advisory committee established under this section in the preparation, adoption, revision and implementation of a comprehensive or other plans for the city. The Commission shall furnish each such committee with technical and other assistance.

(’91 Code, § 1-2.6) (Ord. 715, passed 1-10-74; Am. Ord. 1161, passed 1-13-09. Formerly 32.06)


32.06 POWERS.

The Commission shall have all the powers which are now or hereafter granted to it by ordinance of this city or by general laws of the state. The Commission shall make recommendations regarding subdivisions of land and land use to the City Council, to public officials and to individuals and may make recommendations regarding the location of thoroughfares, public buildings, parks and other public facilities, and regarding any other matter relating to the planning and development of the city. The Commission may make studies, hold hearings and prepare reports and recommendations on its own initiative or at the request of the City Council.

(’91 Code, § 1-2.8) (Ord. 715, passed 1-10-74; Am. Ord. 1161, passed 1-13-09. Formerly 32.08)


32.07 RECOMMENDATIONS.

All recommendations and suggestions made to the City Council by the Commission shall be in writing.

(’91 Code, § 1-2.9) (Ord. 715, passed 1-10-74; Am. Ord. 1161, passed 1-13-09. Formerly 32.09)


32.08 EXPENDITURES.

The Commission shall have no authority to make expenditures on behalf of the City, or to obligate the City for the payment of any sums of money, except as herein provided, and then only after the City Council shall have first authorized the expenditures by appropriate resolution, which resolution shall provide an administrative method by which the funds shall be drawn and expended.

(’91 Code, § 1-2.10) (Ord. 715, passed 1-10-74; Am. Ord. 1161, passed 1-13-09. Formerly 32.10)

CONTRACT REVIEW BOARD


32.25 ESTABLISHMENT; POWERS AND DUTIES.

Pursuant to ORS 279.055, the Council of the city is hereby continued as the City Contract Review Board. The Board shall have all the powers granted it by ORS 279.055.

(’91 Code, § 1-9.1) (Ord. 955, passed 3-12-91)


32.26 RULES.

The Board shall not exercise its authority until it has adopted rules by resolution to carry out its powers and duties.

(’91 Code, § 1-9.2) (Ord. 955, passed 3-12-91)1

Prior legislation: ’91 Code, §§ 1-2.4, 1-2.7. 


CHAPTER 33: POLICE DEPARTMENT

Section

Disposition of Unclaimed Property

33.01    Authority to dispose of property

33.02    Sale notice; claiming property before sale

33.03    Sale bidders

33.04    Sale; sale proceeds

33.05    Transfer of property to city

33.06    Worthless property

33.07    Claims by owner after sale

33.08    Claims by owner after transfer

33.09    Disposal of property

33.10    Vehicle inventories

Disposition of Firearms and Related Equipment

33.20    Applicability of provisions

33.21    Definitions

33.22    Disposition methods

33.23    Disposition reporting

33.24    Records

Cross reference:

Central Oregon Law Enforcement Services Agreement, see T.S.O. Table IV

Residency requirements for emergency personnel, see Ch. 34

DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY


33.01 AUTHORITY TO DISPOSE OF PROPERTY.

Whenever the Chief of the Police Department has sufficient property to make the sale thereof financially feasible, in his/her possession, the ownership of which is unknown, and which is unclaimed for 30 days after the property came into his/her possession, he/she shall request authority to dispose of it as provided in this subchapter.

(’91 Code, § 1-5.1) (Ord. 928, passed 10-25-88)


33.02 SALE NOTICE; CLAIMING PROPERTY BEFORE SALE.

The City Council shall act upon the request of the Chief of Police within 30 days after the receipt of the request. If the request is to have the property disposed of by public sale, and if the Council approves the request, the Chief of Police shall cause to be posted written or printed notice of sale in three public places within the city at least ten days before the sale. The notice shall describe the property and shall state the time and place of public sale at which the property may be purchased by the highest bidder. Until the date of the sale, the property may be claimed at the Police Department. If ownership is proved, the Chief of Police shall turn the property over to the owner, and cancel the sale insofar as the claimed property is concerned. Any money that comes into the possession of the Chief of Police, the ownership of which is unknown and which is unclaimed for 30 days after the money came into his/her possession, may be transferred to the City’s General Fund.

(’91 Code, § 1-5.2) (Ord. 928, passed 10-25-88)


33.03 SALE BIDDERS.

Members of the City Council and officials and employees of the city shall not be allowed to bid at the sale.

(’91 Code, § 1-5.3) (Ord. 928, passed 10-25-88)


33.04 SALE; SALE PROCEEDS.

The Chief of Police or his/her designee shall conduct the sale and shall deposit the proceeds thereof in the City Treasury to the credit of the City General Fund. The cost of the sale shall be paid from the City General Fund.

(’91 Code, § 1-5.4) (Ord. 928, passed 10-25-88; Am. Ord. 1033, passed 4-9-96)


33.05 TRANSFER OF PROPERTY.

In lieu of a sale of the property under the foregoing provisions of this act, the Chief of Police, with the approval of the City Council, may transfer any portion of unclaimed property to the city for use by the city. Use by the city shall include the city using the property itself or transferring the property if the City Council determines it is advantageous to the city to transfer the property.

(’91 Code, § 4-5.5) (Ord. 928, passed 10-25-88)


33.06 WORTHLESS PROPERTY.

If the Chief of Police or his/her designee determines after investigation that any item of property which comes into the possession of the City Police Department has insubstantial commercial value, the Chief of Police or his/her designee may destroy or otherwise dispose of the property. The property shall not be destroyed or otherwise disposed of until it has been in the possession of the City Police Department for at least 30 days prior to the destruction or disposition.

(Ord. 1032, passed 3-26-96)


33.07 CLAIMS BY OWNER AFTER SALE.

If the property is sold as provided herein and if within six months after the sale, the owner of the property files with the City Council a claim for the property and proves his/her right to the same, the Council shall direct that the amount received for the property, less expenses of the sale, and less the cost of any improvements to the property shall be paid to the owner from the City Treasury. The Council shall not approve any claims filed more than six months after the sale.

(’91 Code, § 1-5.6) (Ord. 928, passed 10-25-88)


33.08 CLAIMS BY OWNER AFTER TRANSFER.

If the property is transferred to the city in lieu of sale it may be claimed by the lawful owner thereof at any time within six months from the transfer to the city if the city still owns the property. Upon the payment to the city of any costs of any improvement to the property, the property shall be returned to the lawful owner. The council shall not approve any claims filed more than six months after the transfer.

(’91 Code, § 1-5.7) (Ord. 928, passed 10-25-88)


33.09 DISPOSAL OF PROPERTY.

The Chief of Police, in disposing of the property in the manner provided herein, shall not be liable to the owner thereof. Any property which has been offered at auction without sale thereof, and which the Chief of Police deems to be without value, may be disposed of or destroyed at the discretion of the Chief of Police.

(’91 Code, § 1-5.8) (Ord. 928, passed 10-25-88)


33.10 VEHICLE INVENTORIES.

The contents of all impounded vehicles shall be inventoried in accordance with the following procedure:

(A) An inventory of personal property and the contents of open containers will be conducted throughout the passenger and engine compartments of the vehicle including, but not limited to, the glove box, other accessible areas under or within the dashboard area, any pockets in the doors or in the back of the front seat, in any console between the seats, under any floor mats and under the seats.

(B) In addition to the passenger and engine compartments as described above, an inventory of personal property and the contents of open containers will also be conducted in the following locations:

(1) Any other type of unlocked compartments that are a part of the vehicle including, but not limited to, unlocked glove compartments, unlocked vehicle trunks and unlocked car top containers; and

(2) Any locked compartments including, but not limited to, locked glove compartments, locked vehicle trunks, locked hatchbacks and locked car-top containers, provided the keys are available and are to be released with the vehicle to the third-party towing company or an unlocking mechanism for such compartment is available within the vehicle.

(C) Closed containers located either within the vehicle or any of the vehicle’s compartments will not be opened for inventory purposes except for the following, which shall be opened for inventory: wallets, purses, coin purses, fanny packs, personal organizers, briefcases or other closed containers designed for carrying money or small valuables, or closed containers which are designed for hazardous materials.

(D) Other closed containers shall be opened and inventoried if the owner acknowledges they contain cash in excess of $10, valuables or a hazardous material.

(E) Any valuables, to include cash in excess of $10 or property valued at more than $200, located during the inventory process will be listed on a property receipt and stored in this agency’s property/evidence room. A copy of the property receipt will either be left in the vehicle or tendered to the person in control of the vehicle if such person is present.

(F) The inventory is not a search for evidence of a crime; however, officers shall seize evidence or contraband located during the inventory. Items should be scrutinized to the extent necessary to complete the inventory.

(G) Tow truck operators are to receive a copy of the tow report.

These inventory procedures are for the purpose of protecting an owner’s property while in police custody, to provide for the safety of officers, and to protect the Department against fraudulent claims of lost, stolen, or damaged property.

This policy is also found in Prineville Police Department Policy Manual Section 510.6.

(Ord. 1203, passed 4-22-14)

DISPOSITION OF FIREARMS AND RELATED EQUIPMENT


33.20 APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS.

This subchapter pertains to firearms and related equipment that come into the possession of the City Police Department.

(Ord. 1040, passed 1-14-97; Am. Ord. 1218, passed 10-13-15)


33.21 DEFINITIONS.

As used in this subchapter, RELATED EQUIPMENT includes but is not limited to holsters, magazines, and ammunition.

(Ord. 1040, passed 1-14-97; Am. Ord. 1218, passed 10-13-15)


33.22 DISPOSITION METHODS.

(A) Firearms and related equipment may be retained by the City Police Department for use by the Police Department as the Department deems necessary.

(B) The firearms and related equipment may be traded to federally licensed firearms dealers for firearms and/or other equipment needs of the City Police Department.

(C) The firearms and related equipment may be traded to other law enforcement agencies for equipment of approximately equal or greater value.

(D) The firearms and related equipment may be sold to federally licensed firearms dealers with the proceeds to go to the City General Fund for funding police equipment needs.

(E) If the Chief of Police so determines, any of the firearms or items of equipment may be destroyed.

(Ord. 1040, passed 1-14-97; Am. Ord. 1218, passed 10-13-15)


33.23 DISPOSITION REPORTING.

The City Police Department shall furnish the City Council, not less than annually, a report listing: (A) all firearms and related equipment that have been sold, traded, or destroyed; (B) the type of disposition for each item; and (C) the date of disposition of each item. Such report shall set out each firearm and related equipment item that was disposed of since the last disposition date shown on the most recent disposition report furnished to the City Council.

(Ord. 1040, passed 1-14-97; Am. Ord. 1218, passed 10-13-15)


33.24 RECORDS.

All firearms and related equipment shall be inventoried by the City Police Department. Records shall be kept by the City Police Department of all sales, trades, and other disposition of all firearms and related equipment that are subject to this subchapter.

(Ord. 1040, passed 1-14-97; Am. Ord. 1218, passed 10-13-15)


CHAPTER 34: (RESERVED)


CHAPTER 35: ELECTIONS

Section

35.01    Initiative and referendum

35.02    Nominating petitions

Cross reference:

Elections, see Charter, Ch. VI


35.01 INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM.

State law providing initiative and referendum procedures for cities, contained in O.R.S. 250.255 through 250.346, is adopted by reference.

(’91 Code, § 1-7.1) (Ord. 953, passed 3-12-91)


35.02 NOMINATING PETITIONS.

Nominating petitions for Mayor and City Council members shall be signed by not fewer than 20 electors residing in the city. In all other respects, nominating petitions shall conform to Oregon State Law.

(Ord. 1081, passed 6-13-00)


CHAPTER 36: COURTS

Section

36.01    Transfer of jurisdiction to district court

Cross reference:

Municipal judge, see Charter, Ch. V, § 21


36.01 TRANSFER OF JURISDICTION TO DISTRICT COURT.

The Council may authorize transfer of the jurisdiction of the municipal court to the district court for Crook County. If the transfer is made, the district court shall have all jurisdiction of the municipal court as described by the City Charter.

(’91 Code, § 1-10.1) (Ord. 957, passed 3-12-91)

Cross reference:

Jurisdiction of municipal court, see Charter, Ch. V, § 21, § 21


CHAPTER 37: TAXATION AND FINANCE

Section

Transient Lodgings Tax

37.01    Definitions

37.02    Tax imposed; exemptions

37.03    Collection of tax

37.04    Registration of operator; form and contents

37.05    Due date; returns and payments

37.06    Deficiency determination; fraud; operator delay

37.07    Redeterminations

37.08    Security for collection of tax

37.09    Limitation of actions

37.10    Liens

37.11    Refunds

37.12    Administration

37.13    Review Committee; appeal; rules; procedure

37.14    Appeals

37.15    Violations

37.99    Penalty

Privilege Tax on Electric or Natural Gas Services

37.101    Definitions

37.102    Tax imposed

37.103    Due date

37.104    Revenue statement

37.105    Books of accounts

37.106    Audits

37.107    Applicability

37.108    Rural enterprise zone agreements.

37.109    Rural enterprise zone agreements - Applicability.

Tax on Marijuana and Marijuana-Infused Products

37.200    Purpose

37.201    Definitions

37.202    Levy of tax

37.203    Deductions

37.204    Seller responsible for payment of tax

37.205    Penalties and interest

37.206    Failure to report and remit tax - Determination of tax by Director

37.207    Appeal

37.208    Refunds

37.209    Actions to collect

37.210    Penalty

37.211    Confidentiality

37.212    Audit of books, records or persons

37.213    Forms and regulations

TRANSIENT LODGINGS TAX


37.01 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

ACCRUAL ACCOUNTING. A method of accounting where the operator enters the rent due from a transient on his/her records when the rent is earned, whether or not it is paid.

CASH ACCOUNTING. A method of accounting where the operator does not enter the rent due from a transient on his/her records until rent is paid.

CHAMBER OF COMMERCE. The Prineville/Crook County Chamber of Commerce.

MOTEL. Any structure or any portion of any structure which is occupied or intended or designed for transient occupancy or any space designed for the temporary use of a mobile home or travel trailer for 30 days or less for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, public or private dormitory, fraternity, sorority, public or private club and also means space in mobile home or trailer parks, or similar structure or space or portions thereof so occupied, provided the occupancy is for a period of 30 days or less.

OCCUPANCY. The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, for lodging or sleeping purposes of any room or rooms in a motel or space in a mobile home or trailer park or portion thereof.

OPERATOR. The person who is proprietor of the motel in any capacity. Where the operator performs his/her functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this subchapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his/her principal. Compliance with the provisions of this subchapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall be considered to be compliance by both.

PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, fraternity, sorority, public or private dormitory, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

RENT. The consideration charged, whether or not received by the operator, for the occupancy of space in a motel, valued in money, goods, labor, credits, property or other consideration valued in money, without any deduction.

RENT PACKAGE PLAN. The consideration charged for both food and rent where a single rate is made for the total of both. The amount applicable to rent for determination of transient room tax under this subchapter shall be the same charge made for rent when not a part of a package plan.

TAX. Either the tax payable by the transient or the aggregate amount of taxes due from an operator during the period for which he/she is required to report his/her collections.

TAX ADMINISTRATOR. The City Manager/Recorder of the city, or his/her designees.

TRANSIENT. Any individual who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy in a motel for a period of 30 consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. The day a transient checks out of a motel shall not be included in determining the 30-day period if the transient is not charged rent for that day by the operator. Any individual so occupying space in a motel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of 30 days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy, or the tenancy actually extends more than 30 consecutive days. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of this subchapter may be considered. A person who pays for lodging on a monthly basis, irrespective of the number of days in the month, shall not be deemed a transient, except in the case of subleasing and/or tacking.

TRANSIENT LODGINGS TAX REVIEW COMMITTEE. A committee composed of an accountant, an attorney, who may be a city employee and one lay member appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council.

YEAR. That period from July 1 through June 30.

(’91 Code, § 6-4.1) (Ord. 837, passed 6-24-80; Am. Ord. 938, passed 6-27-89)


37.02 TAX IMPOSED; EXEMPTIONS.

(A) Tax imposed.

(1) For the privilege of occupancy in any motel in the city, on and after September 1, 2003, each transient shall pay a tax in the amount of 8.5% of the rent charged by the operator. The tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city, which is extinguished only by payment by the operator to the city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the motel at the time the rent is paid. The operator shall enter the tax on his/her records when rent is collected if the operator keeps his/her records on the cash accounting basis, and when earned if the operator keeps his/her records on the accrual accounting basis. If rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid by the transient to the operator with each installment. In all cases the rent paid or charged for occupancy shall exclude the sale of any goods, services and commodities, other than the furnishing of rooms, accommodations and space occupancy in mobile home parks or trailer parks, or in mobile homes and trailers.

(2) The tax proceeds collected under the provisions of this subchapter shall be divided between the city and the Chamber of Commerce, with 62.5% going to the city and 37.5% going to the Chamber of Commerce. Of the division of the proceeds going to the Chamber of Commerce, 25% will be allowed to go into the Chamber’s general operating fund with the remaining 75% being used for tourism. The Chamber will be allowed to carry over unspent funds from one year to the next without penalty or deduction by the city as regards the unspent funds.

(’91 Code, § 6-4.2)



(B) Exemptions. No tax imposed under this subchapter shall be imposed upon the following.

(1) Any occupant for more than 30 successive calendar days (a person who pays for lodging on a monthly basis, irrespective of the number of days in the month, shall not be deemed a transient, except in the case of subleasing and/or tacking).

(2) Any occupant whose rent is of a value less than $4 per day.

(3) Any occupant whose rent is paid for a hospital room or to a medical clinic, convalescent home or home for the aged.

(4) An employee of the federal government, while on federal business, whose room is procured and paid for directly by the federal government through a purchase order, a US government credit card, or other forms of procurement and with a government check. If the federal employee pays for the room personally, the employee is not exempt. The tax must be paid, even if the employee is in Prineville on federal business.

(’91 Code, § 6-4.5)

(Ord. 837, passed 6-24-80; Am. Ord. 938, passed 6-27-89; Am. Ord. 1001, passed 11-9-93; Am. Ord. 1082, passed 6-27-00; Am. Ord. 1084, passed 8-22-00; Am. Ord. 1105, passed 8-12-03) Penalty, see § 37.99


37.03 COLLECTION OF TAX.

(A) (1) Every operator renting rooms or space for lodging or sleeping purposes in this city, the occupancy of which is not exempted under the terms of this subchapter, shall collect a tax from the occupant. The tax collected or accrued by the operator constitutes a debt owing by the operator to the city.

(2) In all cases of credit or deferred payment of rent, the payment of tax to the operator may be deferred until the rent is paid, and the operator shall not be liable for the tax until credits are paid or deferred payments are made. Adjustments may be made for uncollectibles.

(3) The Tax Administrator shall enforce provisions of this subchapter and shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with this subchapter which may be necessary to aid in the enforcement.

(4) For tax collected on portions of a dollar in rent, the operator shall round collection of the tax to the nearest penny and remit accordingly.

(’91 Code, § 6-4.3)

(B) Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated upon the operator’s records and any receipt rendered by the operator. No operator of a motel shall advertise that the tax or any part of the tax will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, when added, any part will be refunded, except in the manner provided by this subchapter. (’91 Code, § 6-4.4)

(Ord. 837, passed 6-24-80) Penalty, see § 37.99


37.04 REGISTRATION OF OPERATOR; FORM AND CONTENTS.

Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a motel in the city shall register with the Tax Administrator on a form provided by him/her. Operators engaged in business at the time this subchapter is adopted must register not later than 20 calendar days after passage of this subchapter. Operators starting business after this subchapter is adopted must register within 15 calendar days after commencing business. The privilege of registration after the date of imposition of the tax shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of tax regardless of registration. Registration shall set forth the name under which an operator transacts or intends to transact business, the location of his/her place or places of business and any other information to facilitate the collection of the tax as the Tax Administrator may require. The registration shall be signed by the operator. The Tax Administrator shall, within ten days after the registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to the registrant to collect the tax from the occupants of the motel, together with a duplicate thereof for each additional place of business of the registrant. The certificate shall be nonassignable and nontransferable and shall be surrendered immediately to the Tax Administrator upon the cessation of business at the location named on the certificate or upon sale or transfer of the business. Each certificate and duplicate thereof shall state the place of business to which it is applicable and shall be prominently displayed so as to come to the notice readily of all occupants seeking occupancy therein. The certificate shall, among other things, state the following.

(A) The name of the operator.

(B) The address of the motel.

(C) The date when the certificate is issued.

(D) "This transient lodgings registration certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the transient lodgings tax ordinance of the city by registration with the Tax Administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the room tax imposed by the city and remitting the tax to the Tax Administrator. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, or to operate a motel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including, but not limited to, those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of the city. This certificate does not constitute a permit."

(’91 Code, § 6-4.6) (Ord. 837, passed 6-24-80) Penalty, see § 37.99


37.05 DUE DATE; RETURNS AND PAYMENTS.

(A) The tax imposed by this subchapter shall be paid by the transient to the operator at the time that rent is paid. All amounts of the taxes collected by any operator are due and payable to the Tax Administrator on a monthly basis on the fifteenth day of the following month for the preceding month, and are delinquent on the last day of the month in which they are due.

(B) On or before the fifteenth day of the month following each month of collection, a return for the preceding month’s tax collections shall be filed with the Tax Administrator. The return shall be filed in such form as the Tax Administrator may prescribe by every operator liable for payment of the tax.

(C) Returns shall show the amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period. The Tax Administrator may require returns to show the total rentals upon which tax was collected or otherwise due, gross receipts of the operator for the period and an explanation in detail of any discrepancy between the amounts and the amount of rents exempt, if any.

(D) The person required to file the return shall deliver the return, together with the remittance of the amount of the tax due, to the Tax Administrator at his/her office, either by personal delivery or by mail. If the return is mailed, the postmark shall be considered the date of delivery for determining delinquencies.

(E) For good cause, the Tax Administrator may extend for not to exceed one month the time for making any return or payment of tax. No further extension shall be granted, except by the Transient Lodgings Tax Review Committee. Any operator to whom an extension is granted shall pay interest at the rate of 1% per month on the amount of tax due without proration for a fraction of a month. If a return is not filed and the tax and interest due is not paid by the end of the extension granted, then the interest shall become a part of the tax for computation of penalties described in § 37.15.

(F) The Tax Administrator, if he/she deems it necessary in order to insure payment or facilitate collection by the city of the amount of taxes in any individual case, may require returns and payment of the amount of taxes for other than monthly periods.

(’91 Code, § 6-4.7) (Ord. 837, passed 6-24-80; Am. Ord. 1001, passed 11-9-93) Penalty, see § 37.99


37.06 DEFICIENCY DETERMINATION; FRAUD; OPERATOR DELAY.

(A) Deficiency determinations. If the Tax Administrator determines that the returns are incorrect, he/she may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of the facts contained in the return or returns, or upon the basis of any information within his/her possession or that may come into his/her possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one, or more than one, period, and the amount so determined shall be due and payable immediately upon service of notice as herein provided, after which the amount determined is delinquent. Penalties on deficiencies shall be applied as set forth in § 37.15.

(1) In making a determination, the Tax Administrator may offset overpayments, if any, which may have been previously made for a period or periods, against any underpayment for a subsequent period or periods or against penalties and interest on the underpayments. The interest on the underpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in § 37.15.

(2) The Tax Administrator shall give to the operator or occupant a written notice of his/her determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail. If by mail, the notice shall be addressed to the operator at his/her address as it appears on the records of the Tax Administrator. In case of service by mail of any notice required by this subchapter, the service is complete at the time of deposit in the United States Post Office.

(3) Except in the case of fraud or intent to evade this subchapter, or authorized rules and regulations, where seven years shall apply, every deficiency determination shall be made and notice thereof mailed within three years after the last day of the month following the close of the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period expires the later.

(4) Any determination shall become due and payable immediately upon receipt of notice and shall become final within ten days after the Tax Administrator has given notice thereof, provided, however, the operator may petition for redemption and refund if the petition is filed before the determination becomes final as herein provided.

(B) Fraud, refusal to collect, evasion. If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect the tax or to make, within the time provided in this subchapter, any report and remittance of the tax or any portion thereof required by this subchapter, or makes a fraudulent return or otherwise wilfully attempts to evade this subchapter, the Tax Administrator shall proceed in a manner as he/she may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base an estimate of the tax due. As soon as the Tax Administrator has determined the tax due that is imposed by this subchapter from any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to report it and remit the tax, he/she shall proceed to determine and assess against the operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this subchapter. In case the determination is made, the Tax Administrator shall give a notice in the manner aforesaid of the amount so assessed. The determination and notice shall be made and mailed within three years after discovery by the Tax Administrator of any failure or refusal to collect the tax, or failure to file return and within seven years after discovery of any fraud or intent to evade. Any determination shall become due and payable immediately upon receipt of notice and shall become final within ten days after the Tax Administrator has given notice thereof, provided, however, the operator may petition for redemption and refund if the petition is filed before the determination becomes final as herein provided.

(C) Operator delay. If the Tax Administrator believes that the collection of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected and paid to the city will be jeopardized by delay, or if any determination will be jeopardized by delay, he/she shall thereupon make a determination of the tax or amount of tax required to be collected, noting the fact upon the determination. The amount so determined as herein provided shall be immediately due and payable, and the operator shall immediately pay the determination to the Tax Administrator after service of notice thereof: provided, however, the operator may petition, after payment has been made, for redemption and refund of the determination, if the petition is filed within ten days from the date of service of notice by the Tax Administrator.

(’91 Code, § 6-4.9) (Ord. 837, passed 6-24-80; Am. Ord. 1001, passed 11-9-93) Penalty, see § 37.99


37.07 REDETERMINATIONS.

(A) Any person against whom a determination is made under § 37.06 or any person directly interested may petition for a redetermination and redemption and refund within the time required in § 37.06. If a petition for redetermination and refund is not filed within the time required in § 37.06, the determination becomes final at the expiration of the allowable time.

(B) If a petition for redetermination and refund is filed within the allowable period, the Tax Administrator shall reconsider the determination, and, if the person has so requested in his/her petition, shall grant the person an oral hearing and shall give him/her ten days notice of the time and place of the hearing. The Tax Administrator may continue the hearing from time to time as may be necessary.

(C) The Tax Administrator may decrease or increase the amount of the determination as a result of the hearing and, if an increase is determined, the increase shall be payable immediately after the hearing.

(D) The order or decision of the Tax Administrator upon a petition for redetermination of redemption and refund becomes final ten days after service upon the petitioner of notice thereof, unless appeal of the order or decision is filed with the Transient Lodgings Tax Review Committee within the ten days after service of the notice.

(E) No petition for redetermination or redemption and refund or appeal therefrom shall be effective for any purpose unless the operator has first complied with the payment provisions hereof.

(’91 Code, § 6-4.10) (Ord. 837, passed 6-24-80) Penalty, see § 37.99


37.08 SECURITY FOR COLLECTION OF TAX.

The Tax Administrator, whenever he/she deems it necessary to insure compliance with this subchapter, may require any operator subject hereto to deposit with him/her the security in the form of cash, bond or other security as the Tax Administrator may determine. The amount of the security shall be fixed by the Tax Administrator but shall not be greater than twice the operator’s estimated average monthly liability for the period for which he/she files returns, determined in such manner as the Tax Administrator deems proper, or $5,000, whichever amount is less. The amount of the security may be increased or decreased by the Tax Administrator, subject to the limitations herein provided.

(’91 Code, § 6-4.11(a)) (Ord. 837, passed 6-24-80; Am. Ord. 1001, passed 11-9-93)


37.09 LIMITATION OF ACTIONS.

Except in the case of fraud or intent to evade this subchapter, in which case seven years shall apply, at any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable or at any time within three years after any determination becomes final, the Tax Administrator may bring an action in the courts of this state, any other state or of the United States in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalties and interest.

(’91 Code, § 6-4.11(b)) (Ord. 837, passed 6-24-80)


37.10 LIENS.

The tax imposed by § 37.02 of this subchapter, together with the interest and penalties provided by § 37.15 and the filing fees paid to the Department of Records of Crook County, and advertising costs which may be incurred when the tax becomes delinquent under § 37.05 shall be, and until paid remain, a lien from the date of recording with the Department of Records of Crook County, and superior to all subsequent recorded liens on all real and tangible personal property used in the motel of an operator within the city and may be seized and foreclosed on in accordance with state law as necessary to discharge the lien, if the lien has been so recorded. Notice of lien may be issued by the Tax Administrator whenever the operator is in default in the payment of the tax, interest and penalty, and shall be recorded with the Department of Records and a copy sent to the delinquent operator. Any lien as shown on the records of the Department of Records shall, upon the payment of the taxes, penalty and interest for which the lien has been imposed, be released by the Tax Administrator when their full amount has been paid to the city. The operator or person making the payment shall receive a receipt therefor stating that the full amount of the taxes, penalties and interest have been paid and that the lien is thereby released and the record of lien satisfied.

(’91 Code, § 6-4.11(c)) (Ord. 837, passed 6-24-80)


37.11 REFUNDS.

(A) Refunds by the city to operator. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the Tax Administrator under this subchapter, it may be refunded, provided a verified claim in writing therefor, stating the specific reason upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the Tax Administrator within three years from the date of payment. The claim shall be made on forms provided by the Tax Administrator. If the claim is approved by the Tax Administrator, the excess amount collected or paid may be refunded or may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the operator from whom it was collected or by whom paid, and the balance may be refunded to the operator, his/her administrators, executors or assignees.

(B) Refunds by operator to tenant. Whenever the tax required by this subchapter has been collected by the operator and it is later determined that the tenant occupied the motel for a period exceeding 30 days without interruption, the operator shall refund to the tenant the tax previously collected by the operator from that tenant as a transient. The operator shall account for the collection and refund to the Tax Administrator. If the operator has remitted the tax prior to refund or credit to the tenant, he/she shall be entitled to a corresponding refund under this section.

(’91 Code, § 6-4.12) (Ord. 837, passed 6-24-80)


37.12 ADMINISTRATION.

(A) Records required from operators. Every operator shall keep guest records of room sales and accounting books and records of the room sales. All records shall be retained by the operator for a period of three years and six months after they come into being.

(B) Collection fee. Every operator liable for the collection and remittance of the tax imposed by § 37.02 may withhold 6% of the net tax due to cover his/her expense in the collection and remittance of the tax.

(C) Examination of records; investigations. The Tax Administrator, or any person authorized in writing by him/her, may examine during normal business hours the books, papers and accounting records relating to room sales of any operator, after notification to the operator liable for the tax, and may investigate the business of the operator in order to verify the accuracy of any return made or, if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid.

(D) Confidential character of information obtained; disclosure unlawful. It shall be unlawful for the Tax Administrator or any person having an administrative or clerical duty under the provisions of this subchapter to make known, in any manner whatever, the business affairs, operations or information obtained by an investigation of records and equipment of any person required to file a return or pay a transient occupancy tax, or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures or any particular thereof set forth in any statement or application, or to permit any statement or application, or copy of either, or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof, to be seen or examined by any person; provided that nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prevent the following.

(1) The disclosure to or the examination of records and equipment by another city official, employee or agent for collection of taxes for the sole purpose of administering or enforcing any provisions of this subchapter or collecting taxes imposed hereunder.

(2) The disclosure, after the filing of a written request to that effect, to the taxpayer himself, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees and guarantors, if directly interested, of information as to any paid tax, any unpaid tax or amount of tax required to be collected, together with interest and penalties thereon; further provided, however, that the City Attorney approves each disclosure and that the Tax Administrator may refuse to make any disclosure referred to in this division (D)(2) when in his/her opinion the public interest would suffer thereby.

(3) The disclosure of the names and addresses of any persons making returns.

(4) The disclosure of general statistics regarding taxes collected or business done in the city.

(’91 Code, § 6-4.13) (Ord. 837, passed 6-24-80) Penalty, see § 37.99


37.13 REVIEW COMMITTEE; APPEAL; RULES; PROCEDURE.

(A) A Transient Lodgings Tax Review Committee is hereby created to be composed of an accountant, an attorney, who may be a city employee, and one lay member. The Committee shall select from its members a Chairman who shall serve at its pleasure. The three members of the Committee shall constitute a quorum. The Committee shall keep a record of its transactions. The Committee shall be deemed to be in the office of the Tax Administrator and shall meet and keep its files in his/her office. The Committee shall be appointed by the Mayor of the city with the advice and consent of the City Council and shall serve at the pleasure of the Council.

(B) The Committee shall have the power and it shall be the duty to do the following.

(1) To hear and determine appeals of orders and decisions of the Tax Administrator made upon petitions for redetermination of tax. The Committee may affirm, modify or reverse the orders or decisions or dismiss the appeals therefrom, as may be just, and shall prescribe the forms, rules and regulations relating to appeals as it may deem necessary. In the review of the Tax Administrator decision or order, the Committee may take the evidence and make the investigation as it may deem necessary. It shall give notice of its determinations in the manner prescribed for service of notice of a Tax Administrator’s decision and shall file a copy of each determination with the Tax Administrator with certification thereon of the date of service thereof. The determination shall become final ten days thereafter and shall thereupon become due and payable, subject to interest and penalties, and enforceable by the Tax Administrator in like manner as an order or decision of the Tax Administrator.

(2) To approve, modify or disapprove all forms, rules and regulations prescribed by the Tax Administrator, if the forms, rules and regulations are challenged in the administration and enforcement of this subchapter.

(3) To hear and determine, in a manner as shall be just, any protest, which may be made by any person who may be interested, to any form, rule or regulation approved or prescribed by the Tax Administrator.

(4) To grant, for good cause, applications for extensions of time in excess of one month for making any return or payment of tax, and to prescribe rules therefor.

(5) To make investigations as it deems advisable regarding the imposition and administration of the transient lodgings tax and report its finding to the City Council; to act in an advisory capacity to the Council on matters pertaining to the transient lodgings tax and enforcement problems; and to recommend to the Council the adoption, amendment or repeal of legislation pertaining thereto.

(’91 Code, § 6-4.14) (Ord. 837, passed 6-24-80)


37.14 APPEALS.

(A) Appeal to Transient Lodgings Tax Review Committee. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Tax Administrator may appeal to the Transient Lodgings Tax Review Committee by filing a notice of appeal with the Tax Administrator within ten days of the serving or mailing of the notice of a decision given by the Tax Administrator. The Tax Administrator shall fix a time and place for hearing the appeal as prescribed by the Transient Lodgings Tax Review Committee in its rules and regulations and shall give the appellant ten days written notice of the time and place of hearing. (’91 Code, § 6-4.15)

(B) Appeals to City Council. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Transient Lodgings Tax Review Committee may appeal to the City Council by filing a notice of appeal with the Tax Administrator within ten days of the serving or the mailing of the notice of the decision given by the Transient Lodgings Tax Review Committee. The Tax Administrator shall transmit the notice of appeal, together with the file of the appealed matter, to the City Council, who shall fix a time and place for hearing the appeal from the decision of the Transient Lodgings Tax Review Committee. The City Council shall give the appellant not less than ten days written notice of the time and place of the hearing of the appealed matter. Action by the Council on appeals shall be decided by a majority of the members present at the meeting where the appeal is considered. (’91 Code, § 6-4.16)

(Ord. 837, passed 6-24-80)


37.15 VIOLATIONS.

(A) Original delinquency. Any operator who has not been granted an extension of time for remittance of tax due and who fails to remit any tax imposed by this subchapter prior to delinquency shall pay a penalty of 10% of the amount of the tax due in addition to the amount of the tax.

(B) Continued delinquency. Any operator who has not been granted an extension of time for remittance of tax due and who failed to pay any delinquent remittance on or before a period of 30 days following the date of which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of 15% of the amount of the tax due plus the amount of the tax and the 10% penalty first imposed.

(C) Fraud. If the Tax Administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this subchapter is due to fraud or intent to evade the provisions hereof, a penalty of 25% of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in divisions (A) and (B) of this section.

(D) Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this subchapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month or fraction thereof, without proration for portions of a month, on the amount of the tax due, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.

(E) Penalties merged with tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall be merged with and become a part of the tax herein required to be paid.

(F) Petition for waiver. Any operator who fails to remit the tax herein levied within the time herein stated shall pay the penalties herein stated, provided, however, the operator may petition the Transient Lodgings Tax Review Committee for waiver and refund of the penalty or any portion thereof and the Transient Lodgings Tax Review Committee may, if a good and sufficient reason is shown, waive and direct a refund of the penalty or any portion thereof.

(’91 Code, § 6-4.8) (Ord. 837, passed 6-24-80) Penalty, see § 37.99


37.99 PENALTY.

Any operator or other person who shall fail or refuse to register as required herein, or who shall fail or refuse to furnish any return, supplemental return or other data required herein, or by the Tax Administrator, or, with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due hereunder, shall make, render, sign or verify any false or fraudulent report, commits an offense which constitutes a violation of this § 37.01 et seq., punishable by a fine of not more than $500, to be fixed by the cognizant court, or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both a fine and imprisonment.

(’91 Code, § 6-4.17) (Ord. 837, passed 6-24-80)

PRIVILEGE TAX ON ELECTRIC OR NATURAL GAS SERVICES


37.101 DEFINITIONS.

The following definitions apply unless inconsistent with the context:

CITY means the City of Prineville.

PERSON means any individual, corporation, general or limited partnership, limited liability company, or any other legal entity.

UTILITY means any person that provides electric or natural gas service to customers or themselves, within the boundaries of the City of Prineville by means of facilities permanently located within, under, or above any city rights-of-way, whether or not the person owns such facilities.

(Ord. 1204, passed 5-27-14; Am. Ord. 1220, passed 1-28-16)


37.102 TAX IMPOSED.

City levies a privilege tax in the amount of 5% of the gross revenues for every utility with operations within the boundaries of the city or within, under, or above the rights-of-way in the city, for a period of 30 days or more, without an authorized franchise from the city. The calculation of the privilege tax shall be subject to all applicable limitations imposed by federal or state law.

(Ord. 1204, passed 5-27-14; Am. Ord. 1220, passed 1-28-16)


37.103 DUE DATE.

A privilege tax is for each 30 days or longer in duration that the utility operates without a franchise, and is due no later than 30 days after the end of each calendar quarter in which the utility operates without a franchise. Any past due payments under this subchapter are subject to the interest rate as set by city resolution.

(Ord. 1204, passed 5-27-14; Am. Ord. 1220, passed 1-28-16)


37.104 REVENUE STATEMENT.

The utility paying the privilege tax shall furnish to the city with each payment of such tax a statement showing the amount of gross revenue for the period covering the payment.

(Ord. 1204, passed 5-27-14; Am. Ord. 1220, passed 1-28-16)


37.105 BOOKS OF ACCOUNTS.

So long as a utility is subject to the privilege tax, it shall keep books of financial accounts of the amount of electricity or natural gas provided to customers within the boundaries of the city and the amount of payments received by the utility for providing such electricity or natural gas. The utility shall produce the books of financial accounts for inspection by representatives of the city at any time during normal business hours.

(Ord. 1204, passed 5-27-14; Am. Ord. 1220, passed 1-28-16)


37.106 AUDITS.

The city shall have the right to have an audit made of utilities’ books, and records used to determine the amount of electric or natural gas services to customers within the boundaries of the city and the amounts the utility received for providing such electric or natural gas services. If the tax for the period of the audit is found to be incorrect to an extent of more than 5% over the tax paid by the utility to city, the utility shall pay for the audit; otherwise, the city shall pay for the audit. The utility shall promptly pay to city any deficiency or city shall immediately issue a credit to the utility for any overpayment, as the case may be, which is established by the audit. Any credit issued to the utility shall be applied toward the next tax payment payable by the utility to city. If there are no further tax payments owed by the utility to city, city shall promptly pay the utility the amount of the overpayment.

(Ord. 1204, passed 5-27-14; Am. Ord. 1220, passed 1-28-16)


37.107 APPLICABILITY.

Any person who:

(A) Owns improvements on real property located within the city, which improvements are exempt from real property taxes because they are included in the Prineville/Crook County Enterprise Zone; and

(B) Except for testing of auxiliary or back up power source, produces more than two megawatts annually of electric power on or off site, which electric power is used at the improvements described in subsection (A) of this section; and

(C) Is not subject to a franchise fee payable to the city for the transmission of such electricity;

shall pay to city a privilege tax at the rate of 5%, computed on the basis of tariffed rates applicable to nonrenewable power, for the amount of power produced by such person. Such tax shall be paid quarterly, not later than 30 days after the end of calendar quarter in which the person operates without a franchise.

(Ord. 1204, passed 5-27-14; Am. Ord. 1220, passed 1-28-16)


37.108 RURAL ENTERPRISE ZONE AGREEMENTS.

If a person and city enter into a long-term rural enterprise zone agreement described in ORS 285C.403(3)(c) that references this subchapter, and the agreement includes a commitment by the person to use 100% renewable energy at the facility site, the agreement may require the person to pay an amount equal to the amount of tax with respect to electric service at the facility site that could be levied by § 37.102, except that such amount shall be computed on the basis of tariffed rates applicable to nonrenewable power and reduced by any franchise fee payable to city by a franchisee utility with respect to electric service at the facility site. Payment of this amount shall be made by February 28 and shall cover the prior calendar year. Notwithstanding any provision of this subchapter or the agreement, the maximum amount to be received by city with respect to the facility site for any calendar year:

(A) In franchise fee payable by an electric utility;

(B) In payments from a person pursuant to an agreement to pay an amount equal to potential tax pursuant to § 37.102 and this section;

(C) In payments from a person pursuant to § 37.107;

(D) For any other franchise fee, privilege tax or similar charge imposed by city with respect to electricity used at the facility site; or

(E) For any combination, or the aggregate, of any amounts pursuant to subsections (A), (B), (C) or (D) of this section;

shall be the greater of (1) the franchise fee payable pursuant to subsection (A) of this section or (2) $850,000. City intends hereby that this section will not change any amounts due or recoverable pursuant to any franchise agreement with a utility. Any amount paid by the person pursuant to subsection (B) of this section, or if applicable the maximum payment specified herein, shall fully satisfy the liability for any tax that otherwise would be owed by a nonfranchisee utility pursuant to § 37.102 with respect to the facility site. Nothing in this section describes a minimum amount such a person would pay for items listed in subsections (A) through (E) of this section; if the total amount of payments owed pursuant to subsections (A) through (E) of this section is less than the maximum payment amount, the person shall be responsible for only that lower amount. If the total amount received by the city with respect to the facility site in a calendar year exceeds the maximum amount allowed by this section (e.g., the person errs in calculating the amount to be paid by February 28 for the prior calendar year), such excess shall be refunded to the person. A person who is subject to this section shall provide to the city, with any payment required by this section, documentation showing the amount paid to a utility with respect to the facility site and the amount of electricity consumed at the facility site for the same time period covered by the payment (i.e., the prior calendar year).

(Ord. 1220, passed 1-28-16)


37.109 RURAL ENTERPRISE ZONE AGREEMENTS - APPLICABILITY.

The amendments adopted in § 37.108 apply to all taxes levied or potentially levied on or after the effective date of the long-term rural enterprise zone agreement referred to therein.

(Ord. 1220, passed 1-28-16)

TAX ON MARIJUANA AND MARIJUANA-INFUSED PRODUCTS


37.200 PURPOSE.

For the purposes of this subchapter, every person who sells marijuana, medical marijuana or marijuana-infused products in the city is exercising a taxable privilege. The purpose of this subchapter is to impose a tax upon the retail sale of marijuana, medical marijuana, and marijuana-infused products.

(Ord. 1207, passed 10-28-14)


37.201 DEFINITIONS.

When not clearly otherwise indicated by the context, the following words and phrases as used in this subchapter shall have the following meanings:

CITY means City of Prineville.

DIRECTOR means the Director of Finance for the City of Prineville or his/her designee.

GROSS TAXABLE SALES means the total amount received in money, credits, property or other consideration from sales of marijuana, medical marijuana and marijuana-infused products that is subject to the tax imposed by this subchapter.

MARIJUANA means all parts of the plant of the Cannabis family Moraceae, whether growing or not; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant or its resin, as may be defined by Oregon Revised Statutes as they currently exist or may from time to time be amended. It does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination.

OREGON MEDICAL MARIJUANA PROGRAM means the office within the Oregon Health Authority that administers the provisions of ORS 475.300 through 475.346, the Oregon Medical Marijuana Act, and all policies and procedures pertaining thereto.

PERSON means natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, limited liability company, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or any group or combination acting as a unit, including the United States of America, the State of Oregon and any political subdivision thereof, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them.

PURCHASE OR SALE means the acquisition or furnishing for consideration by any person of marijuana within the city.

REGISTRY IDENTIFICATION CARDHOLDER means a person who has been diagnosed by an attending physician with a debilitating medical condition and for whom the use of medical marijuana may mitigate the symptoms or effects of the person’s debilitating medical condition, and who has been issued a registry identification card by the Oregon Health Authority.

RETAIL SALE means the transfer of goods or services in exchange for any valuable consideration.

SELLER means any person who is required to be licensed or has been licensed by the State of Oregon to provide marijuana or marijuana-infused products to purchasers for money, credit, property or other consideration.

TAX means either the tax payable by the seller or the aggregate amount of taxes due from a seller during the period for which the seller is required to report collections under this subchapter.

TAXPAYER means any person obligated to account to the Finance Director for taxes collected or to be collected, or from whom a tax is due, under the terms of this subchapter.

(Ord. 1207, passed 10-28-14)


37.202 LEVY OF TAX.

(A) There is hereby levied and shall be paid a tax by every seller exercising the taxable privilege of selling marijuana and marijuana-infused products as defined in this subchapter.

(B) The amount of tax levied is as follows:

(1) Five percent of the gross sale amount paid to the seller by a registry identification cardholder.

(2) Ten percent of the gross sale amount paid to the seller of marijuana and marijuana-infused products by individuals who are not purchasing marijuana under the Oregon Medical Marijuana Program.

(Ord. 1207, passed 10-28-14)


37.203 DEDUCTIONS.

The following deductions shall be allowed against sales received by the seller providing marijuana:

(A) Refunds of sales actually returned to any purchaser;

(B) Any adjustments in sales which amount to a refund to a purchaser, providing such adjustment pertains to the actual sale of marijuana or marijuana-infused products and does not include any adjustments for other services furnished by a seller.

(Ord. 1207, passed 10-28-14)


37.204 SELLER RESPONSIBLE FOR PAYMENT OF TAX.

(A) Every seller shall, on or before the last day of the month following the end of each calendar quarter (in the months of April, July, October and January), make a return to the Director, on forms provided by the city, specifying the total sales subject to this subchapter and the amount of tax collected under this subchapter. The seller may request or the Director may establish shorter reporting periods for any seller if the seller or Director deems it necessary in order to insure collection of the tax and the Director may require further information in the return relevant to payment of the tax. A return shall not be considered filed until it is actually received by the Director.



(B) At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the Director. Payments received by the Director shall be applied in the order of the oldest liability first, with the payment credited first toward any accrued penalty, then to interest, then to the underlying tax, then to the current tax owed, until the payment is exhausted. If the Director, in his or her sole discretion, determines that an alternative order of payment application would be in the best interest of the city in a particular tax or factual situation, the Director may order such a change.

(C) The Director may establish shorter reporting periods for any seller if the Director deems it necessary in order to insure collection of the tax. The Director also may require additional information in the return relevant to payment of the liability. When a shorter return period is required, penalties and interest shall be computed according to the shorter return period. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by sellers pursuant to this subchapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment is made to the Director. A separate trust bank account is not required in order to comply with this provision.

(D) Every seller required to remit the tax imposed in this subchapter shall be entitled to retain 5% of all taxes due to defray the costs of bookkeeping and remittance.

(E) Every seller must keep and preserve in an accounting format established by the Director records of all sales made by the dispensary and such other books or accounts as may be required by the Director. Every seller must keep and preserve for a period of three years all such books, invoices and other records. The Director shall have the right to inspect all such records at all reasonable times.

(Ord. 1207, passed 10-28-14)


37.205 PENALTIES AND INTEREST.

(A) Any seller who fails to remit any portion of any tax imposed by this subchapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of 10% of the amount of the tax, in addition to the amount of the tax.

(B) Any seller who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of 60 days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent, shall pay a second delinquency penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the penalty first imposed.

(C) If the Director determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this subchapter is due to fraud, a penalty of 25% of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections (A) and (B) of this section.

(D) In addition to the penalties imposed, any seller who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of 1% per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.

(E) Every penalty imposed, and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section, shall become a part of the tax required to be paid.

(Ord. 1207, passed 10-28-14)


37.206 FAILURE TO REPORT AND REMIT TAX - DETERMINATION OF TAX BY DIRECTOR.

If any seller should fail to make, within the time provided in this subchapter, any report of the tax required by this subchapter, the Director shall proceed in such manner as deemed best to obtain facts and information on which to base the estimate of tax due. As soon as the Director shall procure such facts and information as is able to be obtained, upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this subchapter and payable by any seller, the Director shall proceed to determine and assess against such seller the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this subchapter. In case such determination is made, the Director shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by having it served personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the seller so assessed at the last known place of address. Such seller may make an appeal of such determination as provided in § 37.207. If no appeal is filed, the Director’s determination is final and the amount thereby is immediately due and payable.

(Ord. 1207, passed 10-28-14)


37.207 APPEAL.

Any seller aggrieved by any decision of the Director with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the City Manager or his or her designee. The appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The City Manager shall hear and consider any records and evidence presented bearing upon the Director’s determination of amount due, and make findings affirming, reversing or modifying the determination. The findings of the City Manager shall be final and conclusive, and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice.

(Ord. 1207, passed 10-28-14)


37.208 REFUNDS.

(A) Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once, or has been erroneously collected or received by the city under this subchapter, it may be refunded as provided in subsection (B) of this section, provided a claim in writing, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the Director within one year of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the Director.

(B) The Director shall have 20 calendar days from the date of receipt of a claim to review the claim and make a determination in writing as to the validity of the claim. The Director shall notify the claimant in writing of the Director’s determination. Such notice shall be mailed to the address provided by claimant on the claim form. In the event a claim is determined by the Director to be a valid claim, in a manner prescribed by the Director, a seller may take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously collected or received. If the seller is no longer in business, a refund check will be mailed to claimant at the address provided in the claim form.

(C) No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant established the right by written records showing entitlement to such refund and the Director acknowledged the validity of the claim.

(D) No interest shall be due on the refund amount.

(Ord. 1207, passed 10-28-14)


37.209 ACTIONS TO COLLECT.

Any tax required to be paid by any seller under the provisions of this subchapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the seller to the city. Any such tax collected by a seller which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the seller to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this subchapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount. In any such action by the city for the recovery of monies owed under the provisions of this subchapter, the city shall be entitled to recover from the person owing money to the city the city’s attorney’s fees for such action. In lieu of filing an action for the recovery, the city, when taxes due are more than 30 days delinquent, can submit any outstanding tax to a collection agency. So long as the city has complied with the provisions set forth in ORS 697.105, in the event the city turns over a delinquent tax account to a collection agency, it may add to the amount owing an amount equal to the collection agency fees, not to exceed the greater of $50 or 50% of the outstanding tax, penalties and interest owing.

(Ord. 1207, passed 10-28-14)


37.210 PENALTY.

(A) All violations of this subchapter are punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000. It is a violation of this subchapter for any seller or other person to:

(1) Fail or refuse to comply as required herein;

(2) Fail or refuse to furnish any return required to be made;

(3) Fail or refuse to permit inspection of records;

(4) Fail or refuse to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the Director;

(5) Render a false or fraudulent return or claim; or

(6) Fail, refuse or neglect to remit the tax to the city by the due date.

(B) The remedies provided by this section are not exclusive and shall not prevent the city from exercising any other remedy available under the law, nor shall the provisions of this subchapter prohibit or restrict the city or other appropriate prosecutor from pursuing criminal charges under state law.

(Ord. 1207, passed 10-28-14)


37.211 CONFIDENTIALITY.

Except as otherwise required by law, it shall be unlawful for the city and any officer, employee, or agent of the city to divulge, release or make known in any manner any financial information submitted or disclosed to the city under the terms of this subchapter. Nothing in this section shall prohibit:

(A) The disclosure of the names and addresses of any person who is operating a licensed establishment from which marijuana is sold or provided; or

(B) The disclosure of general statistics in a form which would not reveal an individual seller’s financial information; or

(C) Presentation of evidence to the court, or other tribunal having jurisdiction, in the prosecution of any criminal or civil claim by the Director or an appeal from the Director for amount due the city under this subchapter; or

(D) The disclosure of information when such disclosure of conditionally exempt information is ordered under public records law procedures; or

(E) The disclosure of records related to a business’s failure to report and remit the tax when the report or tax is in arrears for over six months or the tax exceeds $5,000. The City Council expressly finds and determines that the public interest in disclosure of such records clearly outweighs the interest in confidentiality under ORS 192.501(5).

(Ord. 1207, passed 10-28-14)


37.212 AUDIT OF BOOKS, RECORDS OR PERSONS.

The city, for the purpose of determining the correctness of any tax return or for the purpose of an estimate of taxes due, may examine or may cause to be examined, by an agent or representative designated by the city for that purpose, any books, papers, records, or memoranda, including copies of seller’s state and federal income tax return, bearing upon the matter of the seller’s tax return. All books, invoices, accounts and other records shall be made available within the city limits and be open at any time during regular business hours for examination by the Director or an authorized agent of the Director. If any taxpayer refuses to voluntarily furnish any of the foregoing information when requested, the Director may immediately seek a subpoena from the Crook County Circuit Court to require that the taxpayer or a representative of the taxpayer attend a hearing or produce any such books, accounts and records for examination.

(Ord. 1207, passed 10-28-14)


37.213 FORMS AND REGULATIONS.

The Director is hereby authorized to prescribe forms and promulgate rules and regulations to aid in the making of returns, the ascertainment, assessment and collection of said medical marijuana tax and in particular and without limiting the general language of this chapter, to provide for:

(A) A form of report on sales and purchases to be supplied to all vendors;

(B) The records which sellers providing marijuana and marijuana-infused products are to keep concerning the tax imposed by this subchapter.

(Ord. 1207, passed 10-28-14)




CHAPTER 38: SMOKE-FREE CITY FACILITIES

Section

38.01    Purpose

38.02    Definitions

38.03    Application of provisions

38.04    Prohibition of smoking

38.05    Reasonable distance

38.06    Posting of signs

38.07    Enforcement

38.08    Nonretaliation

38.09    Violations

38.10    Electronic smoking device sales to minors prohibited; locating electronic smoking devices in retail stores

38.11    Minors prohibited from possessing or acquiring electronic smoking devices

38.99    Penalty


38.01 PURPOSE.

Numerous studies have found that tobacco smoke is a major contributor to indoor air pollution, and that breathing secondhand smoke is a cause of disease, including lung cancer, in nonsmokers; and health hazards induced by breathing secondhand smoke include lung cancer, heart disease, respiratory infection, and decreased respiratory function, including bronchoconstriction, bronchospasm, and sudden infant death syndrome. Accordingly, the City Council finds and declares that the purposes of this chapter are:

(A) To protect the public health and welfare by prohibiting smoking in city places and places of employment; and

(B) To guarantee the right of nonsmokers to breathe smoke-free air and to recognize that the need to breathe smoke-free air shall have priority over the desire to smoke. 

(Ord. 1083, passed 8-22-00; Am. Ord. 1209, passed 12-17-14)


38.02 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:

CITY means the city of Prineville.

ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE means any electronic oral device, such as one composed of a heating element, battery, and/or electronic circuit, which provides a vapor of nicotine or any other substances, and the use of inhalation of which simulates smoking. The term includes any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an e-cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe, e-hookah, or under any other product name, or descriptor and any cartridge or other component of the device or related product. Notwithstanding the previous sentence, the definition of electronic smoking device shall not include any device approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration to deliver medicines using vapor and inhalation.

EMPLOYEE means any person who is employed by the city in the consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, and any person who volunteers his or her services for the city.

ENCLOSED AREA, ENCLOSED FACILITY, and ENCLOSED FACILITIES means all space between a floor and ceiling which is enclosed on all sides by solid walls or windows (exclusive of door or passageways) which extend from the floor to the ceiling, including all space therein screened by partition which do not extend to the ceiling or are not solid, “office landscaping” or similar structures.

PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT means any enclosed area under the control of the city as employer which employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges and restrooms, conference and classrooms, employee cafeterias, and hallways.

SMOKING means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, weed, plant, or combustible substance, or the use of an electronic smoking device which creates a vapor, in any manner or in any form. 

(Ord. 1083, passed 8-22-00; Am. Ord. 1209, passed 12-17-14)


38.03 APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS.

All enclosed facilities owned by the city and places of employment where city is the employer shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. 

(Ord. 1083, passed 8-22-00; Am. Ord. 1209, passed 12-17-14)


38.04 PROHIBITION OF SMOKING.

(A) Smoking prohibited generally. Except as stated in § 38.09, smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed city-owned and operated facilities within the city including, but not limited to, the following places:

(1) Elevators.

(2) Restrooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways, and any other common-use areas.

(3) All vehicles and other means of transit under the authority of the city.

(B) Smoking prohibited in places of employment.

(1) It shall be the responsibility of the city to provide a smoke-free place of employment for all employees, but the city is not required to incur any expenses to make structural or other physical modifications.

(2) The smoking policy shall be communicated to all employees within three weeks of its adoption.

(3) The city shall supply a written copy of this chapter upon request to any existing or prospective employee. 

(Ord. 1083, passed 8-22-00; Am. Ord. 1209, passed 12-17-14) Penalty, see § 38.99


38.05 REASONABLE DISTANCE.

Smoking shall occur at a distance of at least 20 feet from any enclosed area or breezeway where smoking is prohibited to ensure that tobacco smoke or electronic smoking device vapor does not enter the area through entrances, windows, ventilation systems, or by any other means. 

(Ord. 1083, passed 8-22-00; Am. Ord. 1122, passed 5-24-05; Am. Ord. 1209, passed 12-17-14)


38.06 POSTING OF SIGNS.

(A) “No Smoking” signs or the international “No Smoking” symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) shall be clearly, sufficiently, and conspicuously posted in every building or other area where smoking is prohibited by this chapter, by the owner, operator, manager, or other person having control of such building or other areas.

(B) Every public place where smoking is prohibited by this chapter shall have posted at every entrance a conspicuous sign clearly stating that smoking is prohibited.

(C) All ashtrays and other smoking paraphernalia shall be removed from any area where smoking is prohibited by this chapter by the person having control of such area. However, ashtrays are allowed at entrances so that burning cigarettes, etc., may be disposed of prior to entry. 

(Ord. 1083, passed 8-22-00; Am. Ord. 1209, passed 12-17-14) Penalty, see § 38.99


38.07 ENFORCEMENT.

Enforcement of this chapter shall be implemented by the City Manager, Chief of Police, or designees of either of them. 

(Ord. 1083, passed 8-22-00; Am. Ord. 1209, passed 12-17-14)


38.08 NONRETALIATION.

No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner retaliate against any employee, applicant for employment, or other person because such employee, applicant, or other person exercises any right to a smoke-free environment afforded by this chapter.

(Ord. 1083, passed 8-22-00; Am. Ord. 1209, passed 12-17-14) Penalty, see § 38.99


38.09 VIOLATIONS.

(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any area where smoking is prohibited by the provisions of this chapter.

(B) Any person, after warning by the City Manager, the Chief of Police, or designees of either of them, who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable as set forth in § 38.99.

(C) The Police Department shall be responsible for, or assist in, the issuance of citations for violations of this chapter.

(D) Violation of this chapter by a city employee shall be cause for discipline. 

(Ord. 1083, passed 8-22-00; Am. Ord. 1209, passed 12-17-14. Formerly 38.10) 


38.10 ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE SALES TO MINORS PROHIBITED; LOCATING ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICES IN RETAIL STORES.

(A) No person, other than a minor’s custodian parent or guardian, will sell or otherwise provide electronic smoking devices to a minor under the age of 18 years old.

(B) A person having authority over the location of electronic smoking devices in a retail store may not locate such devices in a location in the store where the electronic smoking devices are accessible by store customers without assistance by a store employee.

(C) Subsection (B) of this section does not apply if the location at which the electronic smoking device products are sold is a store or other establishment at which persons under 18 years of age are prohibited. 

(Ord. 1209, passed 12-17-14)


38.11 MINORS PROHIBITED FROM POSSESSING OR ACQUIRING ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICES.

(A) It is unlawful for any person under 18 years of age to possess an electronic smoking device.

(B) Except as provided in subsection (C) of this section, no person under 18 years of age shall purchase, attempt to purchase, or acquire an electronic smoking device.

(C) A minor acting under the supervision of an adult may purchase, attempt to purchase, or acquire an electronic smoking device for the purpose of testing compliance with the federal law, state statute, local law, or retailer management policy limiting or regulating the delivery of electronic smoking devices to minors. 

(Ord. 1209, passed 12-17-14)


38.99 PENALTY.

(A) Whoever violates any provision of this chapter, except § 38.10, shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by:

(1) A fine not exceeding $100 for the first violation.

(2) A fine not exceeding $200 for a second violation of this chapter within a one-year period.

(3) A fine not exceeding $500 for each additional violation of this chapter within a one-year period.

(B) Whoever violates § 38.10 shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable, upon conviction, by a fine not exceeding $500, for a noncontinuing offense; and when a violation is of a continuing nature, a separately punishable violation occurs on each calendar day the violation continues and shall be punishable, upon conviction, by a fine not exceeding $500 per day.

(C) (1) In lieu of any other penalty established by law, a person who is convicted for the first time of a violation of § 38.11 may be ordered to participate in a substance abuse education program or tobacco/nicotine use cessation program or to perform community service related to diseases associated with the use of electronic smoking devices. A person may be ordered to participate in such a program only once.

(2) In addition to and not in lieu of any other penalty established by law, a person who is convicted of a second violation of § 38.11, through misrepresentation of age, may be required to participate in a substance abuse education or a tobacco/nicotine use cessation program or perform community service related to diseases associated with the use of electronic smoking devices, and the court shall order that the person’s driving privileges and right to apply for driving privileges be suspended for a period not to exceed one year. If a court has issued an order suspending driving privilege under this subsection, the court, upon petition of the person, may withdraw the order at any time the court deems appropriate. The court notification to the Department of Transportation under this subsection may include a recommendation that the person be granted a hardship permit under ORS 807.240 if the person is otherwise eligible for the permit.

(Ord. 1083, passed 8-22-00; Am. Ord. 1209, passed 12-17-14) 




CHAPTER 39: REIMBURSEMENT DISTRICTS FOR PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS

Section

39.01    Definitions

39.02    Application for a reimbursement district

39.03    Engineer’s report

39.04    Amount to be reimbursed

39.05    Public hearing

39.06    Notice of public hearing

39.07    City Council action

39.08    Notice of adoption of resolution

39.09    Recording the resolution

39.10    Contesting the reimbursement district

39.11    Obligation to pay reimbursement fee

39.12    Public improvements

39.13    Multiple public improvements

39.14    Collection and payment; other fees and charges


39.01 DEFINITIONS.

APPLICANT. A person required to pay for or install (or chooses to finance) some or all of a public improvement which is available to serve real property (other than real property owned by the person) and who applies to the city for reimbursement for the expense of the improvement. An applicant can be the city.

CITY. The City of Prineville.

CITY ENGINEER. The person holding the position of City Engineer or, if there is none, an engineer hired by city.

FRONT FOOTAGE. The linear footage of a lot or parcel owned by a property owner to be served by a public improvement. Front footage excludes the front footage of property used as public right-of-way.

PERSON. A natural person or persons, a partnership, corporation, limited liability company, association, or any other legal entity capable of owning, holding, and/or disposing of real or personal property.

PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT. The construction, reconstruction, and/or upgrading of facilities covered by the terms of "street improvement," "sewer improvement," and/or "water improvement" as defined in this section.

REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENT. The agreement between an applicant and the city providing for the construction, reconstruction, and/or upgrading of and payment for public improvements to be financed through a reimbursement district.

REIMBURSEMENT DISTRICT. The area determined by the Prineville City Council to derive benefits from the construction of street, water, and/or sewer improvements financed in whole or in part by an applicant, including property having the potential to utilize the affected improvement(s).

REIMBURSEMENT FEE. That sum determined by a resolution of the City Council and the reimbursement agreement to be the amount of money proportionate to the benefit derived by the affected property from the public improvement.

SEWER IMPROVEMENT. A sewer or sewer line improvement conforming with the City of Prineville adopted standards and specifications, and any applicable land use conditions of approval including, but not limited to, extending a sewer line to property (other than property owned by the applicant) so that sewer service can be provided for such other property without further extension of the line.

STREET IMPROVEMENT. A street or street improvement conforming with the City of Prineville adopted standards and specifications, and any applicable land use conditions of approval including, but not limited to, street, storm drains, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, bike paths, traffic control devices, street trees, lights and signs, and public right-of-way.

UTILIZE. To receive the benefit of a public improvement, manifested by the receipt of a permit which will allow the use of an affected public improvement, or increase the use thereof.

WATER IMPROVEMENT. A water or water line improvement conforming with the City of Prineville adopted standards and specifications and any applicable land use conditions of approval including, but not limited to, extending a water line to real property (other than property owned by the applicant) so that water service can be provided for said other property without extension of the line.

(Ord. 1149, passed 2-26-08)


39.02 APPLICATION FOR A REIMBURSEMENT DISTRICT.

(A) Any person who constructs public improvement(s) capable of providing service(s) to property, other than property owned by that person, may, by written application filed with the city, request that the city establish a reimbursement district. The application shall be accompanied by a fee sufficient to cover the cost of administrative review and the notice required by this section as well as the fee of the City Engineer.

(B) The application for creation of a reimbursement district shall include the following:

(1) A description of the location, type, size, and cost of the public improvement sought to be eligible;

(2) A map showing the properties to be included within the proposed reimbursement district which includes information on the ownership of each property; the zoning thereof; the front and/or square footage of the property; and any other data (traffic studies, water modeling, etc.) necessary for or relevant to calculate the apportionment of the cost of the affected public improvement(s);

(3) Information on the cost of the public improvement(s). In the event the affected public improvement(s) have been built or installed, this information must reflect the actual cost of the improvements as evidenced by receipt, invoices, or other similar documents. In the event the public improvements have not been constructed or installed, the information must reflect the estimated cost of the improvements as evidenced by bids, projections as to the cost of labor and materials and other similar information requested by the City Engineer;

(4) The date the city either accepted the public improvements or estimated date of completion.

An application may be submitted to the city prior to the construction or installation of the affected public improvement but in any event must be submitted not later than 90 days after completion and acceptance by the city of the public improvements. However, the City Engineer may waive this time limitation upon a showing by the applicant of good cause for the delay.

(Ord. 1149, passed 2-26-08)


39.03 ENGINEER’S REPORT.

The City Engineer shall review the application and evaluate whether a reimbursement district should be established. The City Engineer may require the submittal of other relevant information from the applicant in order to assist the City Engineer in the evaluation. The City Engineer shall, after evaluation, prepare a written report for the City Council considering and making a recommendation as to the efficacy of establishing a reimbursement district. The report shall include information on the following items:

(A) Whether the applicant will finance or has constructed some or all of the public improvement(s) and whether those improvements are available to serve property other than property owned by the applicant;

(B) The area to be included within the reimbursement district;

(C) The actual or estimated cost of the public improvement(s);

(D) A methodology for spreading the costs associated with the public improvement(s) between and among the affected parcels. The methodology should take into consideration the cost of the improvement(s), the value of the unused capacity, and such other factors as may be deemed relevant by the City Engineer, utilizing cost accounting principles generally employed in the construction of public improvements;

(E) The amount, if any, to be charged by the city for its administration of the agreement;

(F) The period of time that the right to reimbursement exists; and

(G) Whether the public improvement(s) will or have met city standards.

(Ord. 1149, passed 2-26-08)


39.04 AMOUNT TO BE REIMBURSED.

The cost to be reimbursed to the applicant is limited to the cost of construction, including property acquisition costs, the cost of construction permits, engineering, and legal expenses related directly to the formation of the reimbursement district, as determined by the City Council in its sole discretion.

(Ord. 1149, passed 2-26-08)


39.05 PUBLIC HEARING.

(A) Within a reasonable time after the City Engineer has completed the report described in § 39.03, the City Council shall hold a public hearing at which any person who is or may be monetarily affected by the formation of the reimbursement district is given the opportunity to comment on the formation of the proposed reimbursement district. The formation of the reimbursement district is not subject to termination because of remonstrances, and the City Council has the sole authority and discretion to decide whether a reimbursement district shall be formed.

(B) If a reimbursement district is formed prior to the actual construction of and/or acceptance by the city of the improvement(s), the City Council may set a not-to-exceed reimbursable amount which may or may not reflect the applicant’s actual costs. A second public hearing shall be held after the improvement(s) have been accepted by the city. At that time the City Council may modify the resolution described in § 39.07 to reflect the actual cost of the improvement(s).

(Ord. 1149, passed 2-26-08)


39.06 NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING.

Not less than ten nor more than 30 days prior to any public hearing held pursuant to this section, the applicant and all owners of property within the proposed district shall be notified of such hearing and the purpose thereof. Such notifications shall be accomplished by either regular mail or personal service. If notification is accomplished by mail, notice shall be mailed not less than 13 days prior to the hearing, which notice is deemed effective on the date the notice is mailed. Failure of the applicant or any affected property owner to receive notice shall not invalidate or otherwise affect the authority of the City Council to act.

(Ord. 1149, passed 2-26-08)


39.07 CITY COUNCIL ACTION.

(A) After the public hearing held pursuant to § 39.05(A), the City Council shall approve, reject, or modify the recommendations contained in the City Engineer’s report. The Council’s decision shall be embodied in a resolution. If a reimbursement district is established, the resolution shall include the City Engineer’s report as approved or modified, and shall specify that payment of the reimbursement fee, as designated for each parcel, is a precondition of receiving city permits applicable to development of that parcel as provided for in § 39.11.

(B) When the applicant is other than the city, the resolution shall authorize the City Manager to enter into an agreement with the applicant pertaining to the reimbursement district improvements. The agreement at a minimum shall contain the following provisions:

(1) That the public improvement(s) shall meet all applicable city standards;

(2) The amount of potential reimbursement to the applicant;

(3) That the total amount of potential reimbursement shall not exceed the actual cost of the public improvement(s);

(4) That the applicant shall guarantee the public improvement(s) for a minimum period of 12 months after the date of written acceptance by the city;

(5) That the applicant shall defend, indemnify, and hold the city harmless from any and all losses, claims, damage, judgments, or the costs or expense arising as a result of or related to the city’s establishment of the district; and

(6) That the city will make reasonable efforts to properly account for and collect the reimbursement fee from any affected property, including the city’s costs or expenses related to collection of the reimbursement fee, but is not liable for any failure to collect such fee or costs.

(7) If the agreement is entered into prior to construction, the agreement shall be contingent upon the improvements being accepted by the city.

(C) If a reimbursement district is established by the City Council, the date of the formation of the district shall be the date that the City Council adopts the resolution forming the district.

(Ord. 1149, passed 2-26-08)


39.08 NOTICE OF ADOPTION OF RESOLUTION.

The city shall notify all property owners within the district and the applicant of the adoption of a reimbursement district resolution by notice mailed to them. The notice shall include a copy of the resolution, the date it was adopted, and a short explanation of when the property owner is obligated to pay the reimbursement fee and the amounts thereof.

(Ord. 1149, passed 2-26-08)


39.09 RECORDING THE RESOLUTION.

The City Manager shall cause notice of the formation and the nature of the reimbursement district to be filed in the office of the County Clerk so as to provide notice to potential purchasers of property within the district. Said recording shall not create a lien. Failure to make such recording shall not affect either the lawfulness of the resolution nor the obligation to pay the reimbursement fee.

(Ord. 1149, passed 2-26-08)


39.10 CONTESTING THE REIMBURSEMENT DISTRICT.

Any legal action intended to contest the formation of the district or the reimbursement fee, including the amount of the charge designated for each parcel, shall be filed within 60 days following the adoption of a resolution establishing a reimbursement district and shall be by writ of review as provided in ORS 34.010 to 34.100.

(Ord. 1149, passed 2-26-08)


39.11 OBLIGATION TO PAY REIMBURSEMENT FEE.

(A) The applicant for a permit related to property within any reimbursement district shall pay to the city, in addition to any other applicable fees and charges, the reimbursement fee established by the City Council if within the time specified in the resolution the person applies for and receives approval for any of the following activities:

(1) A building permit which will cause either the use of a public improvement or an increase in the use thereof.

(2) The connection to a public improvement which results in the use of a public improvement or an increase in the use thereof.

(3) Any city approval or development activity which results in utilization of a public improvement as defined in § 39.01.

(B) The city’s determination of who shall pay the reimbursement fee is final. Neither the city nor any officer or employee shall incur liability of any nature whatsoever as a result of this determination.

(C) A permit applicant whose property is subject to payment of a reimbursement fee receives a benefit from the construction of street improvement(s), regardless of whether access is taken or provided directly onto such street. Nothing in this section is intended to modify or limit the authority of the city to provide or require access management.

(D) No person shall be required to pay the reimbursement fee on an application or upon property for which the reimbursement fee has been previously paid unless such payment was for other improvement(s). No permit shall be issued for any of the activities listed in subsection (A) of this section unless the reimbursement fee, as adjusted, has been paid in full. In the case of multiple improvements, a reimbursement fee may be collected for selected improvements which the new development actually utilizes.

(E) The date when the right of reimbursement ends shall be as follows:

(1) For sewer and water improvements, ten years from the district formation date. Upon application for an extension, the City Council may, by resolution, authorize up to two consecutive five-year extensions for a total reimbursement period not to exceed 20 years. A decision as to whether to grant any extension shall be the sole discretion of the City Council.

(2) For street improvements, ten years from the district formation date. The reimbursement fee shall be calculated over the ten-year reimbursement period based on the City Engineer’s determination of the useful life of the street improvement and shall decline 5% per year to a value not exceeding 50% of the original fee in the tenth and final year of the reimbursement agreement. The reimbursement fee shall be calculated to decline beginning at six months and 5% every year thereafter. No extensions may be applied for or authorized in the case of street improvements.

(F) Any property owner may prepay the established reimbursement fee prior to applying for a building permit or connecting to the affected public improvement.

(Ord. 1149, passed 2-26-08)


39.12 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.

Public improvements installed pursuant to reimbursement district agreements shall become and remain the sole property of the city or other appropriate public entity as directed by the city.

(Ord. 1149, passed 2-26-08)


39.13 MULTIPLE PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.

During the initial formation of a reimbursement district, more than one public improvement may be considered for inclusion in the reimbursement district.

(Ord. 1149, passed 2-26-08)


39.14 COLLECTION AND PAYMENT; OTHER FEES AND CHARGES.

(A) Applicants shall receive all reimbursements collected by the city for their public improvements. Such reimbursements shall be delivered to the developer for so long as the reimbursement district agreement is in effect. Such payments shall be made by the city semi-annually.

(B) The reimbursement fee is not intended to replace or limit and is in addition to any other existing fees or charges collected by the city.

(Ord. 1149, passed 2-26-08)


CHAPTER 40: SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT CHARGES

Section

40.01    Title

40.02    Authorization

40.03    Purpose

40.04    Definitions

40.05    Capital improvement plans required

40.06    Determination of amount of SDC’s

40.07    Procedures for SDC credit or refund

40.08    Credits against SDC’s and refunds

40.09    Payment schedules

40.10    Assignment of claims

40.11    City’s obligation to pay

40.12    Enactment


40.01 TITLE.

This chapter shall be known as the Systems Development Charge chapter of 2004 for the city.

(Ord. 1111, passed 5-25-04)


40.02 AUTHORIZATION.

Systems Development Charges (SDC’s) are authorized by O.R.S. 223.297 to 223.314 and by Sections 4 and 39 of the Prineville City Charter.

(Ord. 1111, passed 5-25-04)


40.03 PURPOSE.

It is the purpose of this chapter is to provide for the basic framework for the imposition of Systems Development Charges for the recovery of certain capital improvement costs deemed necessary for the city to provide sewer, water and transportation services.

(Ord. 1111, passed 5-25-04)


40.04 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT.

(1) Facilities or assets used for the following:

(a) Water supply, treatment, storage and distribution;

(b) Waste water collection, transmission, treatment, storage and disposal;

(c) Transportation.

(2) Does not include costs of the operation or routine maintenance of capital improvements.

CITY. The City of Prineville, Oregon.

CITY COUNCIL and COUNCIL. The City Council of Prineville.

CITY PLANNING COMMISSION and COMMISSION. The City Planning Commission for the city as duly appointed by the City Council.

CITY RECORDER, CITY MANAGER, CITY PLANNING OFFICIAL OR DIRECTOR, FIRE CHIEF, CITY LEGAL COUNSEL, CITY COUNSEL or CITY ATTORNEY, and CITY PUBLIC WORKS, SEWER, WATER or STREET SUPERINTENDENT. Such respective positions for the city as applicable.

DEVELOPMENT CHARGE or SDC. Does not include any fees assessed or collected as part of a local improvement district, or a charge in lieu of an LID assessment, or the cost of complying with requirements or conditions imposed upon a land use decision, expedited land division or limited land use decision.

IMPROVEMENT FEE. A fee for costs associated with capital improvements to be constructed.

REIMBURSEMENT FEE. A fee for costs associated with capital improvements associated with capital improvements already constructed or under construction at the time the applicable fee is established, and for which the city determines that capacity exists.

SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGE or SDC. A reimbursement fee, an improvement fee or a combination thereof assessed or collected at the time of increased usage of a capital improvement or issuance of a development permit, building permit or connection to the capital improvement.

(Ord. 1111, passed 5-25-04)


40.05 CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLANS REQUIRED.

(A) As required by O.R.S. 223.309, the city has prepared and adopted the following Public Facility Master Plans. The plans, as may be amended, are hereby adopted by reference as though set forth in full herein. The plans are available for public inspection at the office of the City Manager.

(1) The current Transportation System Plan;

(2) The current Water Facility Plan;

(3) The current Wastewater Facility Plan; and

(4) The current Capital Facilities Improvement Plan.

(B) Plans identified in division (A) of this section may be modified, revised, amended and/or updated by the city at any time.

(C) Copies of all such proposed modifications, revisions, amendments and/or updates to such Plans shall be available for public inspection not less than thirty days prior to any public hearing thereon.

(Ord. 1111, passed 5-25-04; Am. Ord. 1128, passed 5-23-06; Am. Ord. 1133, passed 2-28-06)


40.06 DETERMINATION OF AMOUNT OF SDC’S.

(A) Reimbursement fees shall be established by City Council resolution setting forth a methodology that considers the cost of the existing facility or facilities, prior contributions by existing users, the value of unused capacity or the cost of the existing facilities, rate-making principles employed to finance publicly owned capital improvements and other relevant factors identified by the city. The methodology shall promote the objective of the future system users contributing to no more than an equitable share to the cost of existing facilities. The methodology for establishing such fees shall be available for public inspection.

(B) Improvement fees shall established by City Council resolution setting forth a methodology that considers the cost of projected capital improvements identified in adopted Capital Improvement Plans needed to increase the capacity of the systems to which the fee is related and required to serve the demands placed on the system by future users. The methodology for establishing such fees shall be available for public inspection.

(Ord. 1111, passed 5-25-04)


40.07 PROCEDURES FOR SDC CREDIT OR REFUND.

Developers who wish to expand the city’s Public Facility Master Plan Systems may do so according to the following procedure.

(A) Improvements must be approved by the city.

(B) An agreement between the developer and the city shall be required and shall set forth the development requirements, as well as the SDC credit and/or SDC refund, if available.

(C) All improvements must be constructed according to city standards, rules and regulations, including the city’s Master Plan, as determined by the Public Works Director.

(D) All of the costs of such improvements shall be paid by the developer.

(E) The developer’s costs associated with the construction of these qualified public improvements may be eligible for a System Development Charge (SDC) credit and/or SDC refund as provided in this chapter.

(Ord. 1111, passed 5-25-04)


40.08 CREDITS AGAINST SDC’S AND REFUNDS.

(A) The City Council resolution that establishes an improvement fee shall also provide for a credit against said SDC fees for the construction of a qualified public improvement as provided for by O.R.S. 223.297 to 223.314. In addition to, or in lieu of the SDC credit, a developer is eligible for a SDC refund. A "qualified public improvement" means a capital improvement that is required as a condition of development approval in a Public Facility Plan adopted by the city as referenced by § 40.05 and either: (1) Not located on or contiguous to property that is the subject of development approval; or (2) Located in whole or in part on or contiguous property that is the subject of development approval and required to be built larger or with greater capacity than is necessary for the particular development project to which the improvement fee is related.

(B) The credit or refund provided for in division (A) of this section shall be only for the improvement fee charged for the type of improvement being constructed, and credit for qualified public improvements under division (A) of this section may be granted only for the cost of that portion of such improvement that exceeds the city’s minimum standard facility size or capacity needed to serve the particular development project or property. Such credits or refunds shall only be utilized on the property that is subject to the development approval. Credits or refunds can be transferred between entities, but can only be utilized on the site from which the credits or refunds were created. The applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating that a particular improvement qualifies for credit under division (C) of this section. Qualified costs shall include actual costs, including actual expenditures for engineering and/or surveying.

(1) If land is required to be dedicated to the public for right-of-way for a collector or arterial street as a condition of development approval, the development may be credited or a refund issued for that exaction, but only for the right-of-way area over and above that required for a local street or other lower class street deemed necessary to serve the proposed development. The value of such land will be determined by the real market value last recorded on the most recent available tax assessor’s records for the parcel being developed.

(2) Land required to be dedicated to the public for any classification of streets other than collector or arterial, will be deemed to be for the developer’s benefit and will not be compensated by the SDC credits or refund. No credit or refund will be given for land deeded or dedicated prior to the effective date of this chapter.

(3) Where it is a condition of development approval that the developer either provide, in part or in its entirety, a street improvement or traffic device, or sewer or water component that provides additional capacity on a collector or arterial street, or in the water or sewer system of the city, the developer may receive compensation by credit or refund for the reasonable cost of that additional capacity, unless the need for the improvement is specifically attributable to that development. For example, if a 6-inch sewer line would be adequate to provide necessary services to a specific development, but a 10-foot line is required to provide additional capacity for future development in the immediate area, then compensation for the difference in costs from a 6-foot line to a 10-foot line could be approved. However, for example, a traffic signal at a shopping center entrance would be considered specifically attributable to the shopping center and no credit or refund would be allowed. If for its convenience, a developer wishes to provide a greater facility than required or wishes to construct a facility prior to the time that the city ordinarily would, the city, at its sole discretion, may elect to participate but shall not be required to do so.

(C) When the construction of a qualified public improvement as defined in division (A) of this section gives rise to a credit or refund amount greater than the improvement fee that would otherwise be levied against the project receiving development approval, the excess credit or refund may be applied against improvement fees that accrue in subsequent phases of the original development project or may be refunded from fees collected in subsequent phases of the original development project.

(D) Credits or refunds shall be used in the time specified by the city but not later than ten years from the date the improvement is accepted by the city.

(E) The resolution that establishes an improvement fee shall also provide for a credit or refund against said SDC fees for qualifying local improvement districts. A "qualified local improvement district" means a local improvement district (LID) that has been approved by the city prior to 2000 and:

(1) Applies for and receives building permits to complete planned LID and/or development construction within ten years of the date of original LID and/or development approval unless otherwise approved by the city;

(2) Pays all required LID fees on schedule in compliance with the original LID conditions.

(F) The credit or refund provided for in this section shall only be for the LID fee charged, but shall not exceed the applicable SDC fee that would otherwise by levied against properties in the LID project, in part or in whole, accruing in subsequent phases or the original LID project, subject to city approval.

(Ord. 1111, passed 5-25-04)


40.09 PAYMENT SCHEDULES.

(A) SDC credits or refunds on building permits or refunds shall be allowed within ten years after the completion and acceptance of the improvement giving rise to credit or refund unless otherwise approved by the city.

(B) SDC refund amounts shall be payable annually by the city from SDC improvement fees collected by the city from January 1 through December 31 of each year by February 28 of the year following collection by the city.

(C) SDC credits shall be offset against SDC fees when due.

(D) No interest shall accrue on SDC credit or SDC refund payable to developers.

(E) There shall be no adjustments made to the amount of any SDC credit or SDC refund amount as a result of inflation.

(F) If no money is collected in a given fiscal year, no money shall be eligible for refund.

(Ord. 1111, passed 5-25-04)


40.10 ASSIGNMENT OF CLAIMS.

Claims for SDC credit and SDC refund are personal and may be assigned without the written consent of the city. Copies of the assignment of said claims must be delivered to and approved by the city.

(Ord. 1111, passed 5-25-04)


40.11 CITY’S OBLIGATION TO PAY.

(A) The city’s obligation to pay or apply SDC credit or refund for a qualified public improvement shall be limited to SDC improvement fees actually collected by the city for such public improvements as provided for in this policy. The city’s obligation to pay is limited by the amount actually collected for the particular public improvement. City’s obligation to pay or apply SDC credit or SDC refund from SDC fees collected shall be further limited to the total of the SDC credit and SDC refund calculated as provided for in this policy. Recipients of SDC credit and SDC refund shall indemnify and hold the city harmless in the event the city is subject to claims by others for SDC credit or SDC refund for the same improvements. City shall have the right to set off the amount of any competing claims for SDC credit or SDC refund against prior claims for the same SDC credit or SDC refund if in the city’s judgment it becomes necessary to do so.

(B) No payments shall be made from funds collected prior to the date of the city’s acceptance of the public improvement from the developer. Payments shall only be made from the fund applicable to the type of improvement made.

(Ord. 1111, passed 5-25-04)


40.12 ENACTMENT.

This chapter shall be in full force and effect on and after July 1, 2004.

(Ord. 1111, passed 5-25-04)


CHAPTER 41: PROPERTY OWNERS CLAIM FOR COMPENSATION

Section

41.01    Definitions

41.02    General application

41.03    Certain regulations exempt from claims for compensation

41.04    Timely filing required

41.05    Claims are severable

41.06    Procedure for filing claims

41.07    Review of claims submitted

41.08    Procedure for hearing claims

41.09    Special provisions related to property in family ownership

41.10    Timely consideration

41.11    Land-use authority retained

41.12    Transfer of waivers

41.13    Effective date of land-use decisions

41.14    Appointment and compensation of hearing officers

41.15    Application of law

41.16    Severability


41.01 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

CITY. The City of Prineville.

COUNCIL. The Prineville City Council.

FAMILY MEMBER. The wife, husband, son, daughter, mother, father, brother, brother-in-law, sister, sister-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, mother-in-law, father-in-law, aunt, uncle, niece, nephew, stepparent, stepchild, grandparent, or grandchild of the owner of the property, an estate of any of the foregoing family members, or a legal entity owned by any one or combination of these family members or the owner of the property.

LAND-USE REGULATION. Any law or regulation or decision interpreting a law or regulation regulating the use of land or interest therein.

OWNER. The present owner of the property, or any interest therein.

(Ord. 1119, passed 11-23-04)


41.02 GENERAL APPLICATION.

(A) Effective December 2, 2004, an owner of property located in the City of Prineville may file a timely claim for compensation in the manner prescribed by this ordinance if the owner of said property can demonstrate that any of the following circumstances exist:

(1) When, as a result of a land-use regulation enacted by the City of Prineville, the value of the private real property in which one or more owners have title or interest has been reduced below the value that said private real property would have, had the use of the property not been restricted by such enactment.

(2) When, as a result of a land-use regulation enforced by the City of Prineville through its Planning Department, Planning Commission or City Council, the value of the private real property in which one or more owners have title or interest has been reduced below the value that said private real property would have, had the use of the property not been restricted by such enforcement.

(B) It is the policy of City of Prineville to accept filing of claims derived from discretionary legislative acts and policies of the city or from regulatory actions arising out of enforcement of those acts and policies. Whenever such acts derive from non-discretionary enactment or enforcement of the laws, regulations or decisions of the State of Oregon or the United States of America, it is the policy of the city to deny such claims for lack of jurisdiction.

(Ord. 1119, passed 11-23-04)


41.03 CERTAIN REGULATIONS EXEMPT FROM CLAIMS FOR COMPENSATION.

No claim for compensation shall be recognized if such claim arises as a result of one of the following:

(A) A land-use regulation restricting or prohibiting activities commonly and historically recognized as public nuisances under common law. The definition of nuisance shall be narrowly construed in favor of a finding of compensation under this chapter;

(B) A land-use regulation restricting or prohibiting activities for the protection of public health and safety, such as fire and building codes, health and sanitation regulations, solid or hazardous waste regulations, and pollution control regulations;

(C) A land-use regulation required in order to comply with federal law;

(D) A land-use regulation restricting or prohibiting the use of a property for the purpose of selling pornography or performing nude dancing. Nothing in this division, however, is intended to affect or alter rights provided by the Oregon or United States Constitutions; and

(E) A land-use regulation enacted prior to the date of acquisition of the property by the owner or a family member of the owner who owned the subject property prior to acquisition or inheritance by the owner, whichever occurred first.

(Ord. 1119, passed 11-23-04)


41.04 TIMELY FILING REQUIRED.

(A) No claim for compensation shall be honored unless such claim is timely filed. A timely filing occurs:

(1) When a demand for compensation is presented to the city in writing prior to December 2, 2006, based upon an assertion that a reduction in value resulted from an enactment of legislation, a land-use decision or an enforcement of a land-use regulation commenced by the City’s Planning Department, City’s Planning Commission, or the City’s Council prior to December 2, 2004; or

(2) When a demand for compensation is presented to the city in writing based upon a claim which asserts that a reduction in value resulted as a result of enactment of legislation, a land-use decision or an enforcement commenced by the city after December 2, 2004, and not later than two years from that date, final order of the city in a land-use proceeding or date upon which enforcement was commenced, which the claimant asserts resulted in the claim reduction of the value.

(B) Notwithstanding the deadlines imposed in divisions (A)(1) and (2) above, no claim shall be deemed filed untimely until at least two years have elapsed since the land-use regulation asserted to have resulted in the claimed reduction in value was applied as an approval criteria to the application submitted by the claimant.

(Ord. 1119, passed 11-23-04)


41.05 CLAIMS ARE SEVERABLE.

The city, or a hearings officer, may sever claims whenever such claims are determined related to multiple unrelated properties or multiple or unrelated owners or multiple or unrelated enactments or enforcement of land-use regulations. When claims are severed the city, or hearings officer, may require additional deposits for processing additional claims.

(Ord. 1119, passed 11-23-04)


41.06 PROCEDURE FOR FILING CLAIMS.

A claim for compensation may be filed with the city. Such claims shall not constitute applications for land-use permits. The claimant shall bear the burden of demonstrating that their claim is legitimate. The claimant shall meet this burden by presenting empirical evidence, which shall include the following:

(A) A written petition including a description of the property in question, identified by subdivision lot and block, if available, or township, range, parcel and tax lot number;

(B) A list of all current owners of the property, along with their names and addresses. In the case of a corporate owner, the address and phone number of the registered agent shall be provided. Included with such list shall be a statement that each owner concurs in the application and its contents. The application must be signed by all owners whose collective interests amount to fee simple title. One owner or other person must be designated as the claimant who shall serve as contact for the purposes of receiving all communication, correspondence and notices pertaining to the application. The statement must be notarized.

(C) A current assessor’s map or survey clearly delineating the entire property or properties that comprise the subject of the claim, together with the street address and assessor’s map and lot reference of each property.

(D) A preliminary title report or reports for the subject property or properties disclosing all interests and encumbrances of record. The report(s) shall have been issued no more than 30 days prior to filing the application. In addition, the applicant shall provide a sworn statement indicating any other interests and encumbrances against the property, including but not limited to leases and encroachments, of which the claimant is aware or may have reason to believe exists or indicating that the title report is inclusive of all such claims.

(E) Copies obtained from the City Recorder or City Planning Department of the legislative enactments or land-use enforcement proceedings which the applicant believes has restricted his use of his real private property or any interest therein and/or has reduced the fair market value of the property or any interest therein.

(F) A description by the applicant of how the applicant’s use of his real private property or interest therein has been restricted and/or a statement regarding the reduction in fair market value the applicant has experienced as result of the legislative enactment or legislative proceeding in question.

(G) A statement by the applicant of the amount of compensation the applicant is requesting.

(H) A statement by the applicant as to any non-monetary relief the applicant would accept in lieu of monetary compensation.

(I) An appraisal prepared in accordance with USPAP standards by a professional appraiser properly licensed and currently registered in the state of Oregon familiar with real property values in Prineville, which shall opine as follows:

(1) The net amount the subject property has been reduced in value based upon the restriction and what portion, if any, of the reduction in fair market value is attributable to the enactment or enforcement of the regulation in question;

(2) Whether the restriction or restrictions imposed were entirely detrimental and in no way beneficial to the fair market value of the property or properties in question;

(3) A statement explaining how the regulations restrict the use of the property and why the regulation has the effect of reducing the value of the property or properties upon which the restriction is imposed.

(J) A copy of any other documents upon which the claimant intends to rely in support of his claim.

(K) A deposit of $1,500 or such other amount as the city shall establish. Such deposit shall be used to cover the costs associated with the evaluation of such claims. City shall keep records of the costs associated with the evaluation of such claims including staff time involved. The deposit shall be paid at the time the claimant initially files. The deposits collected from compensation claims shall be deposited into a "Claims Account" which the city shall establish and which shall be used to pay expenses associated with processing of claims and to pay compensation. The deposited funds shall not be used for any purpose other than the administration of the compensation claim system. If at any time a hearings officer or the Council determines that the costs associated with hearing a particular claim will exceed the amount of the deposit paid to date, the hearings officer or the Council may order deposit of additional funds with the City to cover associated costs. A final decision shall not be recorded with the County Clerk for Crook County, Oregon, in a claims proceeding until a claimant has paid any such funds owing.

(L) A claim for compensation after filing shall be reviewed by city who shall determine the following:

(1) Whether the claim was timely filed;

(2) Whether the claimed is barred;

(3) Whether the claim meets the requirements of this section;

(4) Whether the required deposit has been paid.

(M) A claim is deemed "filed" upon submittal, regardless of whether the filing requirements are met. However, no claim shall be processed until city’s designee (hereinafter "the reviewing official") shall determine that all information required by this section has been submitted.

(Ord. 1119, passed 11-23-04)


41.07 REVIEW OF CLAIMS SUBMITTED.

(A) Once a claim has been submitted and reviewed, if information is found to be missing, the reviewing official shall advise the claimant in writing what material has been omitted, and what material is required in order to begin processing the claim. Claimant shall also be advised that claimant may withdraw his claim in writing within 30 days unless such 30 days shall expire on a weekend or holiday when the deadline shall be the next regular business day. If claimant withdraws his claim within 30 days, then claimant’s deposit shall be returned less any processing costs of the city incurred as of the date of withdrawal. If claimant elects not to withdraw his claim, then the deposit paid by claimant shall be held by the city for application toward the deposit, which may be required at a future time when the claimant submits a completed application. If no such application has been received within two years of the date of the initial filing, claimant’s deposit shall be returned, less any claims and processing costs incurred.

(B) Upon determining that the filing requirements have been met the reviewing official shall notify city’s manager that a claim has been timely filed and deemed complete. For purposes of interpreting this chapter, a claim is deemed "filed" on the date all material required by § 41.07 has been submitted. Once claims have been deemed "timely filed," and complete, the city shall make a final determination and issue a final ruling regarding compensation due within 180 days, provided the appropriate deposit has been paid.

(C) Upon receipt of a notice from the reviewing official that a claim has been timely filed and is complete, the Council shall schedule a hearing before the City Council or assign the claim to a hearings officer. The Council or the hearings officer shall schedule a hearing on the claim not later than 45 days after the date on which the claim was deemed "timely filed" and complete. If the Council or the hearings officer fails to schedule a hearing within 45 days, the claimant may seek a writ of mandamus from the Circuit Court of Crook County to compel the Council to schedule or cause to be scheduled such hearing.

(Ord. 1119, passed 11-23-04)


41.08 PROCEDURE FOR HEARING CLAIMS.

The following procedure shall govern the conduct of a compensation hearing:

(A) The hearing shall be conducted at a time and place designated by the city or appointed hearings officer. Public notice in a newspaper of record or in another manner allowed by the Oregon Public Records Law of the time and place of the hearing shall be given at least 48 hours in advance of the hearing. Written notice shall be mailed at least seven days in advance of the hearing by the city via regular mail to all owners within 100 feet of the property which is the subject of the claim. Notice shall be deemed given on the date the notice is mailed.

(B) Continuances of such hearings may be granted by the city or by the hearings officer if such continuances are, in the opinion of the city or hearings officer, deemed necessary. Requests for a continuance made by the applicant shall be requested not later than 72 hours prior to the scheduled hearing. The applicant shall be entitled to no more than one continuance. No continuance shall be granted within 21 days of the expiration of that period 180 days from the date on which the application for compensation was filed.

(C) Hearings shall be conducted in a location where the public may observe the proceedings.

(D) A tape recording of the hearing shall be made. Written minutes of the proceeding may be substituted for the tape recording at the discretion of the city or the hearings officer.

(E) Accommodation shall be made upon request for persons with disabilities.

(F) The Council or hearings officer shall in the course of the hearing allow the applicant to present such empirical evidence as he believes is necessary to demonstrate that a legislative action of the city or that an enforcement of a land-use regulation by the city has restricted the use of his real private property or any interest therein and has had the effect of reducing the fair market value of the property or any interest therein. The applicant may present expert testimony or call witnesses to support his case. All testimony submitted for the consideration of the Council or hearings officers shall be entered into and retained by the city as a part of the permanent record. The Council or the hearings officer may limit the time allowed for the applicant to make his presentation.

(G) Following applicant’s presentation, the Council or the hearings officer shall call upon the City’s Planning Director or his designee or other city staff to present a response to the applicant’s case. The Council or the hearings officer may limit the time allowed for the Planning Director’s and/or city staff’s presentation.

(H) The Council or the hearings officers shall permit other public testimony regarding the application. The Council or the hearings officer may limit the time allowed for such testimony.

(I) Following public testimony, the applicant shall be granted time for rebuttal. The Council or the hearings officer may limit the time allowed for such testimony.

(J) Whenever the Council, or the hearings officer deems necessary, he may continue the hearing.

(K) Upon conclusion of testimony, the Council or the hearings officer shall consider the evidence received and within 60 days of the final hearing or as soon as may be practical thereafter announce the amount of compensation, if any, to which the applicant is entitled due to the fact that the value of the subject property has been reduced by the enactment or enforcement of the land-use regulation as asserted by the claimant; or a decision that the lost value to which the applicant would otherwise be entitled may be restored by modifying, removing or not applying the land-use regulation or enforcement action which was the proximate cause of the loss of value. Such decision shall be set forth in writing and shall summarize the evidence and testimony presented, briefly describe how the Council or the hearings officer evaluated the evidence, indicate the amount of compensation which in the judgment of the Council or hearings officer the applicant is due, and such other matters as the Council or the hearings officer may deem necessary

(L) In any such case where the Council is the tribunal hearing the application for compensation, and the Council determines that compensation is due, the Council shall in lieu of compensation consider whether to waive such regulation or enforcement action.

(M) Notwithstanding any procedural requirement herein, nothing shall preclude the Council or a hearings officer, prior to receiving testimony, from dismissing a claim for lack of jurisdiction.

(N) In cases where a hearings officer considers the application, the hearings officer may in lieu of compensation consider whether to waive such regulation or enforcement action. The hearings officer shall notify the members of the Council in writing of his decision within ten business days of the date the decision is reduced to writing. Upon receipt of such notice, the Council by majority vote may request that the Council take up such decision on review at a meeting of the Council. Prior to conducting such a review, the Council shall notify the applicant and post a notice in the newspaper of record not less than seven days before the hearing is conducted. At such hearing, the Council shall review the decision of the hearings officer and may overrule, modify or amend the decision of the hearings officer. If after ten business days from the date the Council received notice of a hearings officer’s decision and there is no review, the decision of the hearings officer shall become final.

(O) If the Council elects not to modify, remove or not to apply the land-use regulation or enforcement action which was the proximate cause of the loss in value, then the city shall pay to the applicant the value in question out of such funds as the city may have appropriated for such purpose or out of such other funds as may be available to the city. Payment shall be made within 180 days of the date written demand for compensation was originally filed with the city.

(P) The decision of the Council or a duly appointed hearings officer being quasi-judicial in nature, appeals of a decision by the Council or a hearings officer appointed by the City may be appealed by writ of review returnable to the Crook County Circuit Court and not otherwise.

(Q) Upon final approval of a decision by the Council or a hearings officer, the city shall cause to be recorded in the deed records of Crook County, Oregon, such decision, and shall return any unused deposit to the claimant. Prior to the return of the deposit, the cost of recording shall be deducted from the deposit paid by the applicant. A decision is final only when the time provided in this chapter for reconsideration or appeal has been exhausted and no opportunity for appeal remains, and the final decision has been recorded in the office of the Crook County Clerk.

(Ord. 1119, passed 11-23-04)


41.09 SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATED TO PROPERTY IN FAMILY OWNERSHIP.

Whenever a property has been transferred through inheritance or acquisition among members of the same family, then that property shall not be subject to enactments or enforcements of land-use regulations which were passed or enforced by the Council, City Planning Director or City Planning Commission after the date upon which the current owner in a familial line acquired the subject property. An owner of a property which he believes is exempt from regulation by virtue of this section shall submit a claim to the city or official designated by the city to receive such claims in the following manner:

(A) A claim for exemption may be filed with the city’s designee. Such claims shall not constitute applications for land-use permits. The claimant shall bear the burden of demonstrating that applicant’s claim of exemption meets the requirements of this section. The applicant shall meet this burden by presenting the following:

(1) A request for exemption in writing including a description of the property in question, identified by subdivision lot and block, if applicable, or township, range, parcel and tax lot number;

(2) A list of all current owners of the property, along with their names and addresses. In the case of a corporate owner, the address and phone number of the registered agent shall be provided. Included with such list shall be a statement that each of them concurs in the application and its contents. The application must be signed by all owners whose collective interests amount to fee simple title. One owner or other person must be designated as the claimant who shall serve as contact for the purposes of receiving all communication, correspondence and notices pertaining to the application. The statement must be notarized.

(3) A current assessor’s map or survey clearly delineating the entire property that is the subject of the claim, together with the street address and assessor’s map and lot reference.

(4) A preliminary title report for the subject property disclosing all interests and encumbrances of record. The report shall have been issued no more than 30 days prior to filing the application. In addition, the applicant shall provide a sworn statement indicating any other interests and encumbrances against the property, including but not limited to leases and encroachments, of which the claimant is aware or may have reason to believe exists or indicating that the title report is inclusive of all such claims.

(5) A copy obtained from the city of the legislative enactment or land-use enforcement proceeding which the applicant believes was enacted or enforced following acquisition or inheritance of the subject property by the original member of the familial line.

(6) Copies of all recorded deeds documenting the transfer of property.

(7) Copies of documents, such as birth certificates, baptismal records, marriage licenses, wills, or other document which prove a family relationship among owners of the subject property whose claim of relationship is the basis of the claim for compensation.

(B) A deposit of $1,500.00 or such other amount as the Council shall establish. Such deposit shall be used to cover the cost associated with the evaluation such claimed. Such deposit shall be not less than the amount required to cover costs associated with the evaluation of such claims. The deposit shall be paid at the time the claimant initially files. The fees collected from compensation claims shall be deposited into a "Claims Account" which the city shall establish and which shall be used to pay expenses associated with processing of claims. Such deposited funds shall not be used for any purpose other than the administration of the compensation claims system. If at any time a hearings officer or the Council determines that the costs associated with hearing a particular claim will exceed the amount of the deposit paid to date, the hearings officer or the Council may order deposit of additional funds with the city to cover associated costs. A final decision shall not be recorded with the County Clerk for Crook County, Oregon, in a claims proceeding until a claimant has paid any such funds owing.

(C) A claim for compensation after filing shall be reviewed by such official as the Council may designate who shall determine the following:

(1) Whether the claimed is barred;

(2) Whether the claim meets the requirements of this section;

(3) Whether the required deposit has been paid.

(D) The official designated by the Council ("reviewing official") shall determine that all information required in this section has been submitted. Whenever information is found to be missing, the reviewing official shall advise the claimant in writing what material has been omitted, and what material is required in order to begin processing the claim. Claimant shall also be advised that claimant may withdraw his claim in writing within 30 days (if such 30 days shall expire upon a weekend or holiday, the deadline shall be the next regular business day). If claimant withdraws his claim within 30 days, then the unused portion of claimant’s deposit shall be returned. If claimant elects not to withdraw his claim, then the deposit paid by claimant shall be held by the city for application toward the deposit in effect at such time as claimant submits the remainder of the required documentation.

(E) Upon determining that the requirements of this § 41.09 have been met, the reviewing official shall notify the Council that a claim has been submitted and deemed complete. For purposes of interpreting this chapter, a claim is deemed "filed" on the date of the initial filing, if the initial filing is subsequently deemed complete or on the date of the amended filing, upon determination that the amended filing is complete. Once claims have been deemed "filed," the city shall issue its final decision within 180 days of filing, provided the appropriate deposit has been paid.

(F) Upon receipt of a "filed" claim from the reviewing official, the Council shall schedule a hearing before the Council or assign the claim to a hearings officer. The Council or the hearings officer shall schedule a hearing on the claim not later than 60 days after the date on which the claim was deemed "filed." Hearings shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions provided for in § 41.08, except the final determination of the Council or the hearings officer shall be that the property either is or is not exempt from the land-use regulation claimed, based on family ownership. The Council or the hearings officer shall issue a written decision setting forth the basis of such determination and indicating the enactment or regulation which has been exempted.

(G) Such exemption shall be effective when the decision of the Council or hearings officers shall be filed with the City Planning Director, unless a writ of review shall be applied for, in which case, such decision shall not become final until after final judicial disposition.

(H) Any exemption from regulation which is granted based on this section shall entitle the owner of the property to use the subject property in a manner consistent with the land-use regulations that were in effect at the time the current owner acquired the property.

(I) Upon final approval of a decision by the Council or a hearings officer, any unused deposit shall be returned to the claimant. A decision is final only when the time provided in this chapter for reconsideration or appeal has been exhausted and no opportunity for appeal remains and the final decision has been recorded in the office of the Crook County Clerk.

(Ord. 1119, passed 11-23-04)


41.10 TIMELY CONSIDERATION.

(A) All proceedings, whether before the Council or an appointed hearings officer, shall be completed within 170 days of the date upon which a complete application is received.

(B) On the 170th day after a claim has been filed, if the claimant has not yet received a final determination from the Council or a hearings officer, the claimant may submit a petition to City Council through the city’s manager for a final decision regarding whether the enactment or enforcement of a land-use regulation still applies to the property or properties which are the subject of his claim. Upon receipt of such a claim, the Council shall within ten days of receipt of such claim hear the petition and issue a final decision, but nothing herein shall require Council to grant compensation or to waive an enactment or enforcement of a land-use regulation.

(C) The burden of proof remains with the claimant throughout the proceedings to show that the claimant has experienced the alleged reduction in value of claimant’s property as a result of an enactment or enforcement of a land-use regulation. Failure of the applicant to submit evidence or fees as required by this chapter is deemed a failure to meet the burden of proof and may result in denial by the Council of claimant’s application. Upon judicial review, such failure may be deemed a failure by the claimant to exhaust his available administrative remedies and may therefore be grounds for dismissal of the claim.

(Ord. 1119, passed 11-23-04)


41.11 LAND-USE AUTHORITY RETAINED.

(A) Nothing herein shall be construed to repeal or modify those laws and regulations of the State of Oregon or the city relating to land-use. An applicant who applies for compensation and is granted a waiver of an enactment or land-use enforcement in lieu of compensation is not exempt from land-use regulations, but an enactment or land-use regulation which has been waived allowing a particular use by a particular applicant and recorded against a particular property shall not be applied as a condition of approval in a subsequent land-use proceeding filed by that applicant to undertake that use upon that property.

(B) A property which has been improved by an owner who has obtained a waiver allowing a use which would not otherwise have been allowed due to an enactment or enforcement of a land-use regulation may be transferred to a new owner, but this privilege shall not be construed to create authority to transfer the right to improve to a new owner.

(Ord. 1119, passed 11-23-04)


41.12 TRANSFER OF WAIVERS.

Waivers of enactments or land-use regulations, when granted in lieu of compensation, are not transferable to other properties. A waiver properly recorded in the deed records of Crook County survives the sale or transfer of a property to a new ownership. The right to obtain a waiver does not survive the sale or transfer of property if an application for waiver was not made, awarded, and recorded by the owner who was eligible to obtain such waiver; however, a use shall not be deemed non-conforming so long as any current owner who was also an owner at the time a waiver was granted remains an owner of the subject property.

(Ord. 1119, passed 11-23-04)


41.13 EFFECTIVE DATE OF LAND-USE DECISIONS.

For purposes of interpreting this chapter, a land-use decision becomes final when signed by the City Planning Director, Planning Commission Chair, Mayor, or Council representative. If multiple land-use decisions were signed as a result of appeals, then the latest proceeding in the matter shall be considered the final decision.

(Ord. 1119, passed 11-23-04)


41.14 APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION OF HEARINGS OFFICERS.

At any time following passage of Ordinance 1119, the Council may appoint as hearings officers one or more persons whom the Council deems knowledgeable in matters of law, local government or the land-use regulations of the state of Oregon. Hearings officers shall serve at the pleasure of the City. Cases shall be assigned to hearings officers by the Council. A hearings officer shall be compensated on a "lump sum basis" with a fee to be determined by the Council.

(Ord. 1119, passed 11-23-04)


41.15 APPLICATION OF LAW.

This measure (including any future amendments thereto) shall be applied in accordance with the standards set forth in the ordinance and subsequent amendments at the time of filing of a claim except as otherwise provided by judicial decree or enactment of legislation by the General Assembly or the People of Oregon.

(Ord. 1119, passed 11-23-04)


41.16 SEVERABILITY.

No provision of this chapter shall be applied if such provision is determined by the Council or by a court of competent jurisdiction to be in conflict with the Constitution or laws of the State of Oregon. The provisions of this chapter are severable, and if any clause shall be deemed illegal, void or unenforceable, it shall not affect the validity, legality, or enforceability of any other clause or portion of this chapter.

(Ord. 1119, passed 11-23-04)


CHAPTER 42: CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORDS CHECKS

Section

42.01    Prospective city employees and volunteers

42.02    Nonprofit organizations and special districts

42.03    Procedure

42.04    Use by city officials

42.05    Records retention


42.01 PROSPECTIVE CITY EMPLOYEES AND VOLUNTEERS.

All applicants for employment and appointed volunteers with the city will be required to authorize in writing for the city to conduct an Oregon only criminal offender information check through the OSP LED systems.

(Ord. 1178, passed 2-22-11)


42.02 NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS AND SPECIAL DISTRICTS.

Nonprofit organizations or special districts may request that the Police Department perform Oregon only criminal history checks on other employees. Subject to workload priorities and staff availability, the Police Department may perform such criminal record checks on other employees so long as such other employees have signed a written authorization for the city to conduct such criminal history check. Any costs of such records checks shall be borne by the organization requesting the records check. The Police Department shall confirm with the nonprofit organization or special district only if a criminal record exists, without any detail of such record. The nonprofit organization or special district may request criminal record history directly from the Oregon State Police pursuant to state statute and administrative rule.

(Ord. 1178, passed 2-22-11)


42.03 PROCEDURE.

A member of the Police Department trained and authorized to perform criminal history checks through LEDS will conduct the Oregon only check on the prospective city employee or city volunteer and orally report to the City’s Human Resources Department that the applicant’s records indicate "no criminal record" or "criminal record." If the applicant’s record is reported as "criminal record" the city may, under OAR 257-010-0025, request a written criminal history report from the OSP Identification Services Section.

(Ord. 1178, passed 2-22-11)


42.04 USE BY CITY OFFICIALS.

The City’s Human Resources Department will make the written criminal history available to the appropriate city official for his or her consideration in making the selection.

(Ord. 1178, passed 2-22-11)


42.05 RECORDS RETENTION.

The written criminal history record on persons that are not hired or selected as a volunteer for the city will be retained in accordance with the requirements of OAR 166-200-0090 for a period of three years and thereafter will be destroyed. The criminal history record of applicants and volunteers with a criminal history that are hired or selected as volunteers will become a part of the personnel files of that employee or volunteer and released according to the law.

(Ord. 1178, passed 2-22-11)


TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS

Chapter

50.    SOLID WASTE

51.    SEWERS

52.    WATER

53.    WASTEWATER


CHAPTER 50: SOLID WASTE

Section

General Provisions

50.01    Purposes, policy and scope

50.02    Definitions

Franchises

50.15    Franchise required; exemptions

50.16    Franchise granted

50.17    Franchise term

50.18    Franchise fee

50.19    Franchisee responsibility

50.20    Suspension, modification or revocation of franchise

50.21    Termination of service

50.22    Rate determination

50.23    Complaints

Regulations

50.35    Public responsibility

50.36    Offenses

50.99    Penalty

Cross reference:

Franchises, see T.S.O. III

GENERAL PROVISIONS


50.01 PURPOSES, POLICY AND SCOPE.

It is declared to be the public policy of the city to regulate solid waste management to:

(A) Insure safe, efficient, economical and comprehensive solid waste service.

(B) Insure fair and equitable consumer rates and to prohibit rate preferences or other practices that might be discriminatory.

(C) Conserve energy and material resources, reduce solid wastes and promote material and energy recovery in all forms.

(D) Provide for technologically and economically feasible resource recovery.

(E) Eliminate overlapping service and thereby increase efficiency and decrease truck noise, street wear, energy waste, air pollution and public inconvenience.

(F) Protect public health and the environment.

(G) Provide public service standards.

(H) Protect against improper and dangerous handling of hazardous wastes and infectious wastes.

(’91 Code, § 3-5.1) (Ord. 931, passed 2-28-89; Am. Ord. 1118, passed 10-26-04; Am. Ord. 1142, passed 1-9-07)


50.02 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

CITY. The City of Prineville.

CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Prineville, Oregon.

COMPENSATION. Includes the following.

(1) Any type of consideration paid for service including, but not limited to, rent, the proceeds from resource recovery, any direct or indirect provision for the payment of money, goods, services or benefits by tenants, lessees, occupants or similarly situated persons.

(2) The exchange of service between persons.

(3) Notwithstanding anything in subsection (1) or (2) above, this chapter does not intend to include as compensation the normal time-to-time assistance to one’s friend or neighbor in hauling the friend’s or neighbor’s solid waste.

FRANCHISEE. The person or persons granted a franchise by this chapter and a subsequent ordinance or a subcontractor to such person or persons.

HAZARDOUS WASTE. Any waste:

(1) Defined as hazardous waste by or pursuant to O.R.S. 466.005.

(2) Defined as hazardous waste by another governmental unit having jurisdiction.

(3) Determined by competent authority to be hazardous to service workers, to service equipment or to the public.

INFECTIOUS WASTES. Infectious as defined by O.R.S. 459.386 as now adopted or as hereafter amended.

PERSON. Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, limited liability company, trust, firm, estate, joint venture or other private legal entity or any public agency.

RECYCLABLE MATERIAL. Any material or group of materials that can be collected and sold for recycling at a net cost equal to or less than the cost of collection and disposal of the same material.

RESOURCE RECOVERY. The process of obtaining useful material or energy resources from solid waste, including reuse, recycling and other materials recovery or energy recovery of or from solid waste.

SERVICE. The collection, transportation or disposal of or resource recovery from solid waste.

SOLID WASTE. All solid waste or semi-solid waste including, without limitation, garbage, rubbish, refuse, trash, ashes or swill, newsprint or waste paper, corrugated or cardboard, grass clippings, compost, residential, commercial, industrial, governmental or institutional waste, discarded home or industrial appliances, equipment or furniture, vehicle parts or tires, vegetable or animal wastes, confidential document destruction and removal, infectious wastes, and other wastes.

SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT. The prevention of or reduction of solid waste, management of service, and facilities and equipment necessary or convenient to such activities.

WASTE. Material that is no longer directly usable by the source, generator or producer of the material, which material is to be disposed of or to be resource recovered by another person.

(1) The fact that all or any part of the materials may have value and thus be recovered does not remove them from this definition.

(2) The fact that the source, generator or producer of materials has separated or segregated the material from other waste does not remove the materials from this definition.

(’91 Code, § 3-5.2) (Ord. 931, passed 2-28-89; Am. Ord. 1118, passed 10-26-04; Am. Ord. 1142, passed 1-9-07)

FRANCHISES


50.15 FRANCHISE REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS.

(A) Practices prohibited without a franchise. Unless exempted by division (B) of this section or franchised pursuant to § 50.17 of this chapter, no person shall do the following.

(1) Solicit customers for service.

(2) Advertise the providing of service.

(3) Provide service in the city.

(’91 Code, § 3-5.4)

(B) Persons and practices exempt from franchise. Nothing in this chapter requires a franchise from the following persons for the following businesses or practices.

(1) The collection, transportation and reuse of repairable or cleanable discards by a private charitable organization regularly engaged in the business or activity, for example Neat Repeat or similar organization.

(2) The collection, transportation and reuse or recycling of totally source separated materials by a fraternal or charitable organization which is using the activity for fund raising; including, without limitation, scouts and churches.

(3) The collection, transportation or redemption of returnable beverage containers under O.R.S. Ch. 459 and the portion thereof commonly known as the "Bottle Bill."

(4) The generator or producer who transports and disposes of waste created as an incidental part of regularly carrying on the business or service of auto wrecking, to the extent licensed by the state; demolition, land clearing or construction; janitorial service; gardening, park maintenance or landscaping service; street sweeping; auto body recovery; or septic tank pumping or sludge collection. "Janitorial service" does not include cleanup of accumulated or stored wastes.

(5) The transportation by a person of solid waste generated or produced by the person to a disposal site, resource recovery site or market. The transportation by a property owner of residential property of solid waste left upon the owner’s property by tenants or occupants to a disposal site, resource recovery site or market, but may not provide solid waste collection service for a tenant on a regular or continuing basis.

(6) The purchase of totally source separated solid waste for fair market value; however, the City Council may require that anyone making the purchase apply for an exemption as described in division (B)(9).

(7) The providing of service to a state or federal agency under written contract with the agency.

(8) The providing of service for wastes determined by competent authorities to be hazardous.

(9) Any practice, business or activity may be exempted by the City Council after public hearing thereon. In considering whether the City Council shall exempt the practice, business or activity, it may consider the purposes and standards of this chapter and may require terms and conditions as it deems necessary in the public interest.

(’91 Code, § 3-5.3) (Ord. 931, passed 2-28-89; Am. Ord. 1118, passed 10-26-04; Am. Ord. 1142, passed 1-9-07)


50.16 FRANCHISE GRANTED.

There is hereby granted to Holliday Enterprises, LLC, the exclusive right, privilege and franchise to provide service within the city limits as of date of this chapter and any area that may hereafter be annexed to the city, and, for that purpose, to utilize the streets of the city.

(’91 Code, § 3-5.5) (Ord. 931, passed 2-28-89; Am. Ord. 1118, passed 10-26-04; Am. Ord. 1142, passed 1-9-07)


50.17 FRANCHISE TERM.

The right, privilege and franchise herein granted shall be considered as a continuing six year franchise subject to termination as follows.

(A) Unless grounds exist for suspension, modification or revocation of the franchise under § 50.20 of this chapter, this chapter shall be considered as a continuing six-year term. That is, beginning on July 1 of each year, the franchise shall be considered renewed for an additional six-year term unless at least 30 days prior to July 1 of any year the city shall notify the franchisee of intent to terminate the franchise. Upon the giving of the notice of termination, the franchisee shall have a franchise which will terminate six years from the date of notice of termination.

(B) In the event the franchisee shall desire to terminate service given under the terms of this franchise, then it shall give not less than two years notice of the intent to terminate service and obligations under the franchise. In the event of a voluntary termination of services by the franchisee, the city shall have a right and option to purchase all or any part of the equipment of the franchisee at a price which will be agreed upon between the parties. If the parties cannot agree to a purchase price, then the same shall be submitted to arbitration. Each party shall select one arbitrator and the two arbitrators selected shall select a third party, and the three arbitrators shall determine a fair and equitable price to be paid by the city to the franchisee for all equipment to be purchased. The cost of arbitration shall be borne equally. After arbitration the city shall have the right to refuse any or all equipment.

(C) There shall be an annual review of this franchise, and operations under it, in May of each year. The annual review shall be in the form of a work session between the city’s Public Works Committee and the franchisee or his/her designated representative.

(’91 Code, § 3-5.6) (Ord. 931, passed 2-28-89; Am. Ord. 1118, passed 10-26-04; Am. Ord. 1142, passed 1-9-07)


50.18 FRANCHISE FEE.

The franchisee shall pay to the city a franchise fee or charge equivalent to 3% of the franchisee’s gross operating revenue as the same is defined in division (A) of this section.

(A) GROSS OPERATING REVENUE, as used herein shall be defined as the gross revenue from solid waste collection services within the corporate limits of the city.

(B) The franchise fee due hereunder shall be paid annually, by May 1of each year for the calendar year preceding, January 1 through December 31.

(C) The city acknowledges that under the terms of this new franchise the city should pay for services provided to the city by the franchisee. In lieu of this, however, the city and franchisee may reach a mutually agreed upon level of services to the city and mutually agreed upon level of charges for these services. This mutually agreed upon amount may then be deducted from the annual franchise fee due to the city by the franchisee.

(’91 Code, § 3-5.7) (Ord. 931, passed 2-28-89; Am. Ord. 1118, passed 10-26-04; Am. Ord. 1142, passed 1-9-07)


50.19 FRANCHISEE RESPONSIBILITY.

(A) The franchisee shall:

(1) Dispose of solid waste at the site approved by local government unit having jurisdiction and comply with all applicable laws, rules and regulations.

(2) Provide and keep in force public liability insurance in amounts and for coverages reasonably determined by the city. All insurance stated in this paragraph shall be subject to review and revision on a yearly basis. The insurance shall be evidenced by a certificate of insurance filed with the City Recorder.

(3) Within 30 days after the effective date of this chapter, file with the City Recorder a written acceptance of this franchise by endorsing acceptance on a copy of this chapter.

(4) Provide sufficient collection vehicles, containers, facilities, personnel and finances to provide good service.

(5) Except as otherwise provided, all vehicles used in the collection and/or transportation of waste shall be equipped with a leak-proof metal body of the compactor type. If a franchisee uses a specially designed, motorized local collection vehicle for transporting solid waste over short distances from residential or commercial stops to waiting trucks, the container portion of the vehicle shall be equipped with a cover, adequate to prevent scattering of the load. If any pickup truck or open bed truck is used by a franchisee, the load shall be covered with an adequate cover to prevent scattering of the load. All vehicles shall be operated in conformity with all ordinances of the city. All vehicles shall be properly licensed, registered and equipped in compliance with the motor vehicle laws of the state.

(6) Respond promptly and effectively to any complaint on service.

(7) Provide a performance bond in an amount reasonably acceptable to with a surety license to do business in the state conditioned upon the full and faithful performance of this agreement and franchise and this chapter. In the event that the City Council finds that the franchisee has adequate experience and otherwise meets the requirements to guarantee service, it may waive, by City Council action, all or part of the bond requirements and may attach any necessary condition to the waiver.

(8) The franchisee shall provide the Opportunity to Recycle in accordance with O.R.S. 459 and 459A as now enacted or as hereafter amended. In addition, the franchisee shall comply with any and all rules and regulations adopted by the Department of Environmental Quality together with any additional rules adopted by the city.

(B) The franchisee is not required to store, collect, transport, transfer, dispose of or resource recover any of what is determined by competent authorities to be hazardous waste; provided, however, that the franchisee may provide the service outside this chapter in compliance with all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations.

(C) The franchisee may subcontract with others, to provide a portion of the service where franchisee does not have the necessary equipment or service; however, such subcontract shall be with the approval of the City Council. Such a subcontract shall not relieve the franchisee of total responsibility for providing and maintaining service and from compliance with this chapter.

(D) The franchisee shall not:

(1) Give any rate preference to any person, locality or type of solid waste stored, collected, transported, disposed of or resource recovered. This paragraph shall not prohibit uniform classes of rates based upon length of haul, type or quality of solid waste handled and location of customers so long as the rates are reasonably based upon cost of the particular service and are approved by the City Council.

(2) Transfer this franchise in any way or any interest therein, or transfer any ownership interest in franchise, including but not limited to the transfer of franchisee stock to any other person without prior written approval of the City Council, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld.

(’91 Code, § 3-5.8) (Ord. 931, passed 2-28-89; Am. Ord. 1118, passed 10-26-04; Am. Ord. 1142, passed 1-9-07) Penalty, see § 50.99


50.20 SUSPENSION, MODIFICATION OR REVOCATION OF FRANCHISE.

(A) Failure to comply with written notice from the Council to provide necessary service or otherwise comply with the provisions of this chapter after written notice and reasonable opportunity to comply shall be grounds for modification, revocation or suspension of this franchise.

(B) After receipt of the aforementioned written notice from the City Council, the franchisee shall have 60 days from the date of mailing of the notice in which to comply or to request a public hearing before the City Council. In the event of a public hearing, the franchisee and other interested persons shall have an opportunity to present information and testimony in oral or written form.

(C) If the franchisee fails to comply within the specified time or fails to comply with the order of the City Council entered upon the basis of findings at the public hearing, the City Council may suspend, modify, or revoke the franchise or make such action contingent upon continued non-compliance with this chapter. This division shall not restrict franchisee’s appeal rights, if any.

(D) In the event the City Council finds an immediate and serious danger to the public it may take such action as it deems necessary in the public interests.

(’91 Code, § 3-5.9) (Ord. 931, passed 2-28-89; Am. Ord. 1118, passed 10-26-04; Am. Ord. 1142, passed 1-9-07)


50.21 TERMINATION OF SERVICE.

The franchisee shall not terminate service to any customers unless:

(A) The street, road, or alley is impassable or access is blocked and there is no reasonable alternative route, or

(B) Excessive weather conditions render providing service unduly hazardous to persons providing service or such termination is caused by accidents or casualties caused by an act of God, public enemy or vandalism, or

(C) A customer is not complying with the prohibitions of § 50.35 of this chapter or has not paid for service provided after a regular billing and after a 15-day written notice to pay, or

(D) Ordered by a legislative, administrative or judicial body having jurisdiction.

(’91 Code, § 3-5.10) (Ord. 931, passed 2-28-89; Am. Ord. 1118, passed 10-26-04; Am. Ord. 1142, passed 1-9-07)


50.22 RATE DETERMINATION.

(A) Rates for service shall be those contained in the document marked Exhibit A, attached to Ordinance 1142, passed 1-9-07 and by this reference hereby incorporated in this chapter.

(B) The franchisee may file an application yearly for an adjustment in rates. In a scheduled public hearing, the city shall act upon the request for rate adjustment no later than 30 days following receipt of request for adjustment. The new rate increase or decrease will begin 30 days following conclusion of the hearing if approval is granted for a rate change. Rates shall be changed by resolution of the City Council.

(C) In determining the appropriate rate to be charged by the franchisee, the Council may consider any or all of the following.

(1) The cost of performing the service provided by the franchisee.

(2) The anticipated increase in the cost of providing this service.

(3) The need for equipment replacement and the need for additional equipment to meet service needs; compliance with federal, state, local law, ordinances and regulations; or technological change.

(4) The investment of the franchisee and the value of the business and the necessity that the franchisee have a reasonable rate of return.

(5) The rates charged in other cities of similar size in surrounding jurisdictions for similar service.

(6) The public interest in assuring reasonable rates to enable the franchisee to provide efficient and beneficial service to the residents and other users of the service.

(7) The local wage scales, cost of management facilities and land fill and disposal of fees or charges.

(8) Any profit or cost savings resulting from recycling, and any additional costs resulting from recycling.

(9) Other factors affecting the cost of providing service.

(D) Rates charged shall be those set as provided herein. Nonscheduled service may be provided at the reasonable cost of providing the service.

(E) The franchisee shall bill and collect on a current billing basis. When the franchisee has experienced collection problems on a particular account, it may require an other than current billing basis. Such other procedures will be according to reasonable business practices and if objected to by a customer will be subject to disapproval by the city.

(F) If approved in the rate schedule, the franchisee may charge a starting charge to any customer who has been previously terminated for failure to pay for service.

(G) Rates shall be uniform or uniform within zones or classes of service.

(H) Nothing in the above section shall prohibit the franchisee from allowing qualified senior citizen rates. Qualifications for the senior citizen rates shall be determined by the franchisee.

(I) The franchisee may require the owner of rental or leased premises to accept responsibility, upon notification of delinquency, for payment of service to the facilities, as a condition for providing the service.

(’91 Code, § 3-5.11) (Ord. 931, passed 2-28-89; Am. Ord. 1118, passed 10-26-04; Am. Ord. 1142, passed 1-9-07)


50.23 COMPLAINTS.

If either the city or franchisee receives a complaint, the complaint will be handled by filling out the form delineated on Exhibit B attached to Ordinance 1142, passed 1-9-07 and made a part hereof. The forms will be filled out in duplicate. If the franchisee receives the complaint, he/she is responsible for filling out the information required on the form and sending a copy to the city within 30 days of the resolution of the problem. If the city should receive a complaint, they will forward to the franchisee one copy of the form. The franchisee will be responsible for returning one copy of the form within five days of the receipt of it, indicating the action taken.

(’91 Code, § 3-5.12) (Ord. 931, passed 2-28-89; Am. Ord. 1118, passed 10-26-04; Am. Ord. 1142, passed 1-9-07)

REGULATIONS


50.35 RESPONSIBILITY.

The following duties are in addition to and not in lieu of compliance with O.R.S. 459 and 459A, and other applicable laws and regulations.

(A) No person shall place hazardous waste or infectious waste for collection or disposal by the franchisee without notice. This shall apply to minor quantities of hazardous wastes generated at or by a single-family residential unit.

(B) No unauthorized person shall place material in or remove material from a solid waste collection container without permission of the owner of the container. For the purpose of this section, the franchisee is the owner of containers supplied by the franchisee.

(C) No unauthorized person shall remove solid waste placed out for collection and resource recovery by the franchisee or a person exempted by § 50.15 of this chapter and operating solely within the exemption.

(D) Unless permitted by the franchisee, no person shall install or use any container of one cubic yard or greater in capacity for pickup by the franchisee other than those supplied by the franchisee. The purpose of this division (D) is to insure safe equipment, sizes and weights and facilitate the franchisee utilizing the most efficient collection equipment and methods. Rates for use of the franchisee’s containers and drop boxes shall be included in the adopted rate schedule.

(E) The franchisee is not required to service an underground container unless the person responsible for it places the can above ground prior to the time of collection.

(F) The franchisee is not required to handle containers designed for mechanical pickup exceeding safe loading weights or volumes as established by the franchisee to protect service workers, the customer, the public and the collection equipment.

(G) The franchisee is not required to handle containers designed for manual pickup exceeding 32 gallons in size or 60 pounds in loaded weight. The containers shall be of rigid, fireproof and rodent proof construction and not subject to cracking or splitting. Such containers shall have proper handholds and bales.

(H) Unless special service or service equipment is provided by the collector for handling unconfined waste, materials such as brush, leaves, tree cuttings and other solid waste for manual pickup and collection shall be in securely tied bundles or in any box, sack or other receptacles and solid waste so bundled, tied or contained shall not exceed 60 pounds in weight.

(I) Where a customer requires an unusual volume of service or a special type of service requiring substantial investment in equipment, the franchisee may require a contract with the customer as necessary to finance and assure amortization of the equipment. The purpose of this provision is to assure that the equipment not become a charge against other rate payers who are not benefitted.

(J) The franchisee may charge extra for return service to a container or drop box or roll off box that is blocked by automobiles or other obstacles.

(K) Every person who generates or produces wastes shall remove all putrescible wastes at least every seven days. More frequent removal may be required where facility or service involves public health. All wastes shall be removed at sufficient frequency as to prevent health hazards, nuisances or pollution.

(L) The producer or generator of waste shall clean cans and shall keep the area around both cans and containers free of accumulated wastes.

(M) Approved disposal methods shall be as follows.

(1) No person shall burn, dump or in any other manner dispose of solid waste upon any street, alley, public place or private property within the city except as provided in this chapter.

(2) All disposal shall be in accordance with city ordinances, rules and regulations.

(N) The city reserves the right to require the separation of component parts of materials in or from solid wastes and require the deposit thereof in separate cans, containers, receptacles or places and prescribe the method of disposal or resource recovery thereof.

(’91 Code, § 3-5.12) (Ord. 931, passed 2-28-89; Am. Ord. 1118, passed 10-26-04; Am. Ord. 1142, passed 1-9-07) Penalty, see § 50.99


50.36 OFFENSES.

A person may not do any of the following.

(A) Without the permission of the owner or generator of recyclable material, take recyclable materials set out to be collected by a person authorized by the city to provide collection service for that recyclable material, except in accordance with this chapter.

(B) Remove any recyclable material from a container, box, collection vehicle, depot or other receptacle for the accumulation or storage of recyclable material without permission of the owner of the receptacle.

(C) Mix source separated recyclable material with solid waste in any vehicle, box, container or receptacle used in solid waste collection or disposal.

(’91 Code, § 3-5.14(1)) (Ord. 931, passed 2-28-89; Am. Ord. 1118, passed 10-26-04; Am. Ord. 1142, passed 1-9-07) Penalty, see § 50.99


50.99 PENALTY.

Violation by any person of the provisions of this chapter, upon conviction, may be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00. Each day of violation is a separate offense.

(’91 Code, § 3-5.14(2)) (Ord. 931, passed 2-28-89; Am. Ord. 1118, passed 10-26-04; Am. Ord. 1142, passed 1-9-07)


CHAPTER 51: SEWERS

Section

General Provisions

51.001    Adoption of laws and rules

51.002    Definitions

Public Sewer Use Required

51.015    Deposit of objectionable waste

51.016    Discharge of untreated waste

51.017    Privies and cesspools

51.018    Connection to public sewer required

Private Sewage Disposal

51.030    Conflicting provisions

51.031    Private disposal authorized

51.032    Permits and waivers

51.033    Connection to public sewer required

51.034    Operating private sewer systems

Building Sewers and Connections

51.045    Permits

51.046    Fees, charges and rates

51.047    Costs and expenses

51.048    Separate building sewers

51.049    Use of old sewers

51.050    Construction standards

51.051    Surface runoff

51.052    STEP systems

51.053    Excavation regulations

51.054    Inspection and connection

Public Sewer Use Regulations

51.070    Storm and industrial cooling water

51.071    Prohibited discharges

51.072    Prohibited potential harmful discharges

51.073    Pretreatment facilities maintenance

51.074    Interceptors

51.075    Industrial wastes

51.076    Control manholes; sampling devices

51.077    Sampling standards

51.078    Special agreements

Infiltration and Inflow

51.085    Notice to correct

51.086    Time limit for corrective action

51.087    Notice of corrective action taken

51.088    Failure to correct

Service; Charges and Billing

51.100    Definitions

51.101    Service

51.102    Charges

51.103    Billing, payment and collection

51.104    Delinquent accounts

51.105    Sewer Fund

Prohibitions and Restrictions

51.115    Property damage and interference

51.116    Dangerous or unsafe apparatus

Administration and Enforcement

51.130    Disconnection due to noncompliance

51.131    Inspections; right of entry

51.998    Violations

51.999    Penalty

Cross-reference:

Reimbursement districts for public improvements, see Chapter 39

GENERAL PROVISIONS


51.001 ADOPTION OF LAWS AND RULES.

The city adopts and incorporates herein by reference the following as they presently exist or may hereinafter be amended: O.R.S. 447.010 through 447.140, the State Plumbing Code and applicable administrative rules of the Director of Commerce.

(Ord. 981, passed 1-28-92)


51.002 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

APPLICANT. The person(s) applying for a sewer connection permit. The applicant shall be the owner of the premises to be served by the sewer for which a permit is requested, or his/her designated agent authorized in writing to act on his/her behalf.

BOD (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20ºC, expressed in milligrams per liter.

BUILDING. Any structure used for human habitation, employment, place of business, recreation or any other purpose, containing sanitary facilities.

BUILDING DRAIN. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a building drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes within or adjoining the building or structure and conveys the discharge to the building sewer, beginning at a point five feet outside the established line of the building structure including any structural projection except eaves.

BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other points of disposal.

CLEANOUT. A sealed aperture permitting access to the building sewer pipe for stoppage removal and other cleaning purposes.

COLLECTION SYSTEM. The system of public and private sewers which are operated by the city and are designed for the collection and conveyance of sanitary sewage.

DWELLING UNIT. A facility designed for permanent or semi-permanent occupancy which provides the occupants with minimum kitchen, sleeping and sanitary facilities.

FIXTURE UNIT. Fixture unit load values for drainage piping as specified in this chapter, or if not included herein, then as specified in the following or as it may hereinafter be amended. O.R.S. 447.010 through 447.140, the State Plumbing Code and Administrative Rules of the Director of Commerce adopted pursuant to O.R.S. 447.020.

GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.

INDUSTRIAL WASTES. Any liquid, gaseous, radioactive or solid waste substance, or a combination thereof resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade or business or from the development or recovery of any natural resources as distinct from sanitary sewage.

NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground water.

PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or group.

pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.

PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and the dispensing of food, and the handling, storage and sale of produce, that have been shredded to a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.

PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and is owned and controlled by the city. This includes the system from the point of connection of the building drain and/or building sewer to a septic tank effluent pumping (STEP) system to the collection system and the ultimate sewage treatment process.

SANITARY SEWER. A pipe or conduit intended to carry liquid and water-carried wastes, from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions together with minor quantities of ground, storm and surface waters that are not intentionally admitted into the system.

SERVICE CONNECTION. That part of the public sewer which extends from a street sewer and receives flow from a building sewer or a building drain and which may or may not include a STEP system.

SEWAGE. A combination of water-carried wastes, from residences, commercial buildings, industrial establishments and institutions or other places, together with minor quantities of ground, storm and surface waters that are not intentionally admitted into the sewer system.

SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT. Any arrangement of devices and structures used in the process of treating sewage.

SEWAGE WORKS. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage.

SHALL is mandatory; MAY is permissive.

SLUG. Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour sewage concentration or flows during normal operation.

STEP SYSTEM. A septic tank effluent pump system designed for a specific user application which is owned, operated and maintained by the city. It is required as a condition for service to pretreat sewage and pressurize the resulting effluent for delivery to a street sewer in areas where the street sewer is a pressure sewer designed for septic tank effluent. If the system is installed on private property, an easement to the city which allows access must be given by the property owner.

STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN. A sewer designated to carry only storm waters, surface run-off, drainage and street wash waters, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.

SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent of Sewage Works of the city, or his/her authorized deputy, agent or representative.

SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering.

WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.

(Ord. 981, passed 1-28-92)

PUBLIC SEWER USE REQUIRED


51.015 DEPOSIT OF OBJECTIONABLE WASTE.

It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, sewage, garbage or other objectionable waste.

(Ord. 981, passed 1-28-92) Penalty, see § 51.999


51.016 DISCHARGE OF UNTREATED WASTE.

It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.

(Ord. 981, passed 1-28-92) Penalty, see § 51.999


51.017 PRIVIES AND CESSPOOLS.

Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or any other facilities intended or used for the disposal of sewage.

(Ord. 981, passed 1-28-92) Penalty, see § 51.999


51.018 CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SEWER REQUIRED.

The owner of all buildings or dwelling units used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or any other purpose situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located a public sanitary sewer of the city is required at their expense, unless waived in writing by the city with the waiver period not exceeding five years, to connect to the public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter within 90 days provided that the public sewer is within 100 feet of the property line.

(Ord. 981, passed 1-28-92) Penalty, see § 51.999

PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL


51.030 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.

No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed to interfere with any current or to-be-published requirements that may be imposed by the Oregon State Department of Environmental Quality.

(Ord. 981, passed 1-28-92)


51.031 PRIVATE DISPOSAL AUTHORIZED.

Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of §§ 51.015 through 51.018, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system which is in compliance with the provisions of this subchapter.

(Ord. 981, passed 1-28-92) Penalty, see § 51.999


51.032 PERMITS AND WAIVERS.

Before construction is commenced relative to a private sewage disposal system, the property owner must obtain a written waiver from the city concerning the current availability of the city sewer system. Secondly, the property owner shall obtain a written permit from the Oregon State Department of Environmental Quality relating to the construction and use of a private sewage disposal system.

(Ord. 981, passed 1-28-92) Penalty, see § 51.999


51.033 CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SEWER REQUIRED.

At such time as the public sewer becomes available to any property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided for in §§ 51.015 through 51.018 of this chapter, a direct connection shall, unless waived in writing by the city with such waiver period not exceeding five years, be made to the public sewer. Any connections made to the public sewer shall be made in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tank, cesspools or other similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned by the property owner, in accordance with then-existing state law, and at no expense to the city.

(Ord. 981, passed 1-28-92) Penalty, see § 51.999


51.034 OPERATING PRIVATE SEWER SYSTEMS.

The property owner shall be required to operate and maintain the private sewage disposal system facilities in a sanitary manner at all times and at no expense to the city.

(Ord. 981, passed 1-28-92) Penalty, see § 51.999

BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS


51.045 PERMITS.

(A) Authority to open into, make connections or cover. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city. Applications for permits shall be made at the City Hall.

(B) Before permit issuance. Before the applicant can be issued a permit, the applicant must pay the connection fee and inspection fee for the installation of the public sewer system connection. Once issued, each permit shall be valid for 60 days from the date of issuance.

(C) Classes of connection permits. There shall be three classes of building service connection permits: for residential services, for commercial service and for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In any case, the applicant shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by a site plan or other information considered pertinent in the judgement of the Superintendent. The specific permit and inspection fees for each class of building service connection permits, which are to be paid at the time the application is filed, are set out under a separate city ordinance.

(Ord. 981, passed 1-28-92) Penalty, see § 51.999


51.046 FEES, CHARGES AND RATES.

All permit fees, inspection fees, installation charges, connections fees and user rates for the city shall be set by separate Council resolution and resulting city ordinance.

(Ord. 981, passed 1-28-92)


51.047 COSTS AND EXPENSES.

All costs and expenses incident to the associated extension of the public sewer, and the ultimate installation and connection of the building sewer to the public sewer shall be borne by the property owner. The property owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. If the city is requested to make the connection to the applicant’s building drain or building sewer, the costs shall include engineering, construction management, excavation, installation, materials, backfill, street repair and related overheads. Before construction commences the applicant shall place on deposit with the city the necessary funds, or security acceptable to the city, as estimated by the city, for the completion of the extension of the public sewer, including the estimated cost of a STEP system when required. Within 30 days after completion of the project the property owner will pay or the city will return to the property owner any difference in the actual cost of the project and the estimated cost for which the deposit was made.

(Ord. 981, passed 1-28-92) Penalty, see § 51.999


51.048 SEPARATE BUILDING SEWERS.

(A) A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except in the following situations.

(1) Where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private or public sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer.

(2) Where required, two or more buildings on one tax lot under one ownership can share a single STEP system provided that such is approved in writing by the city and that the STEP system utilized is sized appropriately.

(B) In each of the exceptions mentioned in division (A), each separate and independent building shall pay the applicable connection and inspection fees and specified monthly users charges.

(Ord. 981, passed 1-28-92) Penalty, see § 51.999


51.049 USE OF OLD SEWERS.

Old sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, with proper examination and testing by the city and/or its Sewer Works Superintendent, to meet all requirements of this chapter.

(Ord. 981, passed 1-28-92) Penalty, see § 51.999


51.050 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.

(A) Sewer construction standards.

(1) The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of pipe, jointing, testing, backfilling the trench and the connection to the public sewer, including a STEP system where applicable, shall all conform to the requirements of any city building code, the State Plumbing Code and the Administrative Rules of the Director of Commerce, and other applicable rules, regulations and resolutions of the city, as they presently exist, or may hereinafter be amended or enacted.

(2) All ultimate connections to the public sewer, including a STEP system where applicable, shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviations from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the city’s Sewer Superintendent before installation.

(B) Building drain connection elevation. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which the building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, the sanitary sewage carried by the building drain shall be lifted by a means approved by the Sewer Superintendent and discharged to the building sewer.

(Ord. 981, passed 1-28-92) Penalty, see § 51.999


51.051 SURFACE RUNOFF.

No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.

(Ord. 981, passed 1-28-92) Penalty, see § 51.999


51.052 STEP SYSTEMS.

Specific STEP system installation requirements, are as follows.

(A) Permits. Where a STEP system is required, an easement to construct, operate and maintain the system shall be given to the city prior to the city’s issuance of the requested permit.

(B) Notice of installation. The applicant for the STEP system construction shall notify the Sewer Superintendent at least two weeks prior to the need for the sewer application in order for the city to arrange for the installation.

(C) Installation specifications. The materials, excavation and installation of the STEP system shall be in accordance with the plans and specifications of the city. As such, individual electrical and pump needs will have to be determined for each individual service connection.

(D) Electrical power. Electrical power for the STEP system shall be arranged and be provided by the applicant. Suitable electrical rough-in, consistent with applicable city and state electrical codes, for the structure(s) to be served is a condition for the connection of service to the sewer system. Rough-in, as well as other electrical costs, is the responsibility of the applicant.

(Ord. 981, passed 1-28-92) Penalty, see § 51.999


51.053 EXCAVATION REGULATIONS.

(A) Restoration of public property. All streets, sidewalks, parkways and any other public property disturbed in the course of the service connection installation shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. All repairs or replacements shall be made at the expense of the property owner.

(B) Safety measures. All excavation for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. The type of safety measures relied upon will be conducted in a manner satisfactory to the city.

(Ord. 981, passed 1-28-92) Penalty, see § 51.999


51.054 INSPECTION AND CONNECTION.

The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Sewer System Works Superintendent when the building sewer installation is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the Superintendent or a designated representative. No cover shall be added until the proper level of inspection and connection related supervision has been conducted.

(Ord. 981, passed 1-28-92) Penalty, see § 51.999

PUBLIC SEWER USE REGULATIONS


51.070 STORM AND INDUSTRIAL COOLING WATER.

Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designed as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the Superintendent. Industrial cooling waters or unpolluted process waters may also be discharged, on approval of the Superintendent and/or the Department of Environmental Quality, to a storm sewer or other natural outlets.

(Ord. 981, passed 1-28-92) Penalty, see § 51.999


51.071 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.

No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any sanitary sewer.

(A) Any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters.

(B) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas.

(C) Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singularly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanides in excess of two mg/L as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer.

(D) Any water or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment or personnel of the sewer works.

(E) Solid or viscous substances in qualities or of such other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch, manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers and the like, either whole or ground by garbage grinders.

(F) Any septic tank or cesspool sludge or wastes disposals, which are planned for direct disposal into the sewage treatment facilities.

(G) Any other substance prohibited by the Department of Environmental Quality of the State of Oregon.

(Ord. 981, passed 1-28-92) Penalty, see § 51.999


51.072 PROHIBITED POTENTIAL HARMFUL DISCHARGES.

(A) Prohibited potential harmful discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into a sanitary sewer the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely, in the opinion of the Superintendent and/or the Department of Environmental Quality, that the wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. In forming his/her opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the Superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant and other pertinent factors. Substances prohibited are as follows.

(1) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150ºF or 65ºC.

(2) Any waters or wastes containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/L or contain substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150ºF or between 0 and 65ºC.

(3) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Also the installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the Superintendent.

(4) Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not.

(5) Any ground or unground fruit peelings and cores from commercial canneries and/or packing plants. This also includes cull fruits and vegetables and ordinary fruits and vegetables and related seeds.

(6) Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, over five parts per million to a degree that any material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the Superintendent for such materials.

(7) Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the Superintendent as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies or jurisdiction for the discharge to irrigation lands and/or receiving waters.

(8) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the Superintendent in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.

(9) Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.0.

(10) Materials which exert or cause the following.

(a) Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate).

(b) Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions).

(c) Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works.

(d) Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting slug as defined in § 51.002.

(11) Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or deduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to a degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the irrigation lands and/or receiving waters.

(B) Waste rejection, discharge control or pretreatment.

(1) If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in division (A) of this section, and which in the judgement of the Superintendent, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or irrigation lands and/or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Superintendent may do the following.

(a) Reject the wastes.

(b) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition as a requirement for discharge to the public sewers.

(c) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.

(d) Require additional payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under § 51.078.

(2) If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the facilities and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the Superintendent, and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.

(Ord. 981, passed 1-28-92) Penalty, see § 51.999


51.073 PRETREATMENT FACILITIES MAINTENANCE.

Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are required relative to water or waste to be discharged to the public sewer, they shall be maintained at a level of continuous and satisfactory and effective operation by the property owner at such owner’s expense.

(Ord. 981, passed 1-28-92) Penalty, see § 51.999


51.074 INTERCEPTORS.

Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided by the property owner when, in the opinion of the Superintendent, the devices are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excess amounts, any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; with the exception that the interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. The following shall apply to interceptor installations.

(A) All interceptors required to be installed shall be of a type, performance quality and capacity as approved by the Superintendent.

(B) The installed device shall be located in such a manner as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.

(C) Access for periodic cleaning and inspection of the installed interceptors will not be withheld by the property owner.

(D) All costs, including original installation, future replacement, inspection and cleaning, are the responsibility of the property owner.

(Ord. 981, passed 1-28-92) Penalty, see § 51.999


51.075 INDUSTRIAL WASTES.

The following shall apply to the control of industrial wastes to be or which are inadvertently being discharged into the public sewer from industries which exhibit excess strengths or characteristics of excess strengths.

(A) The controls for industrial waste admission apply if BOD in excess of or equal to 200 mg/L or suspended solids in excess of or equal to 150 mg/L is found to exist as a result of composite sample testing.

(B) The composite sample taken shall consist of no less than 12 individual samples taken at a minimum of 30-minute intervals over a period which is not less than six hours.

(C) Review and written acceptance by the city shall be obtained prior to the discharge into the public sewers of any waste having BOD in excess of or equal to 200 mg/L or a suspended solids content in excess of or equal to 150 mg/L.

(D) Pretreatment facilities shall be required if in the opinion of the Superintendent a need exists to modify or eliminate industrial wastes that are harmful to the structures, processes or operations of the sewage treatment works. In such cases, the property owner(s) shall provide at their own expense any pretreatment or processing facilities as may be determined necessary by the Superintendent to render the industrial waste acceptable for admission to the public sewers.

(E) Any industry planning to discharge wastes from a canning, freezing or food-packing operation shall not be allowed to discharge the industrial waste into the public sewer.

(F) The volume of flow used for computing industrial waste charges shall be metered water consumption of the industrial user or customer as shown in the records of meter readings maintained by the city. If the industrial user or customer discharging industrial wastes into the public sewers procures any part, or all, of its water supply from sources other than the City Water Department, all or a part of which is discharged into the public sewers, the additional water supply shall be metered. In such cases the industrial user or customer shall install and maintain at his/her expense water meters of a type approved by the Superintendent for the purposes of determining the volume of water obtained from these other sources.

(G) Where, in the judgement of the Superintendent, it is deemed necessary to protect the public sewer system, certain industrial plants may be required to have separate collection systems; one system to be installed for customary sanitary sewage which is connected directly to the public sewer system; a second system to be installed to collect processing wastes from shop sinks, floor drains, wash stations, plating or cleaning works and all other industrial waste sources. The waste from this system shall be discharged into an exterior concrete sump of sufficient capacity to hold at least two day’s discharge from these sources and be connected to the city sewer system only by a valved overflow. The sump shall be readily accessible for inspection and analysis by the city, and only properly treated or neutralized wastes will be allowed to flow into the city’s sewer system. The city reserves the right to require that city approval be secured for each incident of discharge into the city’s sewer system.

(Ord. 981, passed 1-28-92) Penalty, see § 51.999


51.076 CONTROL MANHOLES; SAMPLING DEVICES.

(A) When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole, together with the necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. The manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his/her expense, and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times. The flow measurement device can be a Parshall flume, weir, venturi nozzle, magnetic flow meter or any other type of device providing accurate and continuous flow indications. Pump timers or other indirect measurement devices will not be acceptable. The flow meter shall be suitable for indicating and totalizing the flow in millions of gallons per day through the device, provided above, with an error not exceeding plus or minus 2%. The instrument shall be equipped with a set of electrical contacts arranged to momentarily close a circuit to energize a process timer and sampling device for every fixed quantity of flow. This quantity should be selected so as to insure a minimum of 12 samples per operating day. Other control variations will be acceptable if it can be demonstrated to the Superintendent that the sampling procedure will result in a waste sample which is proportional to the waste flow.

(B) The length of operation of the sampling device shall be dependent on the type of sampling arrangement used, but in no case shall the daily collected sample be less than two quarts in volume.

The method of sampling used can be continuous pumping past a solenoid-operated valve, direct pumping into sample containers, continuous pumping past a sampler dipper calibrated to remove a constant sample, by a proportional dipper sampler operating directly in the waste flow or by any other approved means. All samples must be continuously refrigerated at a temperature of 39ºF, plus or minus five degrees. The flow measurement and sampling station shall be located and constructed in a manner acceptable to the city. Complete plans on all phases of the proposed installation, including all equipment proposed for use, shall be submitted to the city for approval prior to construction. The person discharging the waste shall keep flow records as required by the city and shall provide qualified personnel to properly maintain and operate the facilities.

(Ord. 981, passed 1-28-92) Penalty, see § 51.999


51.077 SAMPLING STANDARDS.

All measurements, tests and analysis of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at the control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. (The particular analysis involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analysis are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls whereas pH’s are determined from periodic grab samples.)

(Ord. 981, passed 1-28-92) Penalty, see § 51.999


51.078 SPECIAL AGREEMENTS.

No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed to prevent any special agreements or arrangements between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor, by the industrial concern. As such, any payments associated with the arrangements will be determined by special contract between the city and the specific industrial concern for which the special arrangements have been made.

(Ord. 981, passed 1-28-92)

INFILTRATION AND INFLOW


51.085 NOTICE TO CORRECT.

All property owners identified by the city as contributors to excessive or improper infiltration or inflow into the public sewer shall be advised in writing of their infiltration and inflow problems by the city.

(Ord. 981, passed 1-28-92)


51.086 TIME LIMIT FOR CORRECTIVE ACTION.

The owners of all properties who need to take corrective action shall be provided a 60-day grace period in which to correct the infiltration and inflow problems as identified by the city. The 60-day grace period shall commence on the date of notification.

(Ord. 981, passed 1-28-92)


51.087 NOTICE OF CORRECTIVE ACTION TAKEN.

By the end of the 60-day grace period, each property owner shall notify the city that corrective actions have been or are in progress of being taken.

Details with respect to corrective actions taken or expected to be taken and the anticipated completion date shall be specified in the notification to the city.

(Ord. 981, passed 1-28-92)


51.088 FAILURE TO CORRECT.

(A) Failure to notify. A property owner who fails to notify the city of corrective actions prior to the end of the 60-day grace period shall be subject to termination of service, without further notice. The termination of service shall include immediate discontinuance and shut off of the property owners water service, if the service is provided by the city, until the violation shall have been corrected in accordance with federal, state and city regulations.

(B) Continuation of excess infiltration or inflow. In the instance that excessive or improper infiltration or inflow into the public sewer of the city shall continue beyond the 60 day grace period, it is hereby declared that the continuing infiltration or inflow is a public nuisance, that the city shall have the right to abate the public nuisance and to enter upon any private property within the city for such purpose and shall assess the cost of the abatement as a lien against the property upon which the continuing infiltration and inflow occurs and shall assess the cost of the abatement to the property upon or from which the infiltration and inflow occurs. The assessment shall be levied by the filing of a statement of the costs together with the description of the property or properties to be assessed, together with the names of the owner(s) thereof with the City Manager, whereupon the City Manager shall forthwith enter the assessment as a lien against the property. An administration fee of 15% of the cost shall also be charged and collected by the city in addition to all costs of abatement.

(Ord. 981, passed 1-28-92) Penalty, see § 51.999

SERVICE; CHARGES AND BILLING


51.100 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. All definitions included in § 51.002 are incorporated herein by reference.

COMMERCIAL USER. Any premises used for commercial or business purposes which are not determined to be an industry as defined in this subchapter.

DOMESTIC WASTE. Any wastewater which would, under ordinary facts and circumstances, emanate from dwellings.

EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT (ERU). A volume of wastewater emanating from an average residential dwelling unit in the city’s sewer treatment works service area which is assumed to incur the same costs for operation and maintenance as the average volume of domestic waste. When ERU’s are relied upon in establishing user charges, the city shall utilize the metered water use records of the residential dwelling units in the treatment works service area for purposes of making this determination.

INDUSTRIAL USER.

(1) Any nongovernmental, nonresidential user of the public treatment works which is identified in the "Standard Industrial Classification Manual," 1972, Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented, under the following divisions.

Division A - Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing

Division B - Mining

Division D - Manufacturing

Division E - Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and Sanitary Services

Division I - Services

(2) As a general rule, any public treatment works user which discharges more than the equivalent of 25,000 gallons per day (gpd) of sanitary wastes will be considered an industrial user unless an exclusion is requested by the user, and as such is granted by the city.

(3) Given the aforementioned, a user of the public treatment works system may be excluded from the industrial user category if it is determined by the city that the user will introduce primarily domestic waste and other waste from sanitary conveniences.

OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE. All activities required to ensure the continuous, dependable and economical functions of collection, treatment and discharge of the public treatment works sewage or user wastes. The activities and attendant costs would include, but not be limited to the following: preventive and corrective maintenance; replacement of equipment; debt service costs; and, control of the unit processes and equipment that make up the collection, treatment and discharge of the public treatment works such as keeping financial and personal management records, laboratory control, process control, safety, emergency operation planning, employment of attorneys and consultants and payment of court costs and fines.

PUBLIC TREATMENT WORKS. A collection, treatment and discharge sewerage system owned and operated by a public authority.

REPLACEMENT. Obtaining and installing any equipment, accessories or appurtenances that are deemed necessary by the city to maintain the capacity and performance for which the collection and treatment works were designed and constructed. This process shall continue during the designed for or useful life, whichever is longer, of the collection and treatment works facilities.

RESIDENTIAL USER. The user of a single-family dwelling or such other dwelling units included in multiple unit buildings designed for such purposes.

SERVICE AREA. All of the area served by the collection and treatment works system for which there is one uniform user charge system. The service area shall include the corporate limits of the city and any other contiguous and neighboring territory as the City Council shall, from time to time, deem it necessary to service.

TREATMENT WORKS. All facilities used in any manner for the purpose of collecting, pumping, treating and the ultimate disposal of sewage. "Treatment system" and "sewerage system" shall be equivalent terms for TREATMENT WORKS.

USER. Every property owner and/or tenant of any property which is connected to, or required by city ordinance to be connected to, the treatment works system of the city.

USER CHARGE. The periodic or monthly charges levied on all users of the city’s public treatment works.

(Ord. 980, passed 1-28-92)


51.101 SERVICE.

Application for city sewage treatment works services shall be made in the following manner.

(A) The application for city sewage treatment works services shall be considered to be the application for a permit to make a connection to the city’s public sewer system. The application will state the purpose for which service is to be used, the address for mailing of the billings and other information as the city may reasonably require. In signing the application, the property owner agrees to abide by the rules and regulations of the city’s public sewer system.

(B) Deposits and establishment of credit shall be performed at the time the application for service by the city’s public sewer system is made. The credit of the applicant shall be established if the following requirements are met: the applicant makes a cash deposit with the city to secure the payment of two months user charges for services, but not less than $20; or, should the applicant have a history of delinquency of payment for services provided by the city, as determined by the city, the minimum deposit shall be $50. At the time the deposit is given to the city, the applicant will be provided with a written receipt. The deposit is not to be considered as a payment on account. In the event that the service is discontinued, the deposit will be applied to the closing bill and any amount in excess of the closing bill will be refunded to the property owner. Also, following 12 consecutive nondelinquent payments for city public sewer system services, a property owner may request and receive a refund of the deposit.

(C) Users desiring to make a material change in the type and/or quantity of sewage to be discharged into the city’s sewerage system shall give the city written notice of the change prior to the change and the original application for service shall be amended.

(Ord. 980, passed 1-28-92)


51.102 CHARGES.

(A) Sewer user charges. Sewer user charges shall be established on a monthly basis for the use of the city’s sewage facilities. All user charges and service connection, disconnection and reconnection charges will result from a specific resolution of the City Council and the documentation of the charges for specific types of users are attached as exhibits to Ordinance 980, passed 1-28-92.

(B) Applicability of user charges. All user charges and other fees and charges provided for in § 51.101 shall apply to and be the responsibility of each user of the city’s sewerage system.

(C) Process of fixing responsibility.

(1) The process of fixing responsibility for user charges shall be applied such that the property owner of record shall be responsible for the payment of all charges or surcharges for the city’s provision of sewer services. The property owner, if the owner desires, will be notified of any delinquency in user charge or other associated billings rendered by the city.

(2) Users charges shall be levied on all users of the city’s public treatment works. The charges shall cover the costs of operation and maintenance, replacement and other administrative costs of the treatment works. The user charge system relied upon by the city shall distribute these costs in proportion to user responsibility for the wastewater loading of the treatment works.

(D) Assignment of user charges. Assignment of user charges to a specific user of the city’s treatment works shall be the responsibility of the city. If at any point it is determined by the city that a user’s assigned user charge has been incorrectly assigned, the city shall reassign a more appropriate user charge and notify the user of the reassignment.

(E) Records. Records which justify the basis used to assign wastewater contributions which formed the foundation for existing user charges shall be kept on file with the City Manager and shall be available for public inspection.

(F) Beginning of sewer user charges. The beginning of sewer user charges for all occupied property shall be the day following when the sewer service became available or the day that the connection is made to the public treatment works, whichever occurs first. The sewer user charges for all unoccupied property shall commence on the day after the property is ready for occupancy or on the first day of occupancy, whichever occurs first. All unoccupied property which is ready for occupancy at the time the sewer service becomes available shall be treated as occupied property.

(G) Credit for vacancy. Once the sewer user charge has been commenced, a user shall not be allowed a credit for vacancy unless the user can demonstrate that water service to the property from any and all sources has been discontinued. When a demonstration of the conditions can be made, the users charge shall be appropriately pro-rated based on the days of usage divided by 30 days, which in no case shall exceed the total amount of the monthly user charge. Payment will be made by the city to the property owner for the calculated amount less any then-outstanding user account balances owed to the city. The regular user charge shall be reinstated as soon as water service, from any source, has been reconnected to the user’s property.

(H) Review and revision of sewer user charges. Review and revision of sewer user charges established in this section shall, as a minimum, be reviewed annually and if necessary be revised periodically to reflect the recovery of actual costs of operation, maintenance and replacement of the treatment works.

Adjustments may also be made between specified types of applicable user charges to maintain the equitability of the user charges with respect to cost causation criteria. Cost causation charges will be determined on the basis of the proportional distribution of the costs of sewer service in proportion to each user group’s contribution to the total wastewater loading of the treatment works.

(I) User notification of the need for revised user charges. User notification of the need for revised user charges will be made, in conjunction with a regular bill or through other standard means of public announcement, at least one month prior to the effective date of the revised user charges.

(J) Waiver of notification requirements. Waiver of notification requirements will be allowed in case of emergency. In such instances, an emergency will be declared to exist when it is necessary for the health and safety of the people of the city for additional funds to be collected for the proper operation and maintenance of the public treatment works. In such cases an emergency may be declared to exist by the City Council and upon approval by the City Mayor, the revised user charges shall be placed into effect immediately. When such an emergency is declared, the user notification requirements relative to a change in user charges shall be waived.

(K) Cost of service notification. Cost of service notification shall be conducted by the city, with notification being made to each user no less frequently than on an annual basis. As such, each user shall be notified, in conjunction with a regular bill, of that portion of the user charges which are attributable to the operation, maintenance and replacement of the wastewater collection, treatment and disposal system.

(L) Responsibility for payment of sewer user charges. Responsibility for payment of sewer user charges shall be that of the person who owns the property. The responsibility for payment to the city does not pass to the tenant or other occupants, notwithstanding the fact that tenants or other occupants may be required by the property owner to pay the charges.

(M) Appeals. Appeals of the sewer user charges established by the city shall be made in writing to the City Manager within ten days of the billing of the sewer user charges. The City Manager shall respond in writing within ten days of receipt of any appeal. If the user wishes to appeal further, he/she shall request in writing that the City Manager place his/her specific appeal on the agenda of the next scheduled regular City Council session. The decision of the City Council at the session shall be final.

(Ord. 980, passed 1-28-92) Penalty, see § 51.999


51.103 BILLING, PAYMENT AND COLLECTION.

The billing process will be conducted in the following manner.

(A) The users of the public treatment works system shall be billed no more frequently than on a monthly basis for services provided by the city in accordance with the sewer user charge schedule as set forth in the exhibits attached to Ordinance 980, passed 1-28-92, incorporated herein by reference.

(B) The sewer user charges shall be due and payable to the city no later than 30 days after the date of billing. If not paid on or before 30 days after the billing date, the sewer user charges shall be deemed to be delinquent.

(C) Payments for combined water/sewer bills shall be credited to the oldest bill. The payment shall be applied first to amounts owing on the sewer account and then to amounts owing on the water account.

(D) The billings address for city sewer user charges shall be the address specified in the application for the permit to make the connection. This will continue until a different owner or user of the property, and a corresponding change in billing address, is reported in written form to the City’s Department of Public Works.

(E) All collections of sewer user charges and other specified fees and charges shall be made by the City’s Manager. Sewer user charges and other fees and charges shall be computed as provided in the sewer user charge and service charge exhibits attached to Ordinance 980, passed 1-28-92 and shall be payable as provided in this subchapter.

(Ord. 980, passed 1-28-92; Am. Ord. 1028, passed 11‑ ‑95)


51.104 DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS.

(A) Delinquent accounts shall be charged interest at a rate of 1% per month from the date of delinquency. In addition, a service charge shall be assessed at a rate of $5 per month from the date of delinquency in order to allow for the recovery of the city’s administrative costs relative to the delinquent account. The service charge payment shall be added to the account balance and shall accrue interest in the same manner as all other delinquent charges beginning with the month following the month of delinquency.

(B) Disconnection/reconnection in the event of extended delinquencies shall be conducted in the following manner.

(1) After an account becomes delinquent, a turn-off notice will be sent to the billing address. The notice shall state a date not less than ten days from the date of the notice on which water service to the premises will be turned off if the delinquency amount is not paid in full prior thereto. On or after the turn-off date, if the delinquent amount has not been paid in full, the Superintendent may disconnect the service of the water system to the premises. Water services will be withheld until all delinquent amounts owing for sewer services supplied to the premises have been paid in full, together with the reconnection fee for the water services. The amount of the reconnection fee for the water service is specified in the city’s water system ordinances incorporated herein by reference.

(2) In some instances, in the event of failure to pay sewer charges after they have become delinquent, the city shall have the right to remove or close the sewer connection. The same delinquency and notification period as detailed in division (B)(1) of this section would also apply. In these cases, the city shall be allowed the right of entry upon the property owner’s property for accomplishing such purposes.

The total expense of the discontinuance, removal or closing, as well as the expense of restoring service, shall be a debt due to the city and be represented by a lien upon the property. In such cases the amount owed the city, as represented by the lien on the property, may be recovered by civil action in the name of the city against the property owner, the person or both. Also, the city may enforce the collection of the charges by any means that may be provided by the laws of the state or permitted by the charter and ordinances of the city. This would include certification to the Tax Assessor of Crook County for collection in the manner provided for under O.R.S. 454.225.

(C) Change in ownership or occupancy of premises for which the sewer user charge account is found to be delinquent shall not be cause for reducing or eliminating any of the aforementioned penalties.

(Ord. 980, passed 1-28-92; Am. Ord. 1103, passed 5-13-03; Am. Ord. 1103, passed 5-13-03)


51.105 SEWER FUND.

The City Manager is hereby directed to deposit in the City Sewer Fund all of the gross revenues received from charges, rates and penalties collected for the use of the sewerage system as herein provided. As such, the funds deposited in the City’s Sewer Fund shall be used for the operation and maintenance and replacement of the public treatment works system; administration costs; expenses of collection of charges resulting from this subchapter; and, the payment of the principle and interest on any debts which are directly or indirectly related to the public treatment works system of the city.

(Ord. 980, passed 1-28-92)

PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS


51.115 PROPERTY DAMAGE AND INTERFERENCE.

(A) Tampering with the sewage works system is prohibited. No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewage works system. Any person violating this provision shall be prosecuted in accordance with the Oregon Criminal Code.

(B) Liability for damages. The property owner shall be liable for damage to a tank or pump or other equipment or property owned by the city which is caused by an act of the customer, his/her tenants or agents. The city shall be reimbursed by the customer for the damages upon presentation of a bill.

(Ord. 981, passed 1-28-92)


51.116 DANGEROUS OR UNSAFE APPARATUS.

The city may refuse to furnish sewer service to a premises where an apparatus, appliance or other type of equipment using the sewer system is dangerous or unsafe or the devices are being used in violation of laws, ordinances or legal regulations. The city does not assume liability for inspecting apparatus on the customer’s property. The city does reserve the right of inspection, however, if there is reason to believe that unsafe or illegal apparatus is in use. The right to access for the inspections, when requested by the city, shall not be withheld by the property owner.

(Ord. 981, passed 1-28-92) Penalty, see § 51.999

ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT


51.130 DISCONNECTION DUE TO NONCOMPLIANCE.

The city may discontinue water service to a customer for noncompliance with the terms of this chapter if the customer fails to comply with the terms within ten days after receiving written notice of the city’s intention to discontinue service. Provided, however, if the noncompliance materially affects the health, safety or other conditions that warrant the action, the city may discontinue water service immediately and without notice.

(Ord. 981, passed 1-28-92)


51.131 INSPECTIONS; RIGHT OF ENTRY.

(A) Entry on owners property to be permitted. The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private and public properties for the purposes of, but not limited to, installations as required, connections, maintenance, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The Superintendent or his/her representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond those which have a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment.

(B) Conformance with safety rules. While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in division (A) of this section, the Superintendent or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises.

(C) Easements allowing entry on property. The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds an easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, installations of facilities, connections, inspections, observation, measurement, sampling, repairs and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within the easement.

(Ord. 981, passed 1-28-92)


51.998 VIOLATIONS.

(A) Notice of violation. Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter, except §§ 51.115 and 51.116, shall be served with written notice stating the nature of the violation with notification that the violator is given ten days to satisfactorily correct the violation. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in the notice, permanently cease all violations. With respect to damages to the sewer system and associated cost and fines to the city resulting from the violation(s), the property owner shall be responsible for the costs and be billed accordingly.

(B) Liability. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the city for any expense, including reasonable attorney fees, loss or damage occasioned the city by reason for the violation, and in action or suit in the name of the city may be instituted against the person for the recovery of the expense, loss or damage; and the same may be undertaken in addition to other penalties imposed under the provisions of the chapter.

(Ord. 981, passed 1-28-92) Penalty, see § 51.999


51.999 PENALTY.

Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limits provided for in § 51.998(A), shall be deemed guilty of a violation, and, upon conviction, shall be penalized as provided in § 10.99.

(Ord. 981, passed 1-28-92)


CHAPTER 52: WATER

Section

52.001    Rules and regulations

52.002    Definitions and general terms

52.003    Service area

52.004    Description of service

52.005    Application for water service

52.006    Main extensions

52.007    Service

52.008    Meters

52.009    Water rates

52.010    Notices

52.011    Billing and payment

52.012    Meter error

52.013    Suspension of service

52.014    Restoration of service

52.015    Unusual demands

52.016    Access to property

52.017    Responsibility for equipment

52.018    Fire hydrants

52.019    Backflow prevention requirements

52.020    Irrigation

52.021    Suspension of rules

52.022    Easement

52.045    Critically affected area

52.999    Penalties


52.001 RULES AND REGULATIONS.

(A) Short title. This chapter shall be known as "Rates, Rules and Regulations for the operation of the Water Department of the City of Prineville, Crook County," and may be so cited and pleaded.

(B) Scope. The Water Department and all customers receiving water service from the Water Department, whether inside or outside the city limits, are bound by this chapter.

(’91 Code, § 3-3.1) (Ord. 1153, passed 6-10-08)


52.002 DEFINITIONS AND GENERAL TERMS.

APPLICANT. Whenever the word "applicant" is used, it shall mean the person or persons, firm or corporation making application for water service from the Water Department under the terms of this chapter.

CITY. Whenever the word "city" is used, it shall mean the legally constituted municipal government of the City of Prineville, Crook County, Oregon.

CITY COUNCIL. Whenever the words "City Council" are used, they shall mean the legally elected group of members composing the City Council, including the Mayor of the City of Prineville, Oregon.

CROSS CONNECTION. A "cross connection" is defined as any physical connection between the city’s water system and another source.

CUSTOMER or USER. Whenever the words "customer" or "user" are used, it shall mean an applicant who has been accepted under the terms of these regulations and who received water service from the Water Department.

CUSTOMER SERVICE LINE. The "customer service line" is that part of the piping on the customer’s property that connects the service connection to the customer’s water distribution system.

IRRIGATION. "Irrigation" shall be defined as watering trees, lawns, soil, bushes, flowers, plants or other vegetation by any means, including but not limited to sprinklers, handheld hoses or ditches.

PROPERTY OWNER OF RECORD. "Property owner of record" shall mean the person or legal entity owning property according to the most recent application for water service filed with the city for that property.

SERVICE CONNECTION. The "service connection" is that part of the water distribution system which connects the service line to the customer service line and shall normally consist of a corporation stop, service pipe, curb stop and box, meter, meter yoke and meter box.

SERVICE LINE. The "service line" is that part of the water distribution system that connects the service connection to the water main and shall normally consist of a saddle, connection stop, and water line.

SUPERINTENDENT. Whenever the word "Superintendent" is used, it shall mean the person appointed to superintend the affairs of the Water Department.

SUSPENSION. "Suspension" shall mean the stoppage by the city of water service to a customer who is receiving water service from the city.

WATER DEPARTMENT. Whenever the words "Water Department" are used, they shall mean the Water Department of the City of Prineville, Oregon.

(’91 Code, § 3-3.2) (Ord. 1153, passed 6-10-08)


52.003 SERVICE AREA.

The area served by the Water Department shall be all that area included within the corporate limits of the City of Prineville and such other contiguous and neighboring territory as the City Council shall from time to time deem necessary to serve.

(’91 Code, § 3-3.3) (Ord. 1153, passed 6-10-08)


52.004 DESCRIPTION OF SERVICE.

(A) Supply. The Water Department will exercise reasonable diligence and care to deliver a continuous and sufficient supply of water to the customer at a reasonable pressure and to avoid so far as reasonably possible any shortage or interruption in delivery.

The Water Department shall not be liable for damage resulting from the interruption in service or from the lack of service. Temporary suspension of service by the Water Department for improvements and repairs will be necessary occasionally. Whenever possible, and when time permits, all customers affected will be notified prior to shutdowns.

(B) Quality. The Water Department will exercise reasonable diligence to supply safe and potable water at all times.

(C) Ownership of system. All water mains, valves, fittings, hydrants and other appurtenances, except customer service lines, shall be the property of the Water Department.

(D) Special contracts. When the applicant’s requirements for water are unusual or large, such as an independent water district, or necessitate considerable special or reserve equipment or capacity, the Water Department, by authorization of the City Council, reserves the right to enter into a special contract with the applicant, the provisions of which may be different than the provisions set out in this chapter. This special contract shall be in writing, signed by the applicant and approved by the City Council and City Attorney and signed by the Mayor and City Recorder of the City of Prineville.

(E) Resale of water. Resale of water shall be permitted only under special contract, in writing, between the City Council and the persons, parties or corporation selling the water.

(F) Service preference. In case of shortage of supply, the Water Department reserves the right to give preference in the furnishing of water service to customers and interests of the Water Department from the standing of public convenience or necessity. Water service to users outside the city limits shall at all times be subject to the prior and superior rights of the customers within the city limits.

(’91 Code, § 3-3.4) (Ord. 1153, passed 6-10-08)


52.005 APPLICATION FOR WATER SERVICE.

(A) Application form. Each applicant for water service shall sign an application for water service on a form provided by the Water Department giving the date of the application, location of property to be served, the date applicant desires service to begin, purpose for which service is to be used, the address for mailing of the billings, the class and the size of the meter service and such other information as the Water Department may reasonably require. In signing the application, the customer agrees to abide by the rules and regulations of the Water Department. The application is merely a written request for service and does not bind the Water Department to serve the property.

(B) Deposits and establishment of credit. At the time application for credit is made, the applicant shall establish his credit with the Water Department.

(1) Establishment of credit. The credit of the applicant shall be deemed established:

(a) If the applicant makes a deposit with the Water Department to secure the payment of bills for water service. The deposit amount shall be set by city resolution.

(b) Should the applicant have a history of delinquency in payment of his water and/or sewer bills, as determined by the city, and be requesting a new water account, service may be denied until all delinquent water and/or sewer bills and fees are paid in full.

(2) Deposits. At the time the deposit is given to the Water Department, the applicant will be given a receipt for the same. The deposit is not to be considered as a payment on account. In the event the service is discontinued, the deposit will be applied to the closing bill and any amount in excess of the closing bill will be refunded. Following 12 consecutive nondelinquent payments for water service, a customer may request and receive a refund of his deposit.

(3) If an account becomes delinquent and the water service is suspended to a property, all outstanding balances including fees associated with the suspension of service shall be paid prior to the water service to the property being reinstated. Insufficient deposit amounts will be increased in compliance with current fee schedule.

(C) Application of amendments. Customers desiring a material change in the size, character or extent of equipment or operation which would result in material change in the amount of water used shall give the Water Department written notice of such change prior to the change and the application for service shall be amended.

Customers desiring a change in the size, location or number of services shall fill out an amended application.

(’91 Code, § 3-3.5) (Ord. 1153, passed 6-10-08)


52.006 MAIN EXTENSIONS.

(A) Within the city limits. Water main extensions to areas within the city limits not presently served with water shall be installed under procedures to be established by the City Council. Owners of subdivided or partitioned properties will assume all costs for water main extensions to such properties.

(B) Outside the city limits. Water mains outside the city limits shall be extended only at the expense of the customers served. The water main extensions shall become the property of the Water Department one year from the date of final acceptance by the city. The City Engineer shall determine the size of the main extensions and all extensions shall be constructed in compliance with the city’s standards and specifications.

(C) Location of extensions. The Water Department will allow water main extensions only on rights-of-way, easements or publicly owned property. Easements or permits secured for main extensions shall be obtained in the name of the City of Prineville along with all rights and title to the main at the time the service is provided to the customers paying for the extension.

(’91 Code, § 3-3.6) (Ord. 1153, passed 6-10-08)


52.007 SERVICE.

(A) Ownership and maintenance.

(1) The Water Department shall own and maintain all service lines and service connections.

(2) Each property owner of record shall own and maintain the customer service line servicing such property owner’s property.

(B) Installation. The Water Department shall install all service lines and service connections except as follows:

(1) The applicant shall install at applicant’s cost all service lines over two inches in diameter. Applicant shall be responsible for the purchase and installation of such service line and service connection. The water meter and the service connection must be approved by the Water Department.

(2) The applicant shall purchase and install any service line that exceeds five feet in length. The Water Department will install the service connection for such service line so long as the service line is not greater than two inches in diameter.

(C) Service connection charge. At the time the applicant files for service where no service previously existed, or files for a change in size or location, the applicant shall submit with his or her application the service connection charge. The service connection charge shall be set by city resolution.

(D) Size of and placement of service line. The Water Department will furnish and install a service line at such locations as the applicant requests, provided such requests are reasonable. The size of the service line shall be in compliance with the Uniform Plumbing Code as determined by the Crook County Building Department, but not less than one inch. If the Water Department does not have the size of service line as required by the Uniform Plumbing Code, the next larger size of service line used by the Water Department shall be installed.

(E) Change in service line size. Permanent changes in the size of the service line requested by the customer shall be paid by the customer on the basis of actual cost to the Water Department for making the change.

(F) The service connection will be placed at the right-of-way line nearest the property to be served.

(G) Joint service lines. The Water Department may, at its option, serve two or more premises with one service line connection. On new service line connections, the inside diameter of such service lines shall be sufficient to provide a carrying capacity of not less than the combined capacity of individual service lines of the same size as the meters installed.

Service extensions from an existing service to other occupancies or ownerships than that for which the existing service line was intended shall not be permitted nor shall separate residences be permitted to receive water service through one meter except under special circumstances approved by the Water Department.

(H) Number of service line connections on a premises. The owner of a single parcel of property may apply for and receive as many water services as he or his tenants may require, provided his or her application or applications meet the requirements of all governmental laws, policies, rules and regulations.

(I) Standby fire protection service connection.

(1) Purpose. Standby fire protection service connections of two-inch size and larger will be installed only if adequate provisions are made to prevent the use of water from such services for purposes other than fire extinguishing. Sealed fire sprinkler systems with water-operated alarms shall be considered as having such provisions. The Water Department may require that a suitable detector check meter be installed in the standby fire protections service connections, to which hose lines or hydrants are connected. All piping on the customer’s premises shall be installed in accordance with the Plumbing Code of the State of Oregon.

(2) Charges for service. Charges for standby fire protection service will be stated in the published water rate schedule. No charge will be made for water used in the standby fire protection services to extinguish accidental fires or for routine testing of the fire protection system. The customers shall pay the full cost of the standby fire protection service connection, any required detector check meters, and any required special water meter installed for the service to the standby connection.

(3) Violations of regulations. If water is used from a standby pipe connection service in violation of these regulations, an estimate of the amount used will be computed by the Water Department. The customer shall pay for the water used at the regular rates, including the minimum charge based on the size of the service connection and subsequent bills rendered on the basis of regular water rates.

(J) Fire service connections other than standby. A service having fire protection facilities on the premises and water for other purposes flowing through the same service connection shall be considered as an ordinary service and metered as such. All water used through that service, regardless of its use, will be charged at the regular rate.

(K) Temporary service connections. For water service of a temporary nature, applicants shall be required to pay in advance the estimated cost of installation and removal of metering equipment and materials, plus a reasonable depreciation charge for the use of equipment and material used by the Water Department. The applicant shall also pay his water bill in advance and based upon an estimate of the quantity to be used, or he shall otherwise establish satisfactory credit.

(1) Time limit. Temporary service connections shall be disconnected and terminated within six months after installation unless an extension of time is granted in writing by the Water Department.

(2) Charge for water served. Charges for water furnished through a temporary service connection shall be at the established rates set forth in the current water rate schedule.

(3) Installation charges and deposits. The applicant for temporary service will be required:

(a) To pay Water Department, in advance, the estimated cost of installing and removing all facilities necessary to furnish each service.

(b) To deposit an amount sufficient to cover bills for water during the entire period such temporary service may be used or to otherwise establish credit by the Water Department.

(c) To deposit with the city an amount equal to the value of any equipment loaned by the Water Department to such applicant under the terms of subsection (K)(4) of this section.

(4) Responsibility for meters and installation. The customer shall use all possible care to prevent damage to the meter or to any other loaned facilities of the Water Department. If the meter or other facilities are damaged, the cost of making repairs shall be deducted from the deposit refund. If the loaned materials are returned in satisfactory condition and all bills paid, the full amount of the equipment deposit will be returned to the temporary customer at the termination of the service.

(L) Customer’s plumbing.

(1) Plumbing code. The customer’s plumbing, which shall include the customer’s service line and all plumbing, piping, fixtures and other appurtenances carrying or intended to carry water, sewer or drainage, shall comply with the Plumbing Code of the State of Oregon.

(2) Control valves. Customers shall install a suitable control valve in the customer service line as close to the meter as possible, the operation of which will control the entire water supply to the property served. In the event a customer’s service is discontinued for any reason, a control valve must be installed, if none exists, as provided by this section.

It shall be a violation of this chapter for the customer to operate, cause or permit unauthorized operation of the meter stop or any appurtenances on the service connection.

(’91 Code, § 3-3.7) (Ord. 1153, passed 6-10-08)


52.008 METERS.

(A) Ownership. The Water Department will own and maintain all water meters. The Water Department will not pay rent or any other charge for a meter or other water facility, including housing and connections on a customer’s property.

(B) Installation. Installation of water meters shall be performed only by authorized employees of the Water Department. All meters shall be sealed by the Water Department at the time of installation, and no seal shall be altered or broken except by one of its authorized employees.

(C) The size and type of meter. Applicant shall request and receive any size meter regularly stocked or furnished by the Water Department, provided the request is reasonable and further provided that the meter is not greatly oversized or undersized, as determined by the Water Superintendent. The Water Department reserves the right to determine the type of meter to be installed.

(D) Location of meters. Meters shall normally be placed at the curb or property lines; the meter will be installed wherever the applicant desires within reason, but the location must be approved by the Water Department. The meters will not be located in driveways or other locations where damage to the meter or its related parts may occur.

(E) Joint use of meters. The joining of several customers to take advantage of the single minimum charges and large quantity rates shall be prohibited, except under special contract, in writing, with the Water Department.

(F) Changes in size and location. If, for any reason, a change in the size of meter and service is required, the installation will be accomplished on the basis of a new connection, and the customer’s application shall be so amended. Meters or services moved for the convenience of the customer will be relocated only at the customer’s expense.

(’91 Code, § 3-3.8) (Ord. 1153, passed 6-10-08)


52.009 WATER RATES.

The water rates to be charged for each class of service, including minimum charges, charges for water used over the minimum and service connection charges, shall be set by city resolution. These water rates may be revised at any time.

(’91 Code, § 3-3.9) (Ord. 1153, passed 6-10-08)


52.010 NOTICES.

(A) Notices to customers. Notices from the Water Department to the customer will normally be given in writing and either mailed to or delivered to the customer at their last known address. Where conditions warrant and in emergencies, the Water Department may notify the customer either by telephone or by messenger.

(B) Notices from customers. Notices from customers to the Water Department may be given by the customer, their legal representative, or their authorized representative orally or in writing at the office of the Water Department in City Hall or to an agent of the Water Department.

(’91 Code, § 3-3.10) (Ord. 1153, passed 6-10-08)


52.011 BILLING AND PAYMENT.

(A) Meter readings. Meters will be read and customers billed on the basis of the meter readings to the nearest 100 cubic feet.

The Water Department will keep an accurate account on its books of all readings of meters and such accounts so kept shall be offered at all times, places and courts as prima facie evidence of the use of water service by the customer.

(B) Rendering of bills.

(1) Billing period. All meters shall be read and bills rendered therefor monthly.

(2) Bills for other than normal billing period. Opening or closing bills or bills that for any other reason cover a period containing 10% more days or 10% fewer days than in the normal billing period shall be prorated.

(C) Disputed bills. When a customer disputes the correctness of a bill, he shall deposit the amount of the disputed bill at the time the complaint is lodged, to preclude suspension of service pending final settlement of the bill or bills. Subsequent bills shall be paid or placed on deposit in a similar manner. Failure of the customer to make such a deposit shall warrant suspension of service as provided under subsection (F) of this section.

(D) Failure to read meters. In the event that it shall be impossible or impractical to read a meter on the regular reading date, the water consumption shall be prorated on the basis of 30 days per month and the total water consumption for the billing purposes for that month shall be estimated.

(E) Owner of record and payment of bills.

(1) The property owner of record shall be responsible for the payment of all water charges and fees prescribed in this chapter. The responsibility for payment to the city does not pass to the tenant or other occupants, notwithstanding the fact that tenants or other occupants may be required by the property owner of record to pay the charges and fees.

(2) Each water and sewer bill rendered shall have a due date. If the bill is not paid by that date, the account shall be considered delinquent.

(3) Payments for combined water and sewer bills shall be credited to the oldest bill. When bills have the same date, payments shall be applied first to all amounts owing the city until paid in full and then lastly to amounts owing on the water account.

(F) Delinquent accounts.

(1) Delinquent notice. A reminder of account delinquency will be sent to each delinquent customer on the next month’s bill to that customer.

(2) Suspension notice. On or about 14 days after an account becomes delinquent, a suspension notice will be sent to the customer. Such suspension notice shall give not less than ten days’ prior notice of Water Department’s intent to suspend water service unless the delinquent amount is paid in full prior to the date of suspension.

If the property is rented the suspension notice will be sent to the customer and the property owner of record.

(3) Suspension. On the suspension date, the meter reader or other agent of the city shall deliver a written notice to the customer stating that the water service is being turned off until all current and delinquent amounts have been paid. The meter reader or other agent shall immediately thereafter turn off the water service. A delivery of this notice, by the meter reader or agent, to the premises shall be considered a delivery of the notice to the customer.

(4) Restoration of service and service charge. In all instances where water service has been suspended because of delinquent accounts, full payment of all amounts owing for city water and sewer services must be paid prior to restoration of water service including a service charge for restoration of service. Should the customer have a history of delinquency in payment of his water and/or sewer bills as determined by the city, cash may be required to be paid prior to restoration of water service.

(G) Collection of bills, delinquent and penalty fees.

(1) The City of Prineville may enforce the collection of rates and charges for the use of the water and water facilities by any means that may be provided by the laws of the State of Oregon or permitted by the charter and ordinances of the City of Prineville. All water service charges shall be a lien against the premises served from and after the date of delinquency and entered in the city lien docket. The lien docket shall be made accessible for inspection by anyone interested in ascertaining the amount of charges against the property. When a bill for the water service remains unpaid 60 days after it is delinquent, the lien created thereby may be foreclosed in the manner provided for by ORS 223.610, or in any other manner provided by law or city ordinance.

(2) Delinquent fees. Should an account become delinquent, there shall be added a delinquent fee as set by city resolution.

(3) Penalty fees. In the event that it becomes necessary to certify the liens hereby established because of the nonpayment thereof, there shall be added to such charges a penalty as set by city resolution.

(H) Refusal of service.

(1) The city may refuse water service to any property upon which a lien has been attached until the amount owing on the lien has been paid to the city along with the service charge for the restoration of services.

(2) The city may also refuse service to a customer with an outstanding delinquent balance until said account balance is paid in full.

(’91 Code, § 3-3.11) (Ord. 1153, passed 6-10-08)


52.012 METER ERROR.

(A) Meter accuracy. All meters will be tested prior to installation. No meter will be placed in service or allowed to remain in service which is known to have an error in registration in excess of 2% under conditions of normal operation.

(B) Meter test.

(1) Standard test. Meter tests will be conducted in accordance with standards of practice established by the American Water Works Association.

(2) On customer request. A customer may, upon giving seven days’ notice, request the Water Department to test the meter servicing his premises. The Water Department will require the customer to deposit a testing fee. The deposit will be returned to the customer if the test reveals that meter to over register more than 2% under the standard test conditions. The deposit shall be retained by the Water Department if the meter tests within the 2% limitation. Customers may, at their option, witness any meter tests which they request.

(3) On Water Department request. If, upon comparison of past water usage, it appears that a meter is not registering properly, the Water Department may, at its option, test the meter and adjust the charges accordingly. No charge for meter testing will be made to the customer for the meter test under these conditions.

(C) Adjustment of bills for meter error. Should a meter be found to be out of the allowable tolerance for error, or found to be nonregistering, the bill will be computed upon an estimate of consumption based either upon the customer’s prior use during the same season of the year or upon a reasonable comparison with the use of other customers receiving the same class of service during the same season and under similar circumstances and conditions.

(’91 Code, § 3-3.12) (Ord. 1153, passed 6-10-08)


52.013 SUSPENSION OF SERVICE.

(A) On customer request. Each customer about to vacate any premises supplied with water service by the Water Department shall give the Water Department written notice of his intentions at least two business days prior thereto, specifying the date service is to be discontinued; otherwise, he will be responsible for all water supplied to such premises until the Water Department shall receive notice of such request.

At the time specified by the customer that he expects to vacate the premises where service is supplied or that he desires to be discontinued, the meter will be read and a bill rendered which is payable immediately. In no case will the bill be less than the monthly minimum specified in the schedule applying to the class or classes of service furnished.

(B) Nonpayment of bills. A customer’s water service may be suspended if the water bills are not paid in accordance with the procedures listed in Section 52.011(F).

(C) Nonpayment of sewer service charges. If said sewer service charges are not paid when due by such person, firm or corporation whose premises are served or who are subject to the charges herein provided, water service provided to that customer by the City Water Department may be suspended because of the default in the payment of the sewer service charges. As an additional alternative method, if such rates and charges are not paid when due by any such person, firm or corporation, the amounts so unpaid may be certified by the City Recorder to the County Assessor of Crook County, Oregon, and shall be by him assessed against the premises served as provided by law and shall be collected and paid over to the city in the same manner as other taxes are assessed, collected and paid over, with interest. Such unpaid charges may also be recovered in action at law in the name of the city, with interest as aforesaid.

(D) Improper customer facilities.

(1) Unsafe facilities. The Water Department may refuse to furnish water and may suspend service to any premises without prior notice where plumbing facilities, appliances or equipment using water are dangerous, unsafe or not in conformity with the Plumbing Code of the State of Oregon.

(2) Cross connections. The Oregon State Board of Health and the U.S. Public Health Service prohibit cross connections. The Water Department will not permit any cross connection and will suspend service to any persons or premises where a cross connection exists. Service will not be restored until the cross connection is eliminated.

(E) Water waste. Where water is wastefully or negligently used on a customer’s premises, seriously affecting the general service, the Water Department may discontinue service if such conditions are not corrected after due notice by the Water Department.

(F) Service detrimental to others. The Water Department may refuse to furnish water and may discontinue service to any premises where excessive demands by one customer will result in inadequate service to others.

(G) Fraud or abuse. The Water Department will refuse or suspend service to any premises where it is deemed necessary to protect the Water Department from fraud or abuse. Discontinuance of service from one or both of these causes will be made immediately upon receipt of knowledge by the Water Department that the condition or conditions exist.

(H) Unauthorized turn-on. Where water service has been suspended for any reason and the water is turned on by the customer or other unauthorized person, the water may then be shut off at the main or the meter removed. The charges for shutting off the water at the main or removing the meter shall be computed at actual cost to the Water Department plus 15% of such costs for overhead. These charges shall be billed to the offending customer and water shall not be furnished to the premises or customer until such charges are paid and the Water Department has reasonable assurance that the violation will not reoccur.

(I) Noncompliance with regulations. The Water Department may, upon five days’ notice, suspend service to a customer’s premises for failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter.

(’91 Code, § 3-3.13) (Ord. 1153, passed 6-10-08)


52.014 RESTORATION OF SERVICE.

Restoration of service after suspension for nonpayment of bills shall be made after payment of current and past due charges plus a service charge and posting a deposit as hereinbefore provided.

Restoration of service after suspension of service for unsafe facilities, water waste, fraud, abuse or for noncompliance with any of the policies, rules or regulations will only be made after the irregularity has been corrected and the Water Department has been assured that the irregularity will not reoccur.

(’91 Code, § 3-3.14) (Ord. 1153, passed 6-10-08)


52.015 UNUSUAL DEMANDS.

When an abnormally large quantity of water is desired for filling a swimming pool, log pond, or other purposes, arrangements must be made with the city prior to taking such water. Permission to take water in unusual quantities will be given only if the Water Department facilities and other consumers are not inconvenienced.

(’91 Code, § 3-3.15) (Ord. 1153, passed 6-10-08)


52.016 ACCESS TO PROPERTY.

All duly appointed employees of the Water Department, under the direction of the Water Superintendent, shall have free access at all reasonable hours of the day to any and all parts of structures and premises in which water is or may be delivered for the purposes of inspecting connections, the conditions of conduits and fixtures, and the manner and extent in which the water is being used. The Water Department does not, however, assume the duty of inspecting the customer’s line, plumbing and equipment and shall not be responsible therefor.

(’91 Code, § 3-3.16) (Ord. 1153, passed 6-10-08)


52.017 RESPONSIBILITY FOR EQUIPMENT.

(A) Responsibility for customer equipment. The Water Department shall not be liable for any loss or damage of any nature whatsoever caused by any defects in the customer’s line, plumbing or equipment, nor shall the Water Department be liable for loss or damage due to interruption of service or temporary changes in pressure. The customer shall be responsible for valves on his premises being turned off when the water service is turned on.

(B) Responsibility for Water Department equipment. Water Department equipment on the customer’s premises remains the property of the Water Department and may be repaired, replaced or removed by the Water Department employees at any time without the consent of the customer. No payment will be made to the property owner for the right to install, maintain, replace or remove Water Department equipment on his premises. The property owner must keep vicious dogs or other animals secured or confined to avoid interference with the Water Department operation and maintenance.

(C) Damage to Water Department equipment. The customer shall be liable for any damage to equipment owned by the Water Department which is caused by an act of the customer, his tenants, agents, employees, contractors, licensees or permittees. Damage to equipment shall include but not be limited to breaking of seals and locks, tampering with meters, injury to meters, including but not limited to damages by hot water or steam, and damaged meter boxes, curb stops, meter stops and other appurtenances.

(’91 Code, § 3-3.17) (Ord. 1153, passed 6-10-08)


52.018 FIRE HYDRANTS.

(A) Operation. No person other than those designated and authorized by the Water Department shall open any fire hydrant belonging to the Water Department; attempt to draw water from it or in any manner damage or tamper with it. Any violation of this regulation will be prosecuted according to law. No tool other than a special hydrant wrench shall be used to operate a hydrant valve. In case where a temporary service has been granted and received water through a fire hydrant, an auxiliary valve will be provided to control the flow of water.

(B) Moving a fire hydrant. When a fire hydrant has been installed in the locations specified by the proper authority, the Water Department has fulfilled its obligation. If a property owner or other party desires to change the size, type or location of the hydrant, he shall bear all costs of such changes. Any changes in the location of a fire hydrant must be approved by the Water Department and the Fire Department.

(’91 Code, § 3-3.18) (Ord. 1153, passed 6-10-08)


52.019 BACKFLOW PREVENTION REQUIREMENTS.

(A) A potable water supply system shall be designed, installed, and maintained in a manner that prevents contamination from the introduction of nonpotable liquids, solids, or gases into the supply through cross connections or any other piping connections to the system.

(B) An appropriate backflow prevention assembly is required on all fire line and irrigation services and all domestic services larger than one inch in size. An approved double check valve assembly shall be the minimum backflow protection for all nonresidential water service lines. The backflow assembly shall be installed as close to the right-of-way as is practical. Backflow prevention assemblies are required on domestic services two inches and smaller if the building’s highest point of water use is greater than 32 feet above the water main, or if a known hazard exists on the premises of the service connection. The type of backflow prevention assembly required will be determined by the Public Works Director or his designee.

(C) Failure to comply with installation, inspection, testing and maintenance requirements for backflow prevention assembly may result in terminating of the water service.

(D) Before any assembly for the prevention of backflow or backsiphonage is installed, it shall be certified by a recognized testing laboratory acceptable to the Oregon State Health Division Director. Assemblies installed in a building potable water supply distribution system for protection against backflow shall be maintained in good working condition by the person or persons responsible for the maintenance of the system. The Public Works Superintendent or his designee may inspect such assemblies and require the replacement of any that are found to be defective or inoperative.

(E) Building premises owners shall maintain all backflow prevention assemblies and vacuum breakers within the building or on the premises in good working order and make no piping or other arrangements for the purpose of bypassing backflow prevention assemblies.

(F) All approved backflow assemblies must be tested by a certified tester when installed, and prior to use when moved, when repaired and at least annually. All costs for testing and repair of backflow assemblies shall be the responsibility of the owner or agent.

(’91 Code, § 3-4) (Ord. 1153, passed 6-10-08)


52.020 IRRIGATION.

(A) Between April 15 and October 15 of each year, users of city water for irrigation shall comply with the following restrictions:

(1) Irrigation shall be permitted before 10:00 a.m. and after 4:00 p.m. but shall be prohibited in the hours between.

(2) Irrigation shall be permitted following an odd/even irrigation schedule. Even house numbers may water on even-numbered dates of the month and odd house numbers may water on odd-numbered dates of the month. No watering is allowed on the thirty-first day of the month.

(B) The City Manager may restrict all use of city water for irrigation purposes upon any emergency situation.

(Ord. 1153, passed 6-10-08)


52.021 SUSPENSION OF RULES.

No employee of the Water Department is authorized to suspend or alter any of the policies, rules and regulations cited herein without specific approval or direction of the City Council, except in cases of emergency involving loss of life or property or which would place the water system operation in jeopardy.

(’91 Code, § 3-3.20) (Ord. 1153, passed 6-10-08)


52.022 EASEMENT.

Each applicant and user gives and grants the City of Prineville an easement and right-of-way on and across his property for the installation of water mains and the necessary valves and equipment in connection therewith.

(’91 Code, § 3-3.21) (Ord. 1153, passed 6-10-08)


52.045 CRITICALLY AFFECTED AREA.

(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:

CRITICALLY AFFECTED AREA. The geographic area bounded by Dunham Street on the east, Harwood Street on the west, West 1st Street on the south and West 5th Street on the north. This area is demonstrated on a map, which is attached hereto and by this reference is made a part hereof.

PREMISES. The integral property or area, including improvements thereon, to which water service is or will be provided.

(B) Connection required. All existing commercial and residential establishments, homes, buildings, lots or premises concurrently located within the boundaries of the critically affected area, which utilize water for purposes other than agriculture or irrigation, shall connect to and utilize the city water system as city water becomes available to the property. All future development within the critically affected area shall be required to connect to the city system, even if water service is not currently near the property.

(C) Disconnection of private supply. Property owners in the critically affected area shall disconnect, to the satisfaction of the city or its agent, all private water supply connections at their premises except those used exclusively for agriculture and/or irrigation. Property owners shall demonstrate disconnection of these private supplies prior to connecting to the city system.

(D) Use of city and private water. As required by § 52.019, use of both city water supply and a supply of water other than that furnished by the city requires installation of approved backflow prevention devices on the service connection to the premises. Customers desiring to use both the city water supply and a supply of water other than that furnished by the city within the critically affected area shall under no circumstances allow a physical connection, direct or indirect, to exist or be made in manner, even temporarily, between water lines carrying city water and any non-city water source. Where such connection is found to exist, or where provision is made to connect the two systems, the city shall shut water off to the premises without notice. In case of such discontinuance, service shall not be re-established until satisfactory proof is furnished that the cross connection has been completely and permanently severed.

(E) Penalties. A violation of any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a fine of not more than $500. A violation of this section shall be considered a separate offense for each day the violation continues.

(Ord. 1140, passed 12-12-06)


52.999 PENALTIES.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.

(’91 Code, § 3-3.19) (Ord. 1153, passed 6-10-08)


CHAPTER 53: WASTEWATER

Section

Pretreatment

53.105    Purpose and policy

53.110    Administration

53.115    Definitions

53.120    Abbreviations

53.125    Prohibited discharges

53.130    Federal categorical pretreatment standards

53.135    State requirements

53.140    Local limits

53.145    Right of revision

53.150    Special agreement

53.155    Dilution

53.160    Pretreatment facilities

53.165    Compliance deadline

53.170    Additional pretreatment measures

53.175    Slug control plan

53.180    Septic tank wastes

53.185    Permits

Discharge Permits

53.205    Existing SIU

53.210    New sources and new users

53.215    Application contents

53.220    Signatory and certification requirement

53.225    Wastewater discharge authorization

53.230    Wastewater discharge permit decisions

53.235    Wastewater discharge permit contents

53.240    Appeals

53.245    Duration

53.250    Modification

53.255    Transfer

53.260    Revocation

53.265    Reissuance

Reporting Requirements

53.305    Baseline monitoring reports

53.310    Final compliance report

53.315    Periodic compliance report

53.320    Pretreatment standards compliance schedules

53.325    Notification of significant  production changes

53.330    Hazardous waste notification

53.335    Notice of potential problems

53.340    Noncompliance reporting

53.345    Notification of changed discharge

53.350    Reports from unpermitted users

53.355    Recordkeeping

53.360    Annual certification

Sampling and Analytical Requirements

53.405    General requirements

53.410    Sampling

53.415    Analytical requirements

53.420    City monitoring

Compliance Monitoring

53.505    Inspection and sampling

53.510    Monitoring facilities

53.515    Search warrants

53.520    Vandalism

53.525    Confidential information

53.530    Users in significant noncompliance

Enforcement

53.605    Notice of violation

53.610    Consent orders

53.615    Show cause hearing

53.620    Compliance orders

53.625    Cease and desist orders

53.630    Emergency suspensions

53.635    Termination of discharge permit (nonemergency)

53.640    Administrative penalties

53.645    Injunctive relief

53.650    Judicially imposed civil penalties

53.655    Criminal prosecution

53.660    Remedies nonexclusive

53.665    Performance bonds

53.670    Liability insurance

53.675    Water supply discontinuance

53.680    Administrative review of permit

53.685    Public nuisances

53.690    Informants

53.695    Contractor listing

53.700    Affirmative defense of upset

53.705    Affirmative defense - Lack of knowledge

53.710    Affirmative defense - Bypass

FEES

53.805    Fees

PRETREATMENT


53.105 PURPOSE AND POLICY.

(A) Chapter 53 regulates discharges into the city’s sewage system to protect the functioning of the system, including the treatment plant, and to comply with applicable regulations. The objectives of these chapters are:

(1) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the system that will interfere with the operation of the treatment plant;

(2) To prevent the introduction of pollutants that cannot be adequately treated before discharge from the treatment plant or that are otherwise incompatible with the treatment plant;

(3) To ensure that the quality of the treatment plant sludge is maintained at a level that allows its use and disposal in compliance with applicable statutes and regulations;

(4) To protect city personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and to protect the general public; and

(5) To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and biosolids from the treatment plant.

(B) This title shall apply to all who discharge into the city sewage system. This chapter authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; authorizes monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees to recover the city’s costs.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.10.005, passed 6-12-18)


53.110 ADMINISTRATION.

Except as otherwise provided, the Public Works Director shall administer, implement and enforce this title. The Public Works Director may delegate authority and responsibilities granted by this title.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.10.010, passed 6-12-18)


53.115 DEFINITIONS.

The following definitions apply to Chapter 53:

ACT means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq.

APPLICABLE PRETREATMENT STANDARDS means, for any specified pollutant, city prohibitive standards, city specific pretreatment standards (local limits), State of Oregon pretreatment standards, or EPA’s categorical pretreatment standards (when effective), whichever standard is appropriate or most stringent.

AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER means:

(1) By a responsible corporate officer, if the industrial user submitting the reports required by this chapter is a corporation for the purpose of this subsection, a responsible corporate officer means:

(a) A president, secretary, treasurer, or vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or

(b) The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities, provided, the manager is authorized to make management decisions which govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for control mechanism requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.

(2) If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectfully.

(3) If the user is a federal, state, or local government facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or his/her designee.

(4) The individuals described in subsections (1) through (3) of this definition may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the city.

BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE(S) (BMPS) means a schedule of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to comply with this chapter. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.

BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five days at 20 degrees Celsius, usually expressed as a concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/l)).

BIO-SOLIDS means solid or semisolid material obtained from treated wastewater, often used as fertilizer.

CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL STANDARD means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the U.S. EPA that apply to a specific category of users. The standards are listed in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471.

CATEGORICAL USER means a user regulated by one of EPA’s categorical pretreatment standards.

CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND means a test to measure the amount of oxygen consumed where the oxygen is derived from chemicals.

COMPOSITE SAMPLE means the sample resulting from the combination of individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an increment of either flow or time.

COOLING WATER/NONCONTACT COOLING WATER means water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. Cooling water may be generated from any use, such as air conditioning, heat exchanges, cooling or refrigeration to which the only pollutant added is heat.

DEQ means the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality.

DISCHARGE, including INDIRECT DISCHARGE, means any liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, that are discharged into the city sewage system and ultimately to the treatment plant.

DOMESTIC USER (RESIDENTIAL USER) means any person discharging wastewater into the city sewage system similar in volume and/or chemical make-up to the discharge of a residential dwelling unit. Discharges from a residential dwelling unit typically include up to 80 gallons per capita per day, 0.2 pounds of BOD per capita per day, and 0.17 pounds of TSS per capita per day.

EPA means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, including its authorized officials.

EXISTING SOURCE means a wastewater discharge source that was in operation or began construction before the EPA’s publication of proposed categorical pretreatment standards applicable to the source if and when the standard is promulgated.

EXISTING USER means any noncategorical user that was discharging wastewater prior to the effective date of the city’s pretreatment regulations.

GRAB SAMPLE means a sample taken from a wastestream on a one-time basis without regard to the flow in the wastestream and without consideration of time.

INTERFERENCE means:

(1) Inhibition or disruption of the city sewage system, including treatment processes or operations;

(2) Inhibition or disruption of sludge processes, use or disposal; or

(3) Causation of a violation of the city’s WPCF permit or of the prevention of biosolids use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued under those provisions (or more stringent state or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), including Title II, commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act. Interference is normally caused by discharge.

MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMIT means the maximum concentration or mass loading of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.

MEDICAL WASTES means isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes.

NAICS CODES means North American Industry Classification System codes.

NEW SOURCE means:

(1) Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed categorical pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if the standards are then promulgated; provided, that:

(a) The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or

(b) The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or

(c) The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered.

(2) Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment.

(3) Construction of a new source as defined under this subsection has commenced if the owner or operator has:

(a) Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction program:

1. Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities, or equipment; or

2. Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or

(b) Entered into a building contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies, do not constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection.

NEW USER means a user that is not regulated under federal categorical pretreatment standards but that applies to the city for a new building permit or occupies an existing building and plans to commence discharge of wastewater to the city’s collection system after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title. Any person that buys an existing facility that is discharging nondomestic wastewater will be considered an existing user if no significant changes are made in the manufacturing operation.

PASS THROUGH means a discharge that exits the treatment plant into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations that, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of the city’s WPCF permit. This includes an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation.

PERMITTEE means a person or user issued a wastewater discharge permit by the city.

PERSON means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, or local governmental entities.

pH means a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed in standard units.

POLLUTANT means any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, agricultural and industrial wastes, and the characteristics of the wastewater (i.e., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, chemical oxygen demand (COD), toxicity, or odor).

PRETREATMENT means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to (or in lieu of) introducing such pollutants into the city sewage system. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means (except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard).

PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENT means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard.

PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or STANDARDS means prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits established by the city.

PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED DISCHARGES means absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances imposed by this chapter.

PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS or POTW means a treatment works, as defined by section 212 of the Act (33 USC § 1292), which is owned by the city. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances, which convey wastewater to a treatment plant.

SEPTIC TANK WASTE means any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks, trucked waste and waste tanks.

SEWAGE means human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.).

SEWAGE SYSTEM means the entire system used by the city to collect, transport, treat, and discharge treated effluent, including all sewers and treatment plants.

SEWER means any pipe, conduit ditch, or other device used to collect and transport sewage from the generating source.

SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER means:

(1) A user subject to the categorical pretreatment standards; or a user that:

(a) Discharges an average of 25,000 GPD or more of process wastewater to the city sewage system (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater); or

(b) Contributes to a process wastestream which makes up 5% or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the treatment plant; or

(c) Is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the treatment plant’s operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.

(2) A significant industrial user is an industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N.

(3) Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (1)(a) of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s operation or for violating any applicable pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user and in accordance with procedures established pursaunt to 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user.

SLUDGE means semisolid material such as the type precipitated by sewage treatment.

SLUG CONTROL PLAN (40 CFR 403.8(B)(6)(iv)) means requirements to control slug discharges, which include development of a compliance schedule for installation of technology required to meet pretreatment standards and submission of all notices and reports.

SLUG LOAD means any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the discharge standards in this code or any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge.

STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) CODE means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the United States Office of Management and Budget.

STORMWATER means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowfall.

TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS or TSS means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering.

TREATMENT PLANT means a “treatment works,” as defined by the Act, that is owned by the city.

TREATMENT PLANT EFFLUENT means liquid discharge from the treatment plant.

USER or INDUSTRIAL USER means a source of a direct or indirect discharge to the sewage system other than a domestic user.

WASTEWATER means liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are discharged to the sewage system and treated by the treatment plant.

WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT means an authorization or equivalent control mechanism issued by the city to users discharging wastewater to the sewage system. The permit or control mechanism may contain appropriate pretreatment standards and requirements.

WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or TREATMENT PLANT means the facility that treats municipal sewage and industrial waste.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.10.015, passed 6-12-18)


53.120 ABBREVIATIONS.

The following lists the meanings of abbreviations used in Chapter 53:

BOD means biochemical oxygen demand.

CFR means Code of Federal Regulations.

COD means chemical oxygen demand.

DEQ means Department of Environmental Quality.

EPA means U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.

GPD means gallons per day.

l means liter.

LEL means lower explosive limit.

mg means milligrams.

mg/l means milligrams per liter.

NPDES means National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.

O&M means operation and maintenance.

PCC means Prineville City Code.

POTW means publicly owned treatment works.

RCRA means Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.

SIC means standard industrial classifications.

Slug control plan means requirement to control slug discharges.

SWDA means Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 USC 6901 et seq.).

TSS means total suspended solids.

USC means United States Code.

WPCF means water pollution control facility.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.10.010, passed 6-12-18)


53.125 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.

(A) General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the sewage system any pollutant or wastewater that causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements.

(B) Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the sewage system the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:

(1) Pollutants that create a fire or explosive hazard, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flash point of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.

(2) Wastewater having a pH less than 6.0 or more than 10.0, or that otherwise will cause corrosive structural damage to the sewage system or equipment.

(3) Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in or to the sewage system resulting in interference (but in no case solids greater than one-half inch or one and one-quarter centimeters in any dimension).

(4) Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, COD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration that, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the sewage system.

(5) Wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 77 degrees Fahrenheit (25 degrees Celsius) unless DEQ, upon the request of the city, approves alternate temperature limits not to exceed 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius).

(6) Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, products of mineral oil origin, or synthetic oils in the amounts that will cause interference or pass through.

(7) Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the sewage system in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems.

(8) Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the city.

(9) Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, is sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life or health, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair.

(10) Wastewater that imparts color that cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions that impart color to the treatment plant’s effluent. Color (in combination with turbidity) shall not cause the treatment plant effluent to reduce the depth of the compensation point for photosynthetic activity by more than 10% from the seasonably established norm for aquatic life.

(11) Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes.

(12) Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized in writing by the city.

(13) Any sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes or from industrial processes.

(14) Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the city.

(15) Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant’s effluent to fail a toxicity test.

(16) Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances that may cause excessive foaming in the sewage system.

(17) Any liquids, solids, or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are or may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other substances, to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the sewage system or to the operation of the sewage system. At no time shall two successive readings of an explosion meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the system), be more than 5% nor any single reading over 10% of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter.

(18) Grease, animal renderings or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dusts, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastics, gasoline, tar asphalt residues, petroleum products, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, glass grinding or polishing wastes.

(19) Any substance which will cause the city to violate its WPCF and/or other disposal or discharge permits or system permits.

(20) Any wastewater, which in the opinion of the city can cause harm either to the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment; have an adverse effect on the groundwater or receiving waters; or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance.

(21) The contents of any tank or other vessel owned or used in the business of collecting or pumping sewage, effluent, septic tank waste, or other wastewater unless the operator has obtained testing and approval by the city and paid all fees assessed for the privilege of the discharge.

(22) Any hazardous wastes as defined in state regulations or in 40 CFR Part 261.

(23) Persistent pesticides and/or pesticides regulated by the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA).

(24) Sewage sludge, except in accordance with the city’s WPCF permit.

Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this chapter shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that it could be discharged to the sewage system.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.10.025, passed 6-12-18)


53.130 FEDERAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.

The national categorical pretreatment standards promulgated by EPA and found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471 are incorporated into and are enforceable under this title. When a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of pollutant concentrations, an industrial user may request that the city convert the limits to equivalent mass limits. The determination to convert concentration limits to mass limits is within the discretion of the city.

(A) The city may establish equivalent mass limits only if the industrial user meets all the following criteria:

(1) The industrial user employs or demonstrates that it will employ water conservation methods and technologies that substantially reduce water use during the term of its individual wastewater discharge permit.

(2) The industrial user uses control and treatment technologies adequate to achieve compliance with the applicable categorical pretreatment standard, without using dilution as a substitute for treatment.

(3) Sufficient information is provided to establish the facility’s actual average daily flow rate for all wastestreams based on data from a continuous effluent flow monitoring device, as well as the facility’s long-term average production rate. Both the actual average daily flow rate and the long-term average production rate must be representative of current operating conditions.

(4) Not have daily flow rates, production levels, or pollutant levels that vary so significantly that equivalent mass limits are not appropriate to control the discharge.

(5) Consistent compliance with all applicable categorical pretreatment standards during the period prior to the industrial user’s request for equivalent mass limits.

(B) An industrial user subject to equivalent mass limits must:

(1) Maintain and effectively operate control and treatment technologies adequate to achieve compliance with the equivalent mass limits;

(2) Continue to record the facility’s flow rates through the use of a continuous effluent flow monitoring device;

(3) Continue to record the facility’s production rates and notify the city whenever production rates are expected to vary by more than 20% from its baseline production rates. Upon notification of a revised production rate, the city will reassess the equivalent mass limit as necessary to reflect changed conditions at the facility; and

(4) Continue to employ the same or comparable water conservation methods and technologies as those implemented under this section so long as they discharge under an equivalent mass limit.

(C) Where the city chooses to establish equivalent mass limits, it will:

(1) Calculate the equivalent mass limit by multiplying the actual average daily flow rate of the regulated process(es) of the industrial user by the concentration-based daily maximum and monthly average standard for the applicable categorical pretreatment standard and the appropriate unit conversion factor;

(2) When notified of a revised production rate, reassess the equivalent mass limit and recalculate the limit as necessary to reflect changed conditions at the facility; and

(3) Retain the same equivalent mass limit in subsequent control mechanism terms if the industrial user’s actual average daily flow rate was reduced solely as a result of the implementation of water concentration methods and technologies, and the actual average daily flow rates used in the original calculation of the equivalent mass limit were not based on the use of dilution as a substitute for treatment pursuant to 40 CFR 403.6(d) and this title. The industrial user must also be in compliance with 40 CFR 403.17 (regarding the prohibition of bypass).

(Ord. 1240 § 53.10.030, passed 6-12-18)


53.135 STATE REQUIREMENTS.

State requirements and limitations on discharges to the sewage system shall be met by all users which are subject to the standards if they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or this title.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.10.035, passed 6-12-18)


53.140 LOCAL LIMITS.

In addition to categorical pretreatment standards, no significant industrial user (SIU) shall discharge wastewater containing pollutants into the system in excess of limitations specified in its wastewater discharge permit or any other limits established by the city. The city may establish and revise from time to time standards for specified restricted substances. These standards shall be developed in accordance with 40 CFR 403.5 and shall implement the objectives of this title. These standards, including best management practices (BMPs), are only applicable to significant industrial users. Standards established in accordance with this title will be deemed pretreatment standards for the purposes of Section 307(d) of the Clean Water Act. Wherever a discharger is subject to both categorical pretreatment standards and a local limit for a given pollutant, the more stringent limit or applicable pretreatment standard shall apply. The city may also develop best management practices (BMPs) to implement permit specific and local limits for industrial users. BMPs shall be considered local limits and pretreatment standards. The city may impose mass limitations in addition to (or in place of) concentration-based limitations.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.10.040, passed 6-12-18)


53.145 RIGHT OF REVISION.

The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance, resolution or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the sewage system.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.10.045, passed 6-12-18)


53.150 SPECIAL AGREEMENT.

The city may enter into special agreements with users setting out special terms under which they may discharge to the sewage system. Users may request a net/gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.30. They may also request a variance from the categorical pretreatment standard from DEQ in accordance with 40 CFR 403.13. In no case will a special agreement waive compliance with a categorical pretreatment standard, federal pretreatment requirement, or this title.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.10.050, passed 6-12-18)


53.155 DILUTION.

No user may increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The city may impose mass limitations on users that may be using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.10.055, passed 6-12-18)


53.160 PRETREATMENT FACILITIES.

Users shall provide wastewater treatment to comply with Chapter 53 and shall achieve compliance within the time limitations specified by the EPA, the state, or the city, whichever is most stringent. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the city shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user’s expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city for review and construction shall not proceed until the plans are approved in writing by the city. The review of the plans and operating procedures does not relieve the users from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce a discharge that complies with Chapter 53.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.10.060, passed 6-12-18)


53.165 COMPLIANCE DEADLINE.

Compliance by existing sources covered by categorical pretreatment standards shall be within three years of the date the standard is effective unless a shorter compliance time is specified in the appropriate standard. The city shall establish a final compliance deadline date for any existing user not covered by categorical pretreatment standards or for any categorical user when the local limits for said user are more restrictive than the federal categorical pretreatment standards.

New sources and new users are required to comply with applicable pretreatment standards within the shortest feasible time, not to exceed 90 days from the beginning of discharge. New sources and new users shall install, have in operating condition, and shall start up all pollution control equipment required to meet applicable pretreatment standards before beginning to discharge.

Any wastewater discharge permit issued to a categorical user shall not contain a compliance date beyond any deadline date established in EPA’s categorical pretreatment standards. Any other existing user or a categorical user that must comply with a more stringent local limit who is in noncompliance with any local limits shall be provided with a compliance schedule placed in an industrial wastewater permit to ensure compliance within the shortest time feasible.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.10.065, passed 6-12-18)


53.170 ADDITIONAL PRETREATMENT MEASURES.

(A) The Director of Public Works may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the sewage system and determine the user’s compliance with the requirements of this title.

(B) Each user discharging into the sewage system more than 25,000 gallons per day or more than 5% of the average daily flow into the sewage system, whichever is less, shall install and maintain, on its property and at its expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow over a 24-hour period. The facility shall have a capacity for at least 50% of daily discharge volume and shall be equipped with alarms and a rate of discharge controller and shall be regulated as directed by the city. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.

(C) Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand, except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be installed in conformance with the most recent revision of the Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code, the rules adopted thereunder, and any statute or rule of general applicability administered by the State of Oregon Building Codes Division. All interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the city and shall be located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at its expense. All records for inspection, cleaning and repair must be maintained and readily available for review by city staff. Records should include third party cleaning manifests.

(D) Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.10.070, passed 6-12-18)


53.175 SLUG CONTROL PLAN.

(A) General provisions. All users shall provide protection from accidental or intentional discharges of materials that may interfere with or cause pass through to the sewage system by developing and implementing a slug control plan. Facilities necessary to prevent the discharge of prohibited or restricted substances shall be provided and maintained at the user’s cost and expense. A plan showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the city for review and approval before implementation of the plan. Review and approval of the plans and operating procedures by the city does not relieve the user from the responsibility to modify its facility as necessary to meet the requirements of Chapter 53. The plan shall be posted and available for inspection at the facility during normal business hours. SIUs must notify the city immediately of any changes at their facilities, not already addressed in their slug control plan or other slug control requirements, that may affect the potential for slug discharge.

(B) Specific provisions. The city may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement a slug control plan. The need and requirement for a plan shall be included in the user’s wastewater discharge permit.

(C) A slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following:

(1) Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges;

(2) Description of stored chemicals;

(3) Procedures for immediately notifying the city of any accidental or slug discharge; and

(4) Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response.

(D) Users shall notify the city immediately after the occurrence of a slug or accidental discharge of substance regulated by Chapter 53. The notification shall include location, date and time of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions. Any affected user shall be liable for any expense, loss, or damage incurred by the city, in addition to the amount of any penalties imposed on the city as a result of the discharge.

(E) Within five days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit to the city a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. The notification does not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability that may be incurred as a result of damage to the sewage system, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property. The notification does not relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liabilities that may be imposed by Chapter 53 or other applicable law.

(F) Signs shall be permanently posted in conspicuous places on the user’s premises advising employees whom to call in the event of a slug or accidental discharge. Employers shall instruct all employees who may cause or discover such a discharge with respect to emergency notification procedures.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.10.075, passed 6-12-18)


53.180 SEPTIC TANK WASTES.

(A) Septic tank waste may be introduced into the sewage system only at a designated receiving structure within the treatment plant area, and only at times designated by the city. Those wastes must comply with Chapter 53 and other requirements imposed by the city. Wastewater discharge licenses for individual vehicles to use the facilities shall be issued by DEQ. Licenses must be current, up to date, in good standing, and have obtained testing and approval by the city before discharge will be allowed.

(B) Septic tank waste haulers may only discharge loads at locations specifically designated by the city. The city may require the hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge.

(C) Septic tank waste haulers must provide a city waste-tracking form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the waste hauler, license number, truck identification, sources of waste, and volume and characters of waste.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.10.080, passed 6-12-18)


53.185 PERMITS.

(A) No significant industrial user (SIU) may discharge wastewater into the sewage system without first applying for and obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the city. Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit is a violation of this chapter. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of the obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards and requirements or with any requirements of federal, state, and local law.

(B) The city may require other users, including those delivering trucked waste, to obtain wastewater discharge permits to carry out the purposes of this title.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.10.085, passed 6-12-18)

DISCHARGE PERMITS


53.205 EXISTING SIU.

Any SIU that does not currently have a wastewater discharge permit must cease discharges until a wastewater discharge permit is obtained.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.20.010, passed 6-12-18)


53.210 NEW SOURCES AND NEW USERS.

Any new source and any new user that is an SIU must apply for a wastewater discharge permit at least 90 days before startup and may not discharge until its wastewater discharge permit is issued. New sources and new users must include in their application information on the method of pretreatment they intend to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.20.020, passed 6-12-18)


53.215 APPLICATION CONTENTS.

All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit, at a minimum, the following information. Submitting the following information complies with 40 CFR 403.12(b).

(A) Identifying information. The user shall submit the name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owners.

(B) Permits. The user shall submit a list of all environmental control permits held by or for the facility.

(C) Description of operations. The user shall submit a brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classification of the operation(s) carried out by the industrial user, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are or could accidentally or intentionally be discharged to the sewage system; number and type of employees; hours of operation; each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production; type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day) and the time and duration of discharges. This description should also include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the sewage system from the regulated or manufacturing processes; site plans; floor plans; mechanical and plumbing plans; and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, inspection manholes, sampling chambers and appurtenances by size, location and elevation.

(D) Flow measurement.

(1) Categorical User. The user shall submit information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the sewage system from each of the following:

(a) Regulated or manufacturing process streams; and

(b) Other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined wastestreams formula (40 CFR 403.6(e)).

(2) Noncategorical user. The user shall submit information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the sewage system from each of the following:

(a) Total process flow, wastewater treatment plant flow, total plant flow or individual manufacturing process flow as required by the Director of Public Works. The city may allow for verifiable estimates of these flows where justified by costs or feasibility considerations.

(E) Measurements of pollutants.

(1) Categorical user.

(a) The user shall identify the applicable pretreatment standards for each regulated or manufacturing process.

(b) In addition, the user shall submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration (or mass where required by the categorical pretreatment standard or as required by the city) of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated or manufacturing process. Both daily maximum and average concentration (or mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations. In cases where the standard required compliance with a best management practice or pollution prevention alternative, the user shall submit documentation as required by the city or the applicable standards to determine compliance with the standard. Sampling performed shall conform to sampling and analytical procedures required by Chapter 53.

(c) The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this subsection.

(d) Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e) for a categorical user, this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted as part of the application.

(2) Noncategorical significant industrial user (SIU).

(a) The user shall identify the applicable pretreatment standards for its wastewater discharge.

(b) In addition, the user shall submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration in the discharge (or mass where required by the city) of regulated pollutants, as appropriate. Both daily maximum and average concentration (or mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall conform to sampling and analytical procedures required by Chapter 53.

(c) The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this subsection.

(F) Certification. The user shall submit a statement that has been reviewed by an authorized representative of the user, and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether the applicable pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.

(G) Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the applicable pretreatment standards, the user shall submit the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The user’s schedule shall conform to the requirements of Chapter 53. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established by Chapter 53.

(1) Where the user’s categorical pretreatment standard has been modified by a removal allowance (CFR 403.7), the combined wastestream formula (40 CFR 403.6(e)), and/or a fundamentally different factors variance (40 CFR 403.13) at the time the user submits the report required by this subsection, the information required by this section shall pertain to the modified limits.

(2) If the categorical pretreatment standard is modified by a removal allowance (40 CFR 403.7), the combined wastestream formula (40 CFR 403.6(e)), and/or a fundamentally different factors variance (40 CFR 403.13) after the user submits the report required by this section, then a report containing the modified information shall be submitted by the user within 60 days after the new limit is approved.

(H) Submittal of information. The user shall submit any other information as may be deemed necessary by the city to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application. Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.20.030, passed 6-12-18)


53.220 SIGNATORY AND CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENT.

All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement:

I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.20.040, passed 6-12-18)


53.225 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE AUTHORIZATION.

The city may use alternate control mechanisms to control wastewater being discharged into the city’s sewage system. These control mechanisms may include best management practice (BMP).

(Ord. 1240 § 53.20.050, passed 6-12-18)


53.230 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DECISIONS.

The city will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within 60 days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the city will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The permit shall be issued within 60 days of full evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished if all requirements are complied with. The city may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit that does not meet the applicable standards or that lacks sufficient information.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.20.060, passed 6-12-18)


53.235 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT CONTENTS.

Wastewater discharge permits shall include conditions as to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant’s effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the sewage system.

(A) Wastewater discharge permits must contain the following conditions:

(1) A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration shall not exceed five years;

(2) A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to and approval from the city, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit;

(3) Effluent limits, including best management practices, based on applicable pretreatment standards and requirements, including any special state requirements;

(4) Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, submittal of technical reports, compliance schedules, and recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants, or best management practices, to be monitored (including the process for seeking a waiver for a pollutant neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge or a specific waived pollutant in the case of an individual control mechanism), sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law;

(5) The process for seeking a waiver from monitoring for a pollutant neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge in accordance with § 53.315;

(6) Requirement for immediate notification to the city where self-monitoring results indicate noncompliance;

(7) Requirement to report a bypass or upset of a pretreatment facility;

(8) Requirement to control slug discharges, if determined by the city to be necessary;

(9) Requirement to report immediately to the city all discharges, and facility changes, including slug loadings, that could cause problems to the sewage system;

(10) Requirement for the SIU who reports noncompliance to repeat the sampling and analysis and submit results to the city within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation;

(11) A statement of applicable civil, criminal, and administrative penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule.

(B) Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions:

(1) Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;

(2) Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works;

(3) Requirements for the development and implementation of spill/slug control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or routine discharges;

(4) Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewage system;

(5) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the sewage system;

(6) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment;

(7) A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit;

(8) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure compliance with this title, and state and federal laws, rules and regulations.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.20.070, passed 6-12-18)


53.240 APPEALS.

Any person, including the user, may petition the city to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit or the denial of a wastewater discharge permit within 30 days of its issuance or denial. A wastewater discharge permit or notice of denial of such permit shall contain notice of the petition for review procedures that a person may follow to obtain administrative review of the permit decision.

(A) Failure to submit a timely petition for review waives any right to an administrative appeal.

(B) A petition for review shall be in writing and served either in person or by certified mail to the city. In its petition, the appealing party must specify the name and address of the person filing the petition for review, the wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit.

(C) The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal.

(D) The city shall conduct a hearing to determine the merits of the petition. Prior to the hearing, the person conducting the hearing shall notify the petitioner of the time and place of the hearing, and that the petitioner will have the opportunity to present evidence and make statements in support of the appeal. The person conducting the hearing shall have the sole discretion to determine the amount of time allowed for the appeal hearing. The person conducting the hearing may rely on any relevant evidence provided by city staff or obtained by any other reasonable means. The decision on the hearing shall be in writing. If the city fails to make a determination on the petition within 30 days, the petition shall be deemed to be denied, and the permit denial or permit conditions appealed from shall be the final decision of the city.

(E) The decision on the petition for review is the final decision of the city. The final decision may only be challenged under the writ of review provisions of Oregon law.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.20.080, passed 6-12-18)


53.245 DURATION.

Wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five years, at the discretion of the city. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate its expiration date.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.20.090, passed 6-12-18)


53.250 MODIFICATION.

The city may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause including, but not limited to, the following:

(A) To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements;

(B) To address significant alterations or additions to the user’s operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance;

(C) A change in the sewage system that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;

(D) Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the sewage system, city personnel, or receiving waters;

(E) Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit;

(F) Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or any required report;

(G) Revision of categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;

(H) To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or

(I) To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to a new owner/operator.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.20.100, passed 6-12-18)


53.255 TRANSFER.

Wastewater discharge permits may be reassigned or transferred to a new owner and/or operator only if the permittee gives at least 90 days’ advance notice to the city and the city approves the transfer. The notice must include a written certification by the new owner and/or operator that:

(A) States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility’s operations and processes;

(B) States the date on which the transfer is to occur; and

(C) Assumes full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit beginning on the date of the transfer.

Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer.

Provided that the notice required above occurred and that there were no significant changes to the manufacturing operation or wastewater discharge, the new owner will be considered an existing user and will be covered by the existing limits and requirements in the previous owner’s permit.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.20.110, passed 6-12-18)


53.260 REVOCATION.

Wastewater discharge permits may be revoked for, but not limited to, the following reasons:

(A) Failure to notify the city of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge;

(B) Failure to provide prior notification to the city of changed conditions;

(C) Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application;

(D) Falsifying self-monitoring reports;

(E) Tampering with monitoring equipment;

(F) Refusing to allow the city timely access to the facility premises and records;

(G) Failure to meet discharge limitations;

(H) Failure to pay fines;

(I) Failure to pay sewer charges;

(J) Failure to meet compliance schedules;

(K) Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application;

(L) Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of a permitted facility;

(M) If the city has to invoke its emergency provision; or

(N) Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this title.

Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.20.120, passed 6-12-18)


53.265 REISSUANCE.

A user who is required to have a wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete wastewater discharge permit application at least 90 days prior to the expiration of the user’s existing wastewater discharge permit. A user whose existing wastewater discharge permit has expired and who has submitted its reapplication in the time period specified herein shall be deemed to have an effective wastewater discharge permit until the city issues or denies the new wastewater discharge permit. A user whose existing wastewater discharge permit has expired and who failed to timely submit its reapplication will be deemed to be discharging without a wastewater discharge permit.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.20.120, passed 6-12-18)

REPORTING REQUIREMENTS


53.305 BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS.

(A) Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the sewage system shall submit to the city a report which contains the information listed in subsection (B) of this section. At least 90 days prior to the commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the city a report that contains the information listed in subsection (B) of this section. A new source shall also be required to report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source shall also give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants discharged.

(B) Users described above shall submit the information set forth below.

(1) Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner.

(2) Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility.

(3) Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes.

(4) Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e).

(5) Measurement of pollutants.

(a) The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process.

(b) The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration (and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the city) of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations (or mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations. In cases where the standard required compliance with a best management practices or pollution prevention alternative, the user shall submit documentation as required by the control authority or the applicable pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the user.

(c) Sampling must be performed in accordance with the procedures required by Chapter 53. Samples should be taken immediately downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to the pretreatment, the user should measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined wastewater formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e) to evaluate compliance with the pretreatment standards. Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e), this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted to the city.

(6) Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user’s authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.

(7) Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be used. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements of Chapter 53.

(8) Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified as required by this chapter.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.30.010, passed 6-12-18)


53.310 FINAL COMPLIANCE REPORT.

(A) Within 90 days following the date for final compliance of an existing significant industrial user with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements set forth in this title, in federal categorical standards, or in a wastewater discharge permit, or, in the case of a new source or a new user considered by the city to fit the definition of SIU, within 90 days following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the sewage system, the affected user shall submit to the city a report containing the information outlined in § 53.305.

(B) For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established by the city in accordance with procedures established in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user’s long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user’s actual production during the appropriate sampling period.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.30.020, passed 6-12-18)


53.315 PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORT.

(A) Any user that is required to have an industrial waste discharge permit and performs self-monitoring shall submit to the city during the months of June and December, unless the city has determined that the self-monitoring may be reduced to report no less frequently than once a year, or unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the DEQ, a report indicating the nature of the effluent over the previous reporting period. The frequency of monitoring shall be as prescribed within the industrial waste discharge permit. A reporting form will be provided by the city. At a minimum, users shall sample their discharge at least twice per year, unless required less frequently as described above. In cases where a local limit requires compliance with a best management practice or pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit documentation required by the city to determine the compliance status of the user.

(B) Periodic compliance reports are to be postmarked or received by the city by, on, or before the fifteenth of the month following the conclusion of the reporting period.

(C) The report shall include a record of the concentrations (and mass if specified in the wastewater discharge permit) of the pollutants listed in the wastewater discharge permit that were measured and a record of all flow measurements (average and maximum) taken at the designated sampling locations and shall also include any additional information required by this title or the wastewater discharge permit. Production data shall be reported if required by the wastewater discharge permit. Both daily maximum and average concentration (or mass, where required) shall be reported. If a user sampled and analyzed more frequently than what was required by the city or by this title, using methodologies in 40 CFR Part 136, it must submit all results of sampling and analysis of the discharge during the reporting period. All laboratory reports providing data for organic and metal parameters shall include the following information: sampling date, sample location, date of analysis, parameter name, CAS number analytical method/number, method detection limit (MDL), laboratory practical quantitation limit (PQL), reporting units, and concentration detected. Analytical results from samples sent to a contracted laboratory must have information on the chain of custody, the analytical method, QA/QC results, and documentation of accreditation for the parameter.

(D) The city may authorize the industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard to forgo sampling of a pollutant regulated by a categorical pretreatment standard if the industrial user has demonstrated through sampling and other technical factors that the pollutant is neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge or is present only at background levels from intake waste and without any increase in the pollutant due to activities of the industrial user.

(E) Any user subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established by the city or by unit production limits specified in the applicable categorical standards shall report production data.

(F) If the city calculated limits to factor out dilution flows or nonregulated flows, the user will be responsible for providing flows from the regulated process flows, dilution flows and nonregulated flows.

(G) Flows shall be reported on the basis of actual measurement; provided, however, that the city may accept reports of average and maximum flows estimated by verifiable techniques if the city determines that an actual measurement is not feasible.

(H) Discharges sampled shall be representative of the user’s daily operations and samples shall be taken in accordance with this title. In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best management practice (or pollution prevention alternative), the user shall submit documentation required by the city or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the user.

(I) The city may require reporting by users that are not required to have an industrial wastewater discharge permit if information or data is needed to establish a sewer charge, determine the treatability of the effluent, or determine any other factor which is related to the operation and maintenance of the sewage system.

(J) The city may require self-monitoring by the user or, if requested by the user, may agree to perform the periodic compliance monitoring needed to prepare the periodic compliance report required under this section. If the city agrees to perform such periodic compliance monitoring, it may charge the user for such monitoring, based upon the costs incurred by the city for sampling and analyses. The user may be charged for the cost of resampling by the city in the event of a violation or violations. Any such charges shall be added to the normal sewer charge and shall be payable as part of the sewer bills. The city is under no obligation to perform periodic compliance monitoring for a user.

(K) Users that have approved monitoring waivers as to specific pollutants must certify on each report that there has been no increase in the specific pollutant in the wastestream due to activities of the user. The certification shall be in the following form:

Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing compliance with the Pretreatment Standard for 40 CFR ____ [specify applicable National Pretreatment Parts], I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief, there has been no increase in the level of ____ [list pollutant(s)] in the wastewaters due to the activities at the facility since the filing of the most recent report.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.30.030, passed 6-12-18)


53.320 PRETREATMENT STANDARDS COMPLIANCE SCHEDULES.

(A) The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc.).

(B) No increment referred to in subsection (A) of this section shall exceed nine months.

(C) Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the city including, at a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.30.040, passed 6-12-18)


53.325 NOTIFICATION OF SIGNIFICANT PRODUCTION CHANGES.

Any user operating under a wastewater discharge permit incorporating equivalent mass or concentration limits shall notify the city within two business days after the user has a reasonable basis to know that the production level will significantly change within the next calendar month.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.30.050, passed 6-12-18)


53.330 HAZARDOUS WASTE NOTIFICATION.

Any user discharging more than 15 kilograms of hazardous waste as defined in 40 CFR 261 (listed or characteristic wastes) in a calendar month or any facility discharging any amount of acutely hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e) is required to provide a one-time notification in writing to the city, to the EPA Region 10 Office of Waste and Chemicals Management Director, and to DEQ. Any existing user exempt from this notification shall comply with the requirements contained herein within 30 days of becoming aware of a discharge of 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes in a calendar month or any discharge of acutely hazardous wastes to the city sewage system. The notification shall include:

(A) The name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261;

(B) The EPA hazardous waste number; and

(C) The type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other).

(D) If an industrial user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the sewage system, the notification shall also contain the following information to the extent it is known or readily available to the industrial user:

(1) An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes;

(2) An estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestreams discharged during that calendar month; and

(3) An estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestreams expected to be discharged during the following 12 months.

These notification requirements do not apply to pollutants already reported under the self-monitoring requirements.

Whenever the EPA publishes final rules identifying additional hazardous wastes or new characteristics of hazardous waste, a user shall notify the city of the discharge of such a substance within 90 days of the effective date of the regulations.

In the case of any notification made under this subsection, an industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.30.060, passed 6-12-18)


53.335 NOTICE OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS.

A user shall notify the city immediately of all discharges and changes at the facility that could cause adverse impacts to the sewage system, including any slug loads. The notification shall include the concentration and volume and corrective action. Steps being taken to reduce any adverse impact should also be noted during the notification. Any user who discharges a slug load of pollutants shall be liable for any expense, loss, or damage to the sewage system, in addition to the amount of any fines imposed on the city under state or federal law.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.30.070, passed 6-12-18)


53.340 NONCOMPLIANCE REPORTING.

If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user shall notify the city within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling within five days and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the city within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation, except the user is not required to resample if:

(A) The city performs sampling at the user at the frequency of at least once per month; or

(B) The city performs sampling at the user between the time when the user performs its initial sampling and the time when the user receives the results of this sampling.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.30.080, passed 6-12-18)


53.345 NOTIFICATION OF CHANGED DISCHARGE.

All users shall promptly notify the city in advance of any substantial change in the volume or any change in character of pollutants in their discharge, including significant manufacturing process changes, pretreatment modifications, and the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the user has submitted initial notification under 40 CFR 403.12(p). Substantial change is defined to mean a change of 10% or more in discharge volume.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.30.090, passed 6-12-18)


53.350 REPORTS FROM UNPERMITTED USERS.

All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide reports when and if required in writing by the city.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.30.100, passed 6-12-18)


53.355 RECORDKEEPING.

Users subject to the reporting requirements of this title, including documentation associated with best management practices, shall retain and make available for inspection and copying all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least five years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the sewage system or where the user has been notified in writing of a longer retention period by the city.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.30.110, passed 6-12-18)


53.360 ANNUAL CERTIFICATION.

(A) A facility determined to be a nonsignificant categorial industrial user must annually submit the following certification statement. This certification must accompany an alternative report required by the city:

Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing compliance with the categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40 CFR ____, I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief that (a) during the period from __________, _____ to __________, _____ [months, days, year], the facility described as __________ [facility name] met the definition of a non-significant categorical Industrial User; (b) the facility complied with all applicable Pretreatment Standards and requirements during this reporting period; and (c) the facility never discharged more than 100 gallons of total categorical wastewater on any given day during this reporting period. This compliance certification is based upon information elsewhere in this document.

(B) A nondischarging categorical industrial user must annually submit the following certification statement.

Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing compliance with the categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40 CFR _____, I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief that during the period from __________, _____ to __________, _____ [months, days, year], (a) the facility described as __________ [facility name] met the definition of a non-discharging categorical Industrial User as described in PCC 53.115; (b) the facility complied with all applicable Pretreatment Standards and requirements during this reporting period; and (c) the facility never discharged categorical wastewater on any given day during this reporting period. This compliance certification is based upon information provided elsewhere in this document.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.30.120, passed 6-12-18)

SAMPLING AND ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS


53.405 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.

All sample preservation procedures, container materials, maximum allowable holding times and analytical techniques to be submitted as part of any application or report required by this chapter shall be performed in accordance with the procedures and techniques specified in 40 CFR Part 136. Alternatively, a contractor with the required protocols listed in an approved comprehensive quality assurance plan may sample and analyze according to the protocols specified in that document.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.40.010, passed 6-12-18)


53.410 SAMPLING.

(A) Sampling for baseline monitoring reports (BMR) and 90-day compliance reports must include a minimum of four grab samples for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist. The city may authorize a lower minimum for facilities with historical sampling data. The number of grab samples for periodic compliance reports shall be the number the city determines to be necessary to assess and assure compliance by industrial users with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.

The city will determine on a case-by-case basis whether the user will be able to composite the individual grab samples. Grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile organic compounds. For all other pollutants, 24-hour composite samples must be obtained through flow- or time-proportional composite sampling techniques, depending on circumstances. The city may waive flow-proportional composite sampling for any user that demonstrates that flow-proportional composite sampling is infeasible. Where time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the city, the samples must be representative of the discharge and the decision to allow the alternative sampling must be documented in the industrial user file for that facility or facilities. Using protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a 24-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: For cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by the city, as appropriate.

In those cases, samples may be obtained through time-proportional composite sampling techniques or through a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged.

(B) Samples shall be taken immediately downstream from any pretreatment facilities, immediately downstream from the regulated or manufactured process if no pretreatment exists, or at a location determined by the city and specified in the user’s wastewater discharge permit. For categorical users, if other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment, the user shall measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula of 40 CFR 403.6(e) in order to evaluate compliance with the applicable categorical pretreatment standards. For other SIUs, for which the city has adjudged its local limits to factor out dilution flows, the user shall measure the flows and concentrations necessary to evaluate compliance with the adjudged pretreatment standard(s). In cases where a local limit requires compliance with a best management practice or pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit documentation required by the city to determine the compliance status of the user.

(C) All sample results shall indicate the time, date and place of sampling and methods of analysis and shall certify that the wastestream sampled is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges from the user. If a user sampled and analyzed more frequently than required in its wastewater discharge permit using methodologies in 40 CFR Part 136, it must submit all results of sampling and analysis of the discharge as part of its self-monitoring report.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.40.020, passed 6-12-18)


53.415 ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS.

All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.40.030, passed 6-12-18)


53.420 CITY MONITORING.

The city will follow the procedures outlined in §§ 53.405 and 53.415 with sampling to monitor compliance.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.40.040, passed 6-12-18)

COMPLIANCE MONITORING


53.505 INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.

The city shall have the right to enter the facilities of any user to ascertain compliance with this title and any wastewater discharge permit or order. Users shall allow the city ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties.

(A) Where a user has security measures in force that require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, on presentation of suitable identification, city representatives will be permitted to enter without delay for the purpose of performing their responsibility under this title.

(B) The city shall have the right to set up or require to be set up monitoring and sampling devices on the user’s property to monitor compliance with this title.

(C) Any obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the city and shall not be replaced unless and until authorized in writing by the city. The user is responsible for the cost of clearing obstructions.

(D) Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to the user’s premises shall be a violation of this title.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.50.010, passed 6-12-18)


53.510 MONITORING FACILITIES.

Each user shall provide and operate at its own expense a monitoring facility (including installation of a wastewater sample port) to allow inspection, sampling, continuous monitoring and flow measurements of each sewer discharge to the city in all commercial/industrial areas. Each monitoring facility shall be situated on the user’s premises, except, where such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, the city may concur with the facility being constructed in the public street or sidewalk area, providing that the facility is located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. The city may require the construction and maintenance of sampling facilities at other locations (for example, at the end of a manufacturing line or a wastewater treatment system).

There shall be ample room in or near sampling facilities to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, including the sampling and measuring equipment, shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the user’s expense.

The city may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. All monitoring facilities shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with all applicable local construction standards and specifications.

All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.50.020, passed 6-12-18)


53.515 SEARCH WARRANTS.

If the city has been refused access to a building, structure or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this title, or that there is a need to inspect as part of a routine inspection program of the city designed to verify compliance with this title or any wastewater discharge permit or order, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the city may seek issuance of a search and/or seizure warrant from the Crook County Circuit Court. The warrant shall be served at reasonable hours by the city in the company of a uniformed city police officer.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.50.030, passed 6-12-18)


53.520 VANDALISM.

No person shall willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, tamper with, or prevent access to any structure, appurtenance or equipment, or other part of the sewage system.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.50.040, passed 6-12-18)


53.525 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.

Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from city inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a product that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, except when disclosure is required by the Oregon Public Records Law. Information shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES permit or pretreatment program and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other “effluent data” will not be recognized as confidential information.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.50.050, passed 6-12-18)


53.530 USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE.

The city shall publish annually, pursuant to 40 CFR 403.8(D)(viii), in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, a list of the industrial users that, during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. For the purposes of this provision, a significant industrial user or any industrial user which violates subsection (C), (D), or (G) of this section is in significant noncompliance if its violation meets one or more of the following criteria:

(A) Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66% or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numerical pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l);

(B) Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l), multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils, grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);

(C) Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l) (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the city believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of city personnel or the general public);

(D) Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the city’s exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;

(E) Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance;

(F) Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or

(G) Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of best management practices, which the city determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.50.060, passed 6-12-18)

ENFORCEMENT


53.605 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.

When the city finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of Chapter 53, a wastewater discharge permit or order, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, in addition to other remedies provided by this title, the city may serve that user with a written notice of violation via certified mail. Within five days of the receipt of the notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the city. Submission of the correction plan in no way relieves the user of liability of any violations occurring before or after receipt of that notice of violation. Nothing in this chapter shall limit the authority of the city to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.60.010, passed 6-12-18)


53.610 CONSENT ORDERS.

The city may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Those documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document.

The documents shall have the same force and effect as administrative orders issued under this chapter and shall be judicially enforceable. Use of a consent order shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.60.020, passed 6-12-18)


53.615 SHOW CAUSE HEARING.

The city may, in addition to other remedies, order a user that has violated or continues to violate any provision of this title, a wastewater discharge permit or order, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the city and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice shall include the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days before the hearing. The notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.60.030, passed 6-12-18)


53.620 COMPLIANCE ORDERS.

When the city finds that a user has violated or continued to violate any provision of Chapter 53, a wastewater discharge permit or order, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may, in addition to other remedies provided by this title, issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time specified in the order, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders may also contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.60.040, passed 6-12-18)


53.625 CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS.

When the city finds that a user has violated (or continues to violate) any provision of Chapter 53, a wastewater discharge permit or order, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user’s past violations are likely to recur, the city may, in addition to other remedies provided by this title, issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to:

(A) Immediately comply with all requirements; and

(B) Take appropriate remedial or preventive action needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.

Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.60.050, passed 6-12-18)


53.630 EMERGENCY SUSPENSIONS.

The city may immediately suspend a user’s discharge permit when suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge that reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the human health or welfare. The city may immediately suspend a user’s discharge permit after notice and opportunity to respond if the discharge threatens to interfere with the operation of the sewage system or may endanger the environment.

(A) Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge permit shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user’s failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city may take steps, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the sewage system or endangerment to any individuals. The city shall allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city that the period of endangerment has passed unless the termination proceedings of this title are initiated against the user.

(B) A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment, shall submit a detailed written statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence to the city prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing.

Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.60.060, passed 6-12-18)


53.635 TERMINATION OF DISCHARGE PERMIT (NONEMERGENCY).

Any user that violates the following conditions is subject to discharge permit termination:

(A) Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;

(B) Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge;

(C) Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge;

(D) Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling; or

(E) Violation of the pretreatment standards in this title.

The user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge permit and be offered an opportunity to show cause why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the city shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.60.070, passed 6-12-18)


53.640 ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES.

(A) When the city finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of Chapter 53, a wastewater discharge permit or order, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may assess a penalty against the user in an amount not to exceed $25,000 per violation per day.

The penalty may be assessed on a per violation, per day basis. In the case of monthly or other long-term average discharge limits, penalties shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation.

(B) Users desiring to dispute the penalty must file a written request for the city to reconsider the penalty along with full payment of the penalty amount within 30 days of being notified of the penalty. Where a request has merit, the Public Works Director shall convene a hearing on the matter within 60 days of receiving the request from the user. In the event the user’s appeal is successful, the payment, together with interest, shall be returned to the user. The city may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the penalty.

(C) Issuance of an administrative penalty shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.60.080, passed 6-12-18)


53.645 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.

When the city finds that a user has violated (or continues to violate) any provision of Chapter 53, a wastewater discharge permit, or order, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may petition the Circuit Court for Crook County through the City Attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, to restrain or compel the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this title on activities of the user. The city may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.60.090, passed 6-12-18)


53.650 JUDICIALLY IMPOSED CIVIL PENALTIES.

(A) Violation of any provision of Chapter 53, a wastewater discharge permit or order, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement is a civil infraction with a maximum civil penalty of $25,000 but no less than $1,000 per violation, for each day the violation persists. The violation shall be enforced through the civil infraction procedures of this code. In a proceeding under this section, the city shall not be required to prove that the user has acted intentionally, knowingly or willfully. The city shall be required to prove that the violation occurred, but the user’s mental state shall not be an element of proving the violation.

(B) The city may recover reasonable attorneys’ fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the costs of any actual damage incurred by the city, in addition to the civil penalty.

(C) In determining the amount of the civil penalty, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration, any economic benefit gained through the user’s violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires.

(D) Initiation of a civil infraction proceeding shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.60.100, passed 6-12-18)


53.655 CRIMINAL PROSECUTION.

(A) Intentional, willful or knowing violation of any provision of Chapter 53, a wastewater discharge permit or order, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement is a Class A misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $25,000 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than one year, or both.

(B) Intentional, willful or knowing introduction of any substance into the sewage system that causes personal injury or property damage is a Class A misdemeanor punishable by a maximum penalty of not more than $25,000 and/or one year in prison. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under state law. Nothing in this title precludes prosecution under other criminal statutes, including statutes pertaining to damage to public utilities or injury to property or persons.

(C) The knowing making of any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to Chapter 53, wastewater discharge permit or order, or falsification, tampering with, or knowingly rendering inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this title is a Class A misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $25,000 per violation per day, or imprisonment for not more than one year, or both.

(D) If the user is a corporation, the penalty provisions of ORS 161.655 shall be applicable. An employee, officer or agent of a corporation that commits a misdemeanor under this chapter may be prosecuted in that person’s individual capacity, and, upon conviction, be personally subject to the penalties provided under this section if the person committed the offense intentionally, knowingly or willfully, notwithstanding that the permit was issued in the name of a corporation.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.60.110, passed 6-12-18)


53.660 REMEDIES NONEXCLUSIVE.

The remedies provided by this chapter are not exclusive remedies. The city reserves the right to take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement in response to pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city’s enforcement response plan. However, the city reserves the right to take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the city is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. These actions may be taken concurrently.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.60.120, passed 6-12-18)


53.665 PERFORMANCE BONDS.

The city may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user that has failed to comply with any provision of this title, a wastewater discharge permit or order, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement unless the user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the city, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the city to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.60.130, passed 6-12-18)


53.670 LIABILITY INSURANCE.

The city may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user that has failed to comply with any provision of this title, a wastewater discharge permit or order, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained insurance or other financial assurances satisfactory to the city, sufficient to restore or repair damage to the sewage system that may be caused by its discharge.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.60.140, passed 6-12-18)


53.675 WATER SUPPLY DISCONTINUANCE.

The city may discontinue water service to a user for violation of any provision of this title, a wastewater discharge permit or order, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement. Service will only recommence at the user’s expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. The user shall be required to reimburse the city for expense incurred for disconnecting service. Any person, including the user, may petition the city to reconsider the terms of water supply severance within 30 days of termination or notice of termination.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.60.150, passed 6-12-18)


53.680 ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW OF PERMIT.

A wastewater discharge permit or notice of denial of the permit shall contain notice of the petition for review procedures that a person may follow to obtain administrative review of the permit decision.

(A) Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal.

(B) A petition for review shall be in writing and filed with the City Manager’s office. In the petition, the appealing party must specify the name and address of the person filing the petition for review, and the reasons for this objection.

(C) The City Manager shall conduct a hearing to determine the merits of the petition. Prior to the hearing, the person conducting the hearing shall notify the petitioner of the time and place of the hearing, and that the petitioner will have the opportunity to present evidence and make statements in support of the appeal. The person conducting the hearing shall have the sole discretion to determine the amount of time allowed for the appeal hearing. The person conducting the hearing may rely on any relevant evidence provided by the city staff or obtained by any other reasonable means. The decision on the hearing shall be in writing. If the city fails to make a determination on the petition within 30 days, the petition shall be deemed to be denied, and the permit denial or permit conditions appealed from shall be the final decision of the city.

(D) The decision on the petition for review is the final decision of the city. The final decision may only be challenged under the writ of review provisions of Oregon law.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.60.160, passed 6-12-18)


53.685 PUBLIC NUISANCES.

A violation of any provision of this title, a wastewater discharge permit, or order, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, is a public nuisance and may be corrected or abated as provided by this code.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.60.170, passed 6-12-18)


53.690 INFORMANTS.

The city may pay up to 100% of any collected fine or penalty imposed by any court, to a maximum amount of $1,000, to an informant, subject to reduction by the amount of any assessments required by state law.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.60.180, passed 6-12-18)


53.695 CONTRACTOR LISTING.

Users that have not achieved compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements are not eligible to enter into contracts for the sale of goods or services to the city. Existing contracts for the sale of goods or services to the city held by a user found to be in significant noncompliance with pretreatment standards or requirements may be terminated at the discretion of the city.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.60.190, passed 6-12-18)


53.700 AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE OF UPSET.

(A) For the purposes of this section, UPSET means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with the applicable pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation.

(B) An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought under this chapter for noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards if the requirements of subsection (C) of this section are met. The affirmative defense of upset shall not be applicable to enforcement actions under any provision of this title other than those provided in this chapter, although facts indicating that an upset occurred may be considered in determining the appropriate remedy under enforcement proceedings other than those provided in this chapter.

(C) A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence, that:

(1) An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset;

(2) The facility was at the time operating in a prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and

(3) The user has submitted the following information to the city within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset. If this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days.

(a) A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance;

(b) The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and

(c) Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.

(D) In any enforcement proceeding under this title, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.

(E) Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards under this title.

(F) Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with applicable pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of their treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.60.200, passed 6-12-18)


53.705 AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE - LACK OF KNOWLEDGE.

A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the prohibited discharge standards if it can provide that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either: (A) a local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or interference; or (B) no local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituent from the user’s prior discharge when the city was regularly in compliance with its WPCF permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.60.210, passed 6-12-18)


53.710 AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE - BYPASS.

(A) For the purposes of this section:

(1) BYPASS means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user’s treatment facility.

(2) SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. "Severe property damage" does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.

(B) A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause applicable pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of subsections (C) and (D) of this section.

(C) Notice of Bypass.

(1) If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the city at least ten days before the date of the bypass, if possible.

(2) A user shall submit oral notice to the city of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the bypass. The city may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours.

(D) Bypass conditions.

(1) Bypass is prohibited and the city may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass unless:

(a) Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage.

(b) There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and

(c) The user submitted notices as required under subsection (C) of this section.

(2) The city may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the city determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in subsection (D)(1) of this section.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.60.220, passed 6-12-18)

FEES


53.805 FEES.

All persons receiving sewer services shall pay the fees established by council resolution. Fees shall be set at an amount to cover the city’s costs relating to the service for which the fee is paid. Fees may include:

(A) Fees for wastewater services. The fees for wastewater services may include a component or additional charge based on the strength of the discharge;

(B) Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications, including the cost of processing such applications;

(C) Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including the cost of collecting and analyzing a user’s discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users;

(D) Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction;

(E) Fees for filing appeals; and

(F) Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements of this title. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this title and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable by the city.

(Ord. 1240 § 53.70.010, passed 6-12-18)


TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE

Chapter

70.    GENERAL PROVISIONS

71.    TRAFFIC RULES

72.    STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING

73.    BICYCLES


CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS

Section

General Provisions

70.01    Title

70.02    Adoption of state traffic laws

70.03    Definitions

Traffic Control Devices and Markings

70.15    Implementation of regulations

70.16    Public danger

70.17    Existing control devices

Administration

70.30    Powers of the Council

70.31    Standards

70.32    Emergencies

70.33    Impoundment

70.99    Penalty

GENERAL PROVISIONS


70.01 TITLE.

This title may be cited as the Prineville Uniform Traffic Ordinance.

(’91 Code, § 5-3.1) (Ord. 967, passed 3-12-91)


70.02 ADOPTION OF STATE TRAFFIC LAWS.

O.R.S. Ch. 153, and the Oregon Vehicle Code, O.R.S. Chs. 801 to 822, are adopted by reference. Violation of an adopted provision of those chapters is an offense against this city.

(’91 Code, § 5-3.2) (Ord. 967, passed 3-12-91)


70.03 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. The definitions are in addition to the definitions contained in the Oregon Vehicle Code.

BUS STOP. A space on the edge of a roadway designated by sign for use by buses to load or unload passengers.

LOADING ZONE. A space on the edge of a roadway designated by sign to load or unload passengers or materials during specified hours of specified days.

PERSON. A natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation.

STREET. The terms HIGHWAY, ROAD and STREET, as defined in state law, are synonymous, and include the entire width of the right-of-way.

TAXICAB STAND. A space on the edge of a roadway designated by sign for taxicab use.

TRAFFIC LANE. That area of the roadway used for the movement of a single line of traffic.

(’91 Code, § 5-3.3) (Ord. 967, passed 3-12-91)

TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES AND MARKINGS


70.15 IMPLEMENTATION OF REGULATIONS.

The Police Department, through its officers, shall implement the ordinances, resolutions and motions of the Council by installing, maintaining, removing and altering traffic control devices. The installation shall be based on the standards contained in the "Oregon Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways and the Oregon Supplements."

(’91 Code, § 5-3.5) (Ord. 967, passed 3-12-91)


70.16 PUBLIC DANGER.

Under conditions constituting a danger to the public, the Police Chief or his/her designee may install temporary traffic control devices.

(’91 Code, § 5-3.6) (Ord. 967, passed 3-12-91)


70.17 EXISTING CONTROL DEVICES.

Parking and traffic control devices and markings installed prior to the adoption of this chapter are lawfully authorized.

(’91 Code, § 5-3.71) (Ord. 967, passed 3-12-91)

ADMINISTRATION


70.30 POWERS OF THE COUNCIL.

(A) Subject to state laws, the City Council shall exercise all municipal traffic authority for the city except those powers specifically and expressly delegated by this title or another ordinance.

(B) The powers of the Council include, but are not limited to, the following.

(1) Designation of through streets.

(2) Designation of one-way streets.

(3) Designation of truck routes.

(4) Designation of parking meter zones.

(5) Designation of certain streets as bridle paths and prohibition of horses and animals on other streets.

(6) Authorization of greater maximum weights or lengths for vehicles using city streets than specified by state law.

(7) Initiation of proceedings to change speed zones.

(8) Revision of speed limits in parks.

(9) Temporary blocking or closing of streets.

(10) Establishment of bicycle lanes and paths and traffic controls for such facilities.

(11) Restriction of the use of certain streets by any class or kind of vehicle to protect the streets from damage.

(12) Issuance of oversize or overweight vehicle permits.

(13) Establishment, removal or alteration of the following classes of traffic controls.

(a) Crosswalks, safety zones and traffic lanes.

(b) Intersection channelization and areas where drivers of vehicles shall not make right, left or U-turns, and the time when the prohibition applies.

(c) Parking areas and time limitations, including the form of permissible parking (for example, parallel or diagonal).

(d) Loading zones and stops for vehicles.

(e) Traffic control signals.

(’91 Code, § 5-3.4) (Ord. 967, passed 3-12-91)


70.31 STANDARDS.

The regulations shall be based on the following.

(A) Traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations.

(B) Standards, limitations and rules promulgated by the Oregon Transportation Commission.

(C) Other recognized traffic control standards.

(’91 Code, § 5-3.7) (Ord. 967, passed 3-12-91)


70.32 EMERGENCIES.

In the event of a fire or other public emergency, officers of the Police and Fire Departments may direct traffic as conditions require, notwithstanding the provisions of this title.

(’91 Code, § 5-3.8) (Ord. 967, passed 3-12-91)


70.33 IMPOUNDMENT.

(A) When a vehicle is placed in a manner or location that constitutes an obstruction to traffic or a hazard to public safety, a police officer shall order the owner or operator of the vehicle to remove it. If the vehicle is unattended, the officer may cause the vehicle to be towed and stored at the owner’s expense. The owner shall be liable for the costs of towing and storing, even if the vehicle was parked by another or if the vehicle was initially parked in a safe manner but subsequently became an obstruction or hazard.

(B) The disposition of a vehicle towed and stored under authority of this section shall be in accordance with the procedures of state law relating to impoundment and disposition of abandoned vehicles.

(C) The impoundment of a vehicle will not preclude the issuance of a citation for violation of a provision of this title.

(D) Stolen vehicles may be towed from public or private property and stored at the expense of the vehicle owner.

(E) Whenever a police officer observes a vehicle parked in violation of a provision of this title or state law, if the vehicle has five or more unpaid violations outstanding against it, the officer may, in addition to issuing a citation, cause the vehicle to be impounded. An impounded vehicle shall not be released until all outstanding fines and charges have been paid. Vehicles impounded under authority of this division (E) shall be disposed of in the same manner as provided in division (B) of this section.

(’91 Code, § 5-3.66) (Ord. 967, passed 3-12-91)


70.99 PENALTY.

Any person violating any provision of this code for which no other specific penalty is provided shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in § 10.99.


CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC RULES

Section

Regulations

71.01    Unlawful riding

71.02    Roller skates, sleds and the like

71.03    Damaging sidewalks and curbs

71.04    Removing glass and debris

71.05    Obstructing streets

71.06    Noise

71.07    Funeral procession

71.08    Avoiding a traffic control device

Pedestrians

71.20    Use of sidewalks

71.21    Right angles

Parades

71.35    Permit required

71.36    Permit application

71.37    Permit approval

71.38    Permit application appeals

71.39    Permit revocation

71.40    Offenses against parade

REGULATIONS


71.01 UNLAWFUL RIDING.

(A) No operator of a motor vehicle shall permit a passenger to, and no passenger shall, ride on a vehicle on a street except on a portion of the vehicle designed or intended for the use of passengers. This provision does not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty or to a person riding within a truck body in space intended for merchandise.

(B) No person shall board or alight from a motor vehicle while the vehicle is in motion on a street.

(’91 Code, § 5-3.12) (Ord. 967, passed 3-12-91) Penalty, see § 70.99

Cross reference:

Taxicabs; passengers, see § 112.33


71.02 ROLLERS SKATES, SLEDS AND THE LIKE.

(A) (1) No person upon roller skates, skate-boards, roller blades (in-line skates) or riding in or by means of a coaster, toy vehicle or similar device shall use the streets or sidewalks within the city in a manner that endangers or would be likely to endanger any person or property.

(2) Any person who violates this section shall be fined as set forth in § 70.99. As an additional penalty, the Court may order that the violator’s roller skates, skate board, in-line skates, coaster, toy vehicle or similar device used in the violation of this section be held by the City Police Department for a period not to exceed 90 days.

(’91 Code, § 5-3.13(1))

(B) No person shall use the streets for traveling on skies, toboggans, sleds or similar devices, except where authorized. (’91 Code, § 5-3.13(2))

(Ord. 967, passed 3-12-91; Am. Ord. 1019, passed 3-14-95) Penalty, see § 70.99


71.03 DAMAGING SIDEWALKS AND CURBS.

(A) The operator of a motor vehicle shall not drive on a sidewalk or roadside planting strip except to cross at an authorized permanent or temporary driveway.

(B) No unauthorized person shall place dirt, wood or other material in the gutter or space next to the curb of a street with the intention of using it as a driveway.

(C) No person shall remove a portion of a curb or move a motor vehicle or a device moved by a motor vehicle onto a curb or sidewalk without first obtaining authorization from the city and posting bond if required. A person who causes damage shall be responsible for the cost of repair.

(’91 Code, § 5-3.14) (Ord. 967, passed 3-12-91) Penalty, see § 70.99


71.04 REMOVING GLASS AND DEBRIS.

A party to a vehicle accident or a person causing broken glass or other debris to be on a street shall remove the glass or other debris from the street as soon as practicable.

(’91 Code, § 5-3.15) (Ord. 967, passed 3-12-91) Penalty, see § 70.99


71.05 OBSTRUCTING STREETS.

No person shall park or leave on a street, including an alley, parking strip, sidewalk or curb, a vehicle part, trailer, box, merchandise of any description or any other thing that impedes traffic or obstructs the view, except as allowed by this title or other ordinances of the city.

(’91 Code, § 5-3.16) (Ord. 967, passed 3-12-91) Penalty, see § 70.99


71.06 NOISE.

No person shall operate a motor vehicle in the city in a manner that creates or causes excessive noise. The operation of compression brakes, commonly known as "Jacob" brakes, in a manner that creates unnecessary noise is prohibited.

(’91 Code, § 5-3.17) (Ord. 967, passed 3-12-91) Penalty, see § 70.99


71.07 FUNERAL PROCESSION.

(A) (1) No permit is required for a funeral procession.

(2) A funeral procession shall proceed to the place of interment by the most direct route that is both legal and practical.

(3) The procession shall be accompanied by adequate escort vehicles for traffic control.

(4) All motor vehicles in the funeral procession shall be operated with their lights on.

(5) No person shall unreasonably interfere with a funeral procession.

(6) Each driver in the procession shall follow the vehicle ahead as closely as is practical and safe.

(’91 Code, § 5-3.56)

(B) No person shall operate a vehicle that is not part of a funeral procession between the vehicles comprising the procession. (’91 Code, § 5-3.57)

(Ord. 967, passed 3-12-91) Penalty, see § 70.99


71.08 AVOIDING A TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE.

(A) Definition. A TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE is any sign, signal, marking or device placed or erected for the purpose of guiding, directing, warning or regulating traffic.

(B) Violation. A person commits the offense of operator avoiding a traffic control device if any operator of a vehicle crosses private property to avoid a traffic control device.

(’91 Code, § 5-2) (Ord. 937, passed 6-27-89) Penalty, see § 70.99

PEDESTRIANS


71.20 USE OF SIDEWALKS.

Pedestrians shall not use a roadway for travel when abutting sidewalks are available.

(’91 Code, § 5-3.45) (Ord. 967, passed 3-12-91) Penalty, see § 70.99


71.21 RIGHT ANGLES.

No pedestrian shall cross a street other than by a route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb, unless crossing within a crosswalk.

(’91 Code, § 5-3.46) (Ord. 967, passed 3-12-91) Penalty, see § 70.99

PARADES


71.35 PERMIT REQUIRED.

No person shall organize or participate in a parade that may disrupt or interfere with traffic without obtaining a permit. A permit shall always be required of a procession of people using the public right-of-way and consisting of 100 or more persons or ten or more vehicles.

(’91 Code, § 5-3.50) (Ord. 967, passed 3-12-91) Penalty, see § 70.99

Cross reference:

Amusements, see Ch. 94


71.36 PERMIT APPLICATION.

(A) Application for parade permits shall be made to the City Manager at least seven days prior to the intended date of the parade, unless the time is waived by him/her.

(B) Applications shall include the following information.

(1) The name and address of the person responsible for the proposed parade.

(2) The date of the proposed parade.

(3) The desired route, including assembling points.

(4) The number of persons, vehicles and animals that will be participating in the parade.

(5) The proposed starting and ending time.

(C) The application shall be signed by the person designated as chairperson.

(’91 Code, § 5-3.51) (Ord. 967, passed 3-12-91)


71.37 PERMIT APPROVAL.

(A) The City Manager shall issue a parade permit conditioned on the applicant’s written agreement to comply with the terms of the permit unless the City Manager finds the following.

(1) The time, route and size of the parade will unreasonably disrupt the movement of other traffic.

(2) The parade is of a size or nature that requires the diversion of so great a number of police officers to properly police the line of movement and contiguous areas that allowing the parade would deny reasonable police protection to the city.

(3) The parade will interfere with another parade for which a permit has already been issued.

(4) Information contained in the application is found to be false or a material detail is omitted.

(5) The applicant refuses to agree to abide by or comply with all conditions of the permit.

(B) If one or more of the conditions listed in division (A), other than subsection (5), exists, the City Manager may impose reasonable conditions in the permit, including but not limited to the following.

(1) Requiring an alternate date.

(2) Requiring an alternate route.

(3) Restricting the size of the parade.

(C) The City Manager shall notify the applicant of the decision within three days after receipt of the application.

(D) If the City Manager proposes alternatives or refuses to issue a permit, the applicant shall have the right to appeal the decision to the Council.

(’91 Code, § 5-3.52) (Ord. 967, passed 3-12-91)


71.38 PERMIT APPLICATION APPEALS.

(A) An applicant may appeal the decision of the City Manager by filing a written request of appeal with the Recorder within 48 hours after the City Manager has proposed alternatives or refused to issue a permit.

(B) The Council shall schedule a hearing date, which shall not be later than three days following the filing of the written appeal with the Recorder, and shall notify the applicant of the date and time that he/she may appear either in person or by a representative.

(’91 Code, § 5-3.53) (Ord. 967, passed 3-12-91)


71.39 PERMIT REVOCATION.

The City Manager may revoke a parade permit if circumstances clearly show that the parade can no longer be conducted consistent with public safety.

(’91 Code, § 5-3.55) (Ord. 967, passed 3-12-91)


71.40 OFFENSES AGAINST PARADE.

(A) No person shall unreasonably interfere with a parade or parade participant.

(B) No person shall operate a vehicle that is not part of a parade between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade.

(’91 Code, § 5-3.54) (Ord. 967, passed 3-12-91) Penalty, see § 70.99


CHAPTER 72: STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING

Section

General Provisions

72.01    Applicability of provisions

Regulations

72.10    Method of parking

72.11    Prohibited parking or standing

72.12    Time limits; extension of time

72.13    Unattended vehicles

72.14    Downtown parking area

Loading and Unloading Zones

72.25    Use of loading zone

72.26    Passenger loading zone

72.27    Buses and taxicabs

Parking Citations

72.40    Issuance of citation

72.41    Failure to comply with citation

72.42    Cancellation of citation

72.43    Liability for violations

72.44    Hearing

GENERAL PROVISIONS


72.01 APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS.

The provisions of this chapter that regulate the parking, stopping or standing of vehicles do not apply to the following.

(A) A vehicle of the city, county, state or a public utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work on a street.

(B) A vehicle owned by the United States while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of mail.

(C) A vehicle of a disabled person who complies with the provisions of O.R.S. 811.602 through 811.610.

(’91 Code, § 5-3.30) (Ord. 967, passed 3-12-91)

REGULATIONS


72.10 METHOD OF PARKING.

(A) No person shall stand or park a motor vehicle in a street other than parallel with the edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the curbside wheels of the vehicle within 12 inches of the edge of the curb, except where the street is marked or signed for angle parking.

(B) Where parking spaces are designated on a street, no person shall stand or park a vehicle other than in the indicated direction and within a single marked space, unless the size or shape of the vehicle makes compliance impossible.

(C) The operator who first begins maneuvering a motor vehicle into a vacant parking space on a street has priority to park in that space, and no other vehicle operator shall attempt to interfere.

(D) When the operator of a vehicle discovers that the vehicle is parked close to a building to which the Fire Department has been summoned, the operator shall immediately remove the vehicle from the area, unless otherwise directed by police or fire officers.

(’91 Code, § 5-3.21) (Ord. 967, passed 3-12-91) Penalty, see § 70.99


72.11 PROHIBITED PARKING OR STANDING.

(A) No person shall park or stand a vehicle as follows.

(1) In violation of state motor vehicle laws or in violation of a lawfully erected parking limitation device or curb painting.

(2) In an alley other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of persons or materials, and in no case for a period in excess of 20 consecutive minutes in any two-hour period.

(’91 Code, § 5-3.22)

(B) No operator shall park and no owner shall allow a vehicle to be parked on a street for the principal purpose of the following.

(1) Displaying the vehicle for sale.

(2) Repairing or servicing the vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency.

(3) Displaying temporary advertising from the vehicle.

(4) Selling merchandise from the vehicle, except when authorized.

(’91 Code, § 5-3.23)

(Ord. 967, passed 3-12-91) Penalty, see § 70.99


72.12 TIME LIMITS; EXTENSION OF TIME.

Where maximum parking time limits are designated by sign, movement of a vehicle within a block shall not extend the time limits for parking.

(’91 Code, § 5-3.28) (Ord. 967, passed 3-12-91) Penalty, see § 70.99


72.13 UNATTENDED VEHICLES.

When a police officer finds a motor vehicle parked or standing unattended with the ignition key in the vehicle, the officer is authorized to remove the key from the vehicle and deliver the key to the person in charge of the police station.

(’91 Code, § 5-3.29) (Ord. 967, passed 3-12-91)


72.14 DOWNTOWN PARKING AREA.

(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

ABUTS. When the tax lot upon which the place of employment is located and touches at any point the downtown parking area or when the tax lot adjoins a public sidewalk and the tax lot boundary lines perpendicular to the sidewalk are extended to the street parallel to the sidewalk and any of those extended boundary lines intersect the downtown parking area at any point.

DOWNTOWN PARKING AREA. In Prineville, the DOWNTOWN PARKING AREA consists of the following streets:

North side of 4th Street between Beaver Street and Belknap Street

South side of 4th Street between Claypool Street and Court Street

Both sides of 3rd Street between Deer Street and Dunham Street

North side of 2nd Street between Claypool Street and Court Street

South side of 2nd Street between Beaver Street and Court Street

East side of Deer Street between 3rd Street and 4th Streets

Both sides of Claypool Street between 2nd Street and 4th Street

Both sides of Beaver Street between 2nd Street and 4th Street

Both sides of Main Street between 1st Street and 5th Street

Both sides of Belknap Street between 2nd Street and 4th Street

West side of Court Street between 2nd Street and 4th Street

East side of Court Street between 3rd Street and 4th Street.

EMPLOYEE. Anyone being engaged for wages, credit or other remuneration including employers, agents, salesmen, representatives or volunteers for a public or private enterprise when the enterprise is located within the city.

VEHICLE OWNED. Any vehicle registered to, operated or controlled by a person.

(’91 Code, § 5-1.2)

(B) Parking restrictions.

(1) Except as provided in subsections (B)(2), (3), (4) or (5), no person shall, while at his/her place of employment when the place of employment abuts the downtown parking area, cause, allow, suffer or permit any motor vehicle owned by that person to be parked in any one or more parking spaces upon the public streets within the downtown parking area between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on any day.

(2) This section shall not apply on Sundays or state holidays.

(3) Vehicles owned by employees shall be allowed to load or unload their vehicle for a maximum period of 30 minutes in the downtown parking area.

(4) This section shall not apply to any vehicle owned by an employee but being operated by someone other than the employee.

(5) This section shall not apply to a vehicle operated by a person over 65 years of age, or which has been identified as a vehicle used by or for a disabled person under Ch. 487 of Oregon laws when the vehicle is actually used by or for the disabled person.

(’91 Code, § 5-1.3)

(C) Employee parking prohibited. No employee shall cause a vehicle owned by that person to be parked on a public street within the downtown parking area except within an individually marked parking space. (’91 Code, § 5-1.4)

(Ord. 883, passed 12-11-84) Penalty, see § 70.99

LOADING AND UNLOADING ZONES


72.25 USE OF LOADING ZONE.

No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of persons or materials, in a place designated as a loading zone when the hours applicable to that loading zone are in effect. When the hours applicable to the loading zone are in effect, the loading and unloading shall not exceed the time limits posted. If no time limits are posted, then the use of the zone shall not exceed five minutes for loading or unloading of passengers and personal baggage and 15 minutes for loading or unloading materials.

(’91 Code, § 5-3.24) (Ord. 967, passed 3-12-91) Penalty, see § 70.99


72.26 PASSENGER LOADING ZONE.

No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in a place designated as a passenger loading zone when the hours applicable to that zone are in effect.

(’91 Code, § 5-3.25) (Ord. 967, passed 3-12-91) Penalty, see § 70.99


72.27 BUSES AND TAXICABS.

(A) Standing or parking of buses and taxicabs. The operator of a bus or taxicab shall not stop, stand or park the vehicle on a street in a business district other than at a bus stop or taxicab stand, respectively, except that this provision shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from temporarily stopping the taxicab outside a traffic lane while loading or unloading passengers. (’91 Code, § 5-3.26)

(B) Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, or a bus in a bus stop, except that the operator of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when stopping does not interfere with a bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter the restricted space.

(’91 Code, § 5-3.27) (Ord. 967, passed 3-12-91) Penalty, see § 70.99

PARKING CITATIONS


72.40 ISSUANCE OF CITATION.

When a vehicle without an operator is found parked in violation of a restriction imposed by this chapter, the officer finding the vehicle shall take its license number and any other information displayed on the vehicle that may identify its owner, and shall conspicuously affix to the vehicle a parking citation instructing the operator to answer to the charge or pay the penalty imposed within five days during specific hours and at a specific place.

(’91 Code, § 5-3.60) (Ord. 967, passed 3-12-91)


72.41 FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH CITATION.

If the operator does not respond to a parking citation affixed to a vehicle within five working days, the citing officer or city official may send a letter to the owner of the vehicle informing the owner of the violation and giving notice that if the citation is disregarded for a period of ten days the fine will be doubled and the vehicle is subject to impoundment and may be sold if not redeemed.

(’91 Code, § 5-3.61) (Ord. 967, passed 3-12-91; Am. Ord. 1250, passed 4-9-19)


72.42 CANCELLATION OF CITATION.

No person shall cancel or solicit the cancellation of a parking citation in any manner.

(’91 Code, § 5-3.62) (Ord. 967, passed 3-12-91) Penalty, see § 70.99


72.43 LIABILITY FOR VIOLATIONS.

(A) Owner responsibility. The owner of a vehicle in violation of a parking restriction shall be responsible for the offense, unless the use of the vehicle was secured by the operator without the owner’s consent. (’91 Code, § 5-3.63)

(B) Registered owner presumption. In a proceeding against a vehicle owner charging a violation of a restriction on parking, proof that the vehicle was registered to the defendant at the time of the violation shall constitute a presumption that the defendant was the owner.

(’91 Code, § 5-3.64) (Ord. 967, passed 3-12-91) Penalty, see § 70.99


72.44 HEARING.

After the issuance of a citation as provided in § 72.40, any person may object to the citation within five business days by filing an objection at the main office of City Hall. Said objection shall specify the basis for so protesting. The statement shall be referred to the City Council as part of its regular agenda at its next succeeding meeting. At the time set for consideration of the citation, the person protesting may appear and be heard by the Council; and the Council shall determine whether or not a violation occurred; and the determination shall be entered in the official minutes of the Council. Council determination shall be required only in those cases where a written statement has been filed as provided.

(Ord. 1250, passed 4-9-19) 




CHAPTER 73: BICYCLES

Section

73.01    Licensing and registration

73.02    Operating and parking rules

73.03    Impoundment of bicycles


73.01 LICENSING AND REGISTRATION.

(A) Licensing and registration.

(1) All residents of the city who either own or control a bicycle to be operated within the city shall register it with the Chief of Police and shall be issued a registration certificate by the city upon payment of an annual license fee.

(2) The Chief of Police shall inspect each bicycle presented to him/her for registration, and he/she shall have the authority to refuse to license any bicycle found to be in unsafe mechanical condition.

(3) License numbers shall be issued only to bicycle owners who have passed a written or oral examination on traffic regulations and the safe operation of a bicycle, and who have satisfactorily demonstrated their ability to ride a bicycle in a safe manner. However, this requirement may be waived by the Chief of Police.

(4) The Chief of Police shall record the name and address of the registrant, the make of the bicycle to be registered, its serial or frame number, style and general description, together with the license numbers. The Chief of Police shall keep on file the information obtained when licensing bicycles.

(5) Persons who purchase or obtain a second-hand bicycle shall apply for a transfer of the registration within ten days of the transaction.

(’91 Code, § 5-3.37)

(B) Authority to revoke or suspend registrations. The Chief of Police may suspend or revoke a registration for repeated violations of this chapter. (’91 Code, § 5-3.38)

(C) Sale or change of ownership. A purchaser or recipient of an unlicensed bicycle shall apply for a license within ten days of acquisition of the bicycle, as provided in division (A) of this section. (’91 Code, § 5-3.39)

(D) Licenses for rental bicycles. All rental agencies that rent bicycles shall first obtain a license for each bicycle so used and pay the regular license fee. The license shall be attached to the bicycle for which it is issued. (’91 Code, § 5-3.40)

(Ord. 967, passed 3-12-91) Penalty, see § 70.99


73.02 OPERATING AND PARKING RULES.

In addition to observing all other applicable provisions of this chapter and state law, no person shall do the following.

(A) Ride a bicycle on a sidewalk adjacent to the following streets:

First Street between Main and Court Streets

2nd Street between Deer and Fairview Streets

3rd Street between Locust and Fairview Streets

4th Street between Deer and Court Streets

Deer Street between 2nd and 4th Streets

Claypool between 2nd and 4th Streets

Beaver Street between 2nd and 4th Streets

Main Street between 1st and 10th Streets

Belknap Street between 1st and 4th Streets

Court Street between 1st and 4th Streets

Dunham between 2nd and 3rd Streets

Elm Street between 2nd and 3rd Streets

Fairview between 2nd and 3rd Streets.

(B) Park a bicycle upon a street or a sidewalk, except in a bicycle rack or against a building or at the curb and in a manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic.

(’91 Code, § 5-3.36) (Ord. 967, passed 3-12-91) Penalty, see § 70.99


73.03 IMPOUNDMENT OF BICYCLES.

(A) A bicycle left on public property for a period in excess of 72 hours may be impounded by the Police Department.

(B) If a bicycle impounded under this chapter is licensed or other means of determining its ownership exist, the police shall make reasonable efforts to notify the owner.

(C) A bicycle impounded under this chapter that remains unclaimed shall be disposed of in accordance with the city’s procedures for disposal of abandoned or lost personal property.

(’91 Code, § 5-3.41) (Ord. 967, passed 3-12-91)

Cross reference:

Disposition of unclaimed property, see Ch. 33


TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS

Chapter

90.    ANIMALS

91.    TREES AND SHRUBS

92.    STREETS AND SIDEWALKS

93.    NUISANCES

94.    AMUSEMENTS

95.    FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION

96.    GARAGE SALES

97.    HOMEGROWN MARIJUANA

98.    CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY


CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS

Section

Dogs

90.01    Definitions

90.02    Prohibitions

90.03    Rabies inoculation required

90.04    Feces removal

90.05    Impoundment

90.06    Termination of dog

90.07    Nuisance abatement

90.99    Penalty

DOGS


90.01 DEFINITIONS.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:

LEASH. Lead rope, chain or line for leading or restraining a dog.

NUISANCE. A dog which meets any of the following conditions:

(1) Disturbs any person by frequent or prolonged noises.

(2) Roams about the city or runs at large.

(3) Trespasses on property not owned by or under the control or custody of the owner or custodian of the dog.

(4) Bites a person unless provoked.

(5) Shows a propensity to bite persons.

(6) Chases vehicles or persons.

(7) Injures or kills an animal or fowl belonging to a person other than the owner or custodian of the dog.

(8) Destroys or damages any property belonging to a person other than the owner or custodian of the dog.

(9) Is a female dog in heat, and not properly confined.

(10) Scatters garbage or trash.

OFF-LEASH AREA. Any area designated by the city or Crook County Parks and Recreational Department that clearly delineates that dogs are permitted to be off-leash.

PUBLIC PARK. Harwood Park, Ochoco Park, Pioneer Park, Rimrock Park, Davidson Field, Kilowatt Field, Stryker Field, Gary Ward Park, Library Park, Mini Park, Mountain View Park, Crooked River Park, and Yellowpine Park, and any other areas so designated and signed by the City Council.

WILDLIFE. Fish, shellfish, amphibians and reptiles, feral swine as defined by the State Department of Agriculture rules, wild birds as defined by the State Fish and Wildlife Commission rules and other wild mammals as defined by the State Fish and Wildlife Commission rules.

(’91 Code, § 4-2.1) (Ord. 863, passed 7-27-82; Ord. 1236, passed 4-24-18)


90.02 PROHIBITIONS.

No person, while on property owned by, leased to, or controlled by the City of Prineville, shall possess or be in control of a dog that meets any of the following conditions:

(A) Is a nuisance.

(B) Is not controlled by a leash of less than ten feet in length and adequate for the dog unless on the real property of the owner, possessor or controller or in a designated off-leash area.

(C) Is not licensed according to the laws of this state.

(D) Is rabid.

(E) Is diseased.

(F) Is chasing, harassing, molesting, worrying or disturbing any wildlife unless engaged in lawful angling for, hunting or trapping such wildlife.

(’91 Code, § 4-2.2) (Ord. 863, passed 7-27-82; Am. Ord. 964, passed 3-12-91; Ord. 1236, passed 4-24-18) Penalty, see § 90.99


90.03 RABIES INOCULATION REQUIRED.

Every person who resides within the corporate limits of the city, who owns or keeps any dog six months of age or older, shall inoculate that dog for rabies. The inoculation shall be kept current and shall be done by a veterinarian licensed by the state in which the veterinarian practices.

(’91 Code, § 4-2.3) (Ord. 863, passed 7-27-82; Am. Ord. 964, passed 3-12-91) Penalty, see § 90.99


90.04 FECES REMOVAL.

Any person in possession or control of a dog when that dog defecates in any public park in the city or on property owned by, leased to, or controlled by the City of Prineville, except in an area set aside for this purpose, shall be in violation of this chapter, unless the defecation is immediately removed and placed in a proper receptacle.

(’91 Code, § 4-2.4) (Ord. 863, passed 7-27-82; Ord. 1236, passed 4-24-18) Penalty, see § 90.99


90.05 IMPOUNDMENT.

(A) Impoundment. A dog described by §§ 90.02 through 90.04 of this chapter may be seized by any person who shall promptly notify the Prineville Police Department for impounding of the dog. (’91 Code, § 4-2.5)

(B) Impoundment facility. All dogs taken up and impounded shall be held in an adequate and sanitary facility. (’91 Code, § 4-2.6)

(C) Female in heat; impoundment fees. If a dog is a female in heat and impounded for that reason, the court may order impoundment for a period not to exceed three weeks. In case of any impoundment, the owner or custodian of the dog shall pay for the care and custody of the dog at the rate of $1.50 per day or any part of a day of impoundment, plus $7.50 if the impoundment is the first for that dog or $15 for a second and subsequent impoundments. (’91 Code, § 4-2.7)

(D) Notice of impoundment; disposition of dog.

(1) Whenever a dog is impounded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and the owner or custodian of the dog is known to the dog control officer, the officer shall forthwith give written notice of the impounding by personal service or a certified letter return receipt requested upon the owner or custodian, and if the owner or custodian does not within five days after the date of service or mailing of the notice, claim the dog and pay the fees required under division (C) of this section, the dog shall be humanely disposed of or given for adoption to a suitable home.

(2) In case the owner or custodian of the dog is not known to the dog control officer, if at the expiration of five days after it has been impounded, neither its owners or custodian claims it and pays the fees required under division (C) of this section, it shall be humanely disposed of or given for adoption to a suitable home. (’91 Code, § 4-2.8)

(Ord. 863, passed 7-27-82)


90.06 TERMINATION OF DOG.

When a dog is obviously rabid, so vicious it cannot be impounded without risk to human life or safety, or if a dog is so seriously injured that its suffering warrants its destruction, the dog may be killed immediately.

(’91 Code, § 4-2.9) (Ord. 863, passed 7-27-82)


90.07 NUISANCE ABATEMENT.

A dog which is a nuisance as defined in § 90.01 may be abated under Ch. 93 of this code.

(’91 Code, § 4-2.10) (Ord. 863, passed 7-27-82; Am. Ord. 1058, passed 4-28-98)


90.99 PENALTY.

A person who violates § 90.01 et seq. may be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000. A dog that has repeatedly been a nuisance may be ordered destroyed or disposed of in a manner that the court considers necessary for the health and safety of the public. The first time a dog is found a nuisance under the definition set forth in § 90.01 subdivisions (4) or (7), the dog shall be ordered destroyed by the court unless the court finds that the general demeanor of the dog is such that the offenses are out of character for the dog, or the owner, custodian or possessor of the dog is given specific instructions on keeping the dog from violating subdivisions (4) or (7) of the definition for a nuisance set forth in § 90.01 of this chapter again. If the instructions are not followed or the dog again violates those subdivisions, the dog shall be ordered destroyed.

(’91 Code, § 4-2.11) (Ord. 863, passed 7-27-82; Am. Ord. 964, passed 3-12-91)


CHAPTER 91: TREES AND SHRUBS

Section

General Provisions

91.01    Title

91.02    Definitions

Permits

91.10    Permit required

91.11    Permit application and issuance

91.12    Permit conditions

Regulations

91.25    Prohibited trees

91.26    Removal and trimming

91.27    Liability

91.28    Abuse of trees and shrubs

Administration and Enforcement

91.40    Enforcement authority

91.99    Penalty

GENERAL PROVISIONS


91.01 TITLE.

This chapter shall be hereafter referred to and cited as the "Street Tree Ordinance" of the city.

(’91 Code, § 2-1.1) (Ord. 575, passed 7-13-65; Am. Ord. 973, passed 3-12-91)


91.02 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

PUBLIC PARKING STRIP. That portion of a street or alleyway that is not currently being used as a street or alleyway.

PUBLIC PLACE. Any area within the city limits of Prineville, owned by the City of Prineville, Crook County, Crook County Parks and Recreation District or any other municipal corporation.

PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. City streets, alleyways, including that portion of a street or alleyway that is dedicated as a street or alley, but is not currently being used as a street or alley.

(’91 Code, § 2-1.2) (Ord. 575, passed 7-13-65; Am. Ord. 973, passed 3-12-91)

PERMITS


91.10 PERMIT REQUIRED.

(A) No person shall plant or remove trees or shrubs from a public right-of-way or other public place in the city without permission from the City Street Superintendent.

(B) No person shall plant, grow or maintain a tree, shrub or vegetable growth upon the sidewalks, sidewalk areas or public right-of-way in the city, or so close thereto that they overhang the sidewalks, sidewalk areas or public right-of-way at an elevation of less than eight feet, without first obtaining a permit from the City Street Superintendent.

(’91 Code, § 2-1.4) (Ord. 575, passed 7-13-65; Am. Ord. 973, passed 3-12-91) Penalty, see § 91.99


91.11 PERMIT APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE.

(A) When an application is filed by an applicant setting forth all relevant facts relating to the request in question, the City Street Superintendent may issue a permit to plant, grow and maintain trees, shrubs or vegetable growth in areas in which they are prohibited by division (C) of this section.

(B) The City Street Superintendent shall not grant the permit unless he/she finds that to do so would be detrimental to the public interest. The Superintendent shall give consideration to the following factors in granting permits.

(1) Width of sidewalks, sidewalk areas or public right-of-way.

(2) Type of tree, shrub or vegetable growth.

(3) Location of parking meters, light standards, crosswalks, building entrance and exit ways, streets, utility poles, alleys, loading zones and other physical conditions and legal restrictions then existing or reasonably contemplated.

(4) Traffic count.

(5) Purpose of applicant.

(6) Any other factors found by the Superintendent to be relevant.

(C) The City Street Superintendent shall designate in the permit or in an exhibit attached to it the areas in which planting shall be allowed, the type of plantings allowed and any other condition or restriction that he/she deems necessary or expedient to protect the public interest.

(’91 Code, § 2-1.5) (Ord. 575, passed 7-13-65; Am. Ord. 973, passed 3-12-91)


91.12 PERMIT CONDITIONS.

Each person planting, growing or maintaining trees, shrubs or vegetable matter under a permit shall comply with and be subject to the following general conditions and restrictions.

(A) The permittee shall abide by all of the terms, conditions and restrictions contained on the permit.

(B) The permit shall be nontransferable without prior written approval of the City Street Superintendent.

(C) The permit shall be revocable at any time, with or without cause, at the pleasure of the Council and no expenditure of money, lapse of time or any act or thing shall act as an estoppel against the city or be held to give the permittee or the owner of property any vested right.

(D) The installation and care of plantings shall be at the sole cost and expense of the permittee, without cost to the city, and the sidewalks, sidewalk areas and public right-of-way in the vicinity of the plantings and the structure served thereby shall be maintained in a good state of repair and maintenance at the sole cost and expense of the permittee.

(E) At the expiration or termination of the permit, the permittee shall remove all plantings and vegetable matter from the area at his/her sole cost and expense and place the sidewalk or public right-of-way in the area in a good condition of repair.

(F) The permittee shall indemnify and save the city, its officers, agents, officials and employees harmless from any claim or award for damages or injuries to property or persons, including costs and attorney fees allegedly arising in whole or in part out of the use, occupation or disruption of sidewalks, sidewalk areas or public right-of-way, by the permittee or those acting on his/her behalf or with his/her approval or ratification, or allegedly arising in whole or in part out of the failure by the permittee to abide by the terms of this chapter and the permit.

(G) The permittee shall remove, replace or relocate individual plantings or vegetable growth as the public convenience or necessity warrants and at the request of the City Street Superintendent.

(H) No permit shall become effective until the permittee has filed with the City Recorder proof of the existence of a repaid liability insurance policy naming the city, its officers, agents, officials and employees as named insureds. The policy shall have limits of $100,000 or more for injury to one person in one accident, and $500,000 or more for case of injuries to more than one person in any one accident, and $50,000 or more for property damage. The insurance shall indemnify the city, its officers, agents, officials and employees as specified in division (F) of this section.

(I) No permit shall be issued for placing plants that are for sale in or on the sidewalks, sidewalk areas or public right-of-way, nor shall any advertising be placed on plantings or on a container in which plantings may be set; the plantings shall be for decorative purposes only.

(J) No permit shall become effective unless the permittee, simultaneously with the issuance of the permit, files with the City Street Superintendent, on a form approved by him/her, a notice of acceptance of the terms, covenants and conditions of the permit and an agreement to abide by all of the terms, covenants, conditions and obligations imposed on the permitted by this chapter.

(’91 Code, § 2-1.6) (Ord. 575, passed 7-13-65; Am. Ord. 973, passed 3-12-91) Penalty, see § 91.99

REGULATIONS


91.25 PROHIBITED TREES.

It shall be unlawful to plant in any public parking strip the following trees: poplar, cottonwood, willow, conifer, ailanthus, cottonwood, fruit trees, nut trees. It shall be unlawful to plant willow, cottonwood or poplar trees anywhere in the city unless the City Street Superintendent approves the site as one where the tree roots will not interfere with a public sewer.

(’91 Code, § 2-1.7) (Ord. 575, passed 7-13-65; Am. Ord. 973, passed 3-12-91) Penalty, see § 91.99


91.26 REMOVAL AND TRIMMING.

(A) The owner, possessor or occupant of property upon which any tree, shrub, bush or plant is located or the owner, possessor or occupant of property adjacent to a public right-of-way upon which is located any tree, shrub, bush or plant has a duty to trim the trees, shrubs, bushes or plants which meet the following conditions.

(1) Endanger, or which in any way may endanger, the security or usefulness of any public street, sewer or sidewalk.

(2) Are located at or near any intersection in the city, and which tend to obstruct the vision of persons using the streets at or near the intersection or which create a traffic hazard.

(3) Partially or wholly obstruct the visibility of a stop sign or vehicular traffic regulatory sign so that the sign cannot be seen for a minimum distance of 100 feet when viewed from the normal vehicular approach.

(B) When the owner, possessor or occupant of property as described above shall neglect or refuse to trim or remove any tree, shrub, bush or plants as provided in this section, the Street Superintendent may trim or remove, or cause to be trimmed the tree, shrub, bush or plant. The person remedying the condition shall be authorized to enter the property for that purpose.

(’91 Code, § 2-1.8) (Ord. 575, passed 7-13-65; Am. Ord. 973, passed 3-12-91) Penalty, see § 91.99


91.27 LIABILITY.

(A) Any person, firm or corporation who is responsible for trimming or removing any tree, shrub, bush or plant as described in § 91.26, is liable to any person injured because of failure to trim or remove the trees, shrubs, bushes or plants.

(B) If the city is required to pay damages for an injury to any person caused by the failure of an owner, possessor or occupant of property to trim or remove trees, shrubs, bushes or plants on their property or on a public right-of-way adjacent to their property as required by § 91.26, the owner, possessor or occupant shall reimburse the city for the amount of the damages thus paid by the city and for the attorney fees and costs against defending against the claim of damages. The city may maintain an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this section.

(C) Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to impose any liability upon any member of the City Council, or the city or any of its officers or employees for the following.

(1) Failure to trim or remove any trees, shrubs, bushes or plants.

(2) Failure to require any owner, possessor or occupant of property to trim or remove trees, shrubs, bushes or plants on their property or adjacent public right-of-way property.

(3) Failure to discover trees, shrubs, bushes or plants that should be trimmed or removed.

(4) Any other duty owed to any person, firm or corporation under this chapter.

(’91 Code, § 2-1.9) (Ord. 575, passed 7-13-65; Am. Ord. 973, passed 3-12-91)


91.28 ABUSE OF TREES AND SHRUBS.

It shall be a violation of this chapter to abuse, destroy or mutilate any tree, shrub or plant in a public right-of-way or any other public place, or to attach or place any rope or wire (other than one used to support a young or broken tree), sign, poster, handbill or other thing to or on any tree growing in a public place, or to cause or permit any wire charged with electricity to come in contact with any such tree, or to allow any gaseous, liquid or solid substance which is harmful to the trees to come in contact with their roots or leaves.

(’91 Code, § 2-1.10) (Ord. 575, passed 7-13-65; Am. Ord. 973, passed 3-12-91) Penalty, see § 91.99

ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT


91.40 ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.

The City Streets Superintendent, or his/her duly authorized representative, shall be charged with the enforcement of this chapter.

(’91 Code, § 2-1.3) (Ord. 575, passed 7-13-65; Am. Ord. 973, passed 3-12-91)


91.99 PENALTY.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or failing to comply with them shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed $50.

(’91 Code, § 2-1.11) (Ord. 575, passed 7-13-65; Am. Ord. 973, passed 3-12-91)


CHAPTER 92: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS

Section

Benches on Sidewalks

92.01    Permit required

92.02    Permit application

92.03    Regulations; permit conditions

92.04    Appeal

Sidewalks, Planting Strips and Driveway Approaches

92.15    Definitions

92.16    Maintenance of sidewalks, driveways and planting strips

92.17    Liability for injury

92.18    Notice to repair

92.19    Repair by the city

92.20    City liens

92.21    Improvement standards

92.22    Permits

92.23    Appeal

Excavations

92.35    Definitions

92.36    Permit required

92.37    Application for permit

92.38    Security

92.39    Insurance

92.40    Issuance of permit

92.41    Conduct of work

92.42    Notice of completion of work

92.43    Barricades and safety measures

92.44    Liability for accidents

92.45    Repairs

92.46    Option of city to repair excavation

92.47    Applicability to city employees

92.48    Emergencies

92.49    Violations

Street Naming and Numbering System

92.50    Established

92.51    Definitions

92.52    Procedures

92.53    Standards

92.54    Fees

92.55    Display of address number

92.56    Subdivision map submission

Cross-reference:

Reimbursement districts for public improvements, see Chapter 39

BENCHES ON SIDEWALKS


92.01 PERMIT REQUIRED.

No person, firm or corporation shall place benches or public seating on the sidewalks or sidewalk areas in the city without first obtaining a permit from the City Manager.

(’91 Code, § 4-1.1) (Ord. 636, passed 7-2-69; Am. Ord. 963, passed 3-12-91) Penalty, see § 10.99


92.02 PERMIT APPLICATION.

(A) Upon proper application filed by the applicant, setting forth all relevant facts related to the request in question, the City Manager may issue a permit or permits to persons, firms or corporations to place benches or public seating in areas in which they are prohibited by § 92.01.

(B) The City Manager shall consider the following factors in granting the permits, and shall not grant the permit unless he/she finds that to do so would not be detrimental to the public interest.

(1) Width of sidewalks or sidewalk area.

(2) Type of benches or public seating.

(3) Location of parking meters, light standards, crosswalks, building entrance and exit ways, streets, utility poles, alleys, loading zones and other physical conditions and legal restrictions then existing or reasonably contemplated.

(4) Traffic count.

(5) Purpose of applicant.

(6) Any other factors found by him/her to be relevant.

(C) The City Manager shall designate in the permit, or in an exhibit attached to it, the areas in which benches or public seating shall be allowed, the type of benches or public seating allowed and any other condition or restriction that he/she deems necessary or expedient to protect the public interest.

(’91 Code, § 4-1.2) (Ord. 636, passed 7-2-69; Am. Ord. 963, passed 3-12-91)


92.03 REGULATIONS; PERMIT CONDITIONS.

Each person, firm or corporation placing benches or public seating under a permit shall comply with the following general conditions and restrictions.

(A) The permittee shall abide by all of the terms, conditions and restrictions contained in the permit.

(B) The permit shall be nontransferable without prior written approval of the City Manager.

(C) The permit shall be revocable at any time with or without cause at the pleasure of the City Council; and no expenditure of money, lapse of time or any act or thing shall act as an estoppel against the city or be held to give the permittee or the owner of any property any vested right.

(D) The installation and care of benches or public seating shall be at the expense of the permittee and without cost to the city. The sidewalks and sidewalk areas in the vicinity of the benches or public seating and the structure served thereby shall be maintained in a good state of repair and maintenance at the expense of the permittee.

(E) At the expiration or termination of the permit, the permittee shall remove all benches or public seating from the area at the permittee’s own expense and place the sidewalk in the area in a good condition of repair.

(F) The permittee shall indemnify and save the city, its officers, agents, officials and employees, harmless from any claim or award for damages or injuries to property or persons, including costs and attorney fees, allegedly arising in whole or in part out of the use, occupation or disruption of sidewalks or sidewalk areas by the permittee or those acting on his/her behalf or with his/her approval or ratification, or allegedly arising in whole or in part out of the failure by the permittee to abide by the terms of this subchapter and the permit.

(G) The permittee shall remove, replace or relocate individual benches or seating as the public convenience or necessity warrants and at the request of the City Manager.

(H) No permit shall become effective until the permittee files with the City Manager proof of the existence of a prepaid liability insurance policy naming the city, its officers, agents, officials and employees as named insureds. The policy shall have limits of $100,000 or more for injury to one person in one accident, and $500,000 or more in case of injuries to more than one person in any one accident, and $50,000 or more for property damage. The insurance shall indemnify the city, its officers, agents, officials and employees, as specified in subsection (F) of this section. The insurance shall be kept in effect, and subsequent policies or renewals of the original or subsequent policies shall be filed with the City Manager.

(I) No permit shall be issued for placing any benches or types of seating that are for sale in or on the sidewalks or sidewalk areas, nor shall any advertising be placed on any benches or seating. The purpose of the seating is to be for the convenience of the public only.

(J) No permit shall become effective unless the permittee, simultaneously with the issuance of it, files with the City Manager, in form approved by him/her, a notice of acceptance of the terms, covenants and conditions of the permit, and an agreement to abide by all of the terms, covenants, conditions and obligations imposed on the permittee by this subchapter.

(’91 Code, § 4-1.3) (Ord. 636, passed 7-2-69; Am. Ord. 963, passed 3-12-91) Penalty, see § 10.99


92.04 APPEAL.

Any applicant who feels aggrieved by an action taken by the City Manager may file a written appeal with the City Council setting forth in detail the reasons for the appeal. The City Council shall hear the appellant and any other relevant information and may ratify the action taken by the City Manager or may take any action in relation to the applicant that the City Manager could take under the provisions of this subchapter.

(’91 Code, § 4-1.4) (Ord. 636, passed 7-2-69; Am. Ord. 963, passed 3-12-91)

SIDEWALKS, PLANTING STRIPS AND DRIVEWAY APPROACHES


92.15 DEFINITIONS.

For purposes of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

CITY. The City of Prineville.

DRIVEWAY APPROACH. A driveway approach is an area, construction, or improvement located within the public street right-of-way between the roadway of the public street and private property intended to provide access for vehicles from the roadway of a public street to private property and used for the ingress and egress of vehicles.

PLANTING STRIP. That portion of a public street right-of-way that lies between the roadway and the sidewalk.

PROPERTY OWNER. The owner or the contract purchaser of record of real property adjacent to the sidewalk.

ROADWAY OF PUBLIC STREET. That part of a public right-of-way street where vehicles drive and where vehicles park, excluding any curbs.

SIDEWALK. That portion of the public street right-of-way intended for the use of pedestrians and improved by surfacing.

SUPERINTENDENT. The Public Works Superintendent or his/her designee.

(Ord. 1144, passed 7-24-07)


92.16 MAINTENANCE OF SIDEWALKS, DRIVEWAYS AND PLANTING STRIPS.

All property owners shall maintain sidewalks, driveway approaches, and planting strips adjacent to their property in good repair.

(Ord. 1144, passed 7-24-07)


92.17 LIABILITY FOR INJURY.

(A) A property owner responsible for maintaining the adjacent sidewalk, planting strip, and driveway approach shall be liable to any person injured because of any negligence of the property owner in failing to maintain the sidewalk, planting strip, and/or driveway approach in good condition.

(B) If the city is required to pay damages for an injury to persons or property caused by the failure of a property owner to perform the duty imposed by § 92.16, the property owner failing to perform the duty shall compensate the city for the full amount of the damages paid and all city legal fees incurred in defense of such a claim. The city may maintain an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this section.

(Ord. 1144, passed 7-24-07)


92.18 NOTICE TO REPAIR.

(A) If a property owner allows a sidewalk, driveway approach, or planting strip adjacent to such owner’s property to become out of repair, and the Superintendent has personal notice of the same, it shall be his or her duty to post a notice on the adjacent property or on a tree immediately in front thereof entitled "Notice to Repair." The notice shall be in legible characters and shall direct the owner, agent, or occupant of the property to immediately repair the sidewalk, driveway approach, and/or planting strip in good and substantial manner in accordance with § 92.21.

(B) A notice to repair the sidewalk, driveway approach, or planting strip shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the property owner as shown on the Crook County Tax Assessor’s records. A mistake in the name or address of the property owner does not render the notice void, but in such case the posted notice shall be sufficient.

(C) The Superintendent shall file with the City Recorder an affidavit of the posting of the notice, stating the time and place of posting and also any proof of mailing the notice to the property owner.

(Ord. 1144, passed 7-24-07)


92.19 REPAIR BY THE CITY.

If within 20 days after such notification of repair has been posted and mailed, the sidewalk, driveway approach, and/or planting strip are not repaired or the repairs are not completed by a date agreed upon by the property owner and the Superintendent, which agreement was made within the same 20-day period, then the city may make the necessary repairs. The costs of repairs, plus an administrative fee equal to 5% of the repairs, shall constitute a lien against the property and shall be entered in the docket of city liens.

(Ord. 1144, passed 7-24-07)


92.20 CITY LIENS.

If a lien is not paid in full by the property owner within 30 days after entry in the lien docket, the city may foreclose the lien in the manner provided for delinquent assessments for public improvements.

(Ord. 1144, passed 7-24-07)


92.21 IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS.

Improvements or repairs to any sidewalk or driveway approaches shall conform to the city’s standard specifications for sidewalks and/or driveways and shall also conform to ADA standards.

(Ord. 1144, passed 7-24-07)


92.22 PERMITS.

All persons seeking to construct or repair sidewalks, driveway approaches, and/or planting strips shall first obtain a permit for the same from the city. Such persons shall also have the specifications for the construction approved by the Superintendent prior to commencing construction and shall have the placement of the forms approved by the Superintendent prior to pouring concrete.

(Ord. 1144, passed 7-24-07)


92.23 APPEAL.

Any person aggrieved by a ruling by the Superintendent in connection with the proposed construction or repair of any sidewalk, driveway approach, or planting strip within the city may appeal the ruling to the City Manager. Any person aggrieved by a ruling of the City Manager in connection with the proposed construction and repair of any sidewalk, driveway approach, and/or planting strip may appeal the ruling to the City Council and the decision of the City Council shall be final on the matter.

(Ord. 1144, passed 7-24-07)

EXCAVATIONS1


92.35 DEFINITIONS.

APPLICANT. A person applying for a permit pursuant to this subchapter.

CITY. The City of Prineville.

COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR. The Community Development Director of the City of Prineville or his or her designee.

EXCAVATION. A hole, cut, tunnel, or other cavity in, through, across, or under a street, not including the driving or forcing of pipes through the ground.

PERMITTEE. A person who has received a permit pursuant to this subchapter.

PERSON. Every natural person, firm, co-partnership, association, limited liability company, corporation, or other legal entity.

STREET. Every way or place open as a matter of right to the use of the public for vehicular and pedestrian traffic and/or placement of utilities, including sidewalks, curbs, and alleys.

(’91 Code, § 2-4.2) (Ord. 1152, passed 3-11-08)


92.36 PERMIT REQUIRED.

It is unlawful for any person to cut, break, dig up, damage in any manner, undermine or tunnel under any street without first complying with the provisions of this subchapter in regards to the obtaining of permits, depositing of securities, and the making of applications to the Community Development Director. Applications for permits shall be in the form prescribed by the Community Development Director. Permits shall be issued for a limited time and shall specify the extent of the authority granted by the permit.

(Ord. 1152, passed 3-11-08)


92.37 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.

In the application for an excavation permit, the applicant shall specify his/her name and address; the date of application; the name of the street to be cut or tunneled under; the exact location of the excavation; the nature of the street surface involved; the purpose of the work; size and nature of the excavation; the number of days required to complete the work; and an agreement to deposit such securities as required by the Community Development Director to comply with the provisions of this subchapter and with the specifications of the Community Development Director pertaining to the conduct of the work, to save the city and its employees harmless against any injury or damage which may result from the actions of the applicant, and to file a report of the work within 48 hours of its completion. Applications for each permit to be issued shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount set by resolution of the city.

(Ord. 1152, passed 3-11-08)


92.38 SECURITY.

Before the issuance of any permit, the Community Development Director shall require the applicant to file with the application as security either:

(A) A surety bond in the amount fixed by the Community Development Director. The bond shall be conditioned that the applicant will, immediately upon the completion of the work, remove all surplus earth, rubbish, or other materials, replace the surface excavated in a condition as good as or better than before, and keep the same in good repair, at his/her own expense, for one year from the completion of the work;

(B) In lieu of the above mentioned surety bond, the applicant may file as security cash, certified check, letter of credit, or assign an interest in a bank account or provide such other security acceptable to the Community Development Director in an amount equal to twice the estimate of replacement value of surface to be cut, together with the costs of re-excavation and refilling with proper materials, if necessary, as determined by the Community Development Director, to be held and returned subject to the same conditions as set forth in the case of surety bonds; provided, however, that in the case of unimproved streets, no security shall be required, unless, in the opinion of the Community Development Director, such security is necessary for the protection of the public interest.

(Ord. 1152, passed 3-11-08)


92.39 INSURANCE.

Each applicant shall submit with his or her application a certificate of insurance designating the city additional insured under the applicant’s policy of liability insurance with policy limits in an amount deemed appropriate by the city. In addition, the applicant shall provide city with proof of an endorsement for completed operations.

(Ord. 1152, passed 3-11-08)


92.40 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.

If the Community Development Director is satisfied that the excavation is feasible and proper, that the application has been made in due form, that adequate security has been filed as required by the provisions of this subchapter, that the applicant has provided the appropriate certificate of insurance, and upon payment of the permit fee, he/she shall issue a permit which shall designate the name and address of the persons to whom the permit is granted; the date of issuance of the permit; the street or streets to be cut or tunneled under; the estimated time in which the work is to be completed; and such other conditions or restrictions as may be required, including, but not limited to, the following:

(A) Requiring that access to fire hydrants be available at all times;

(B) Requiring that the actual work be confined to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m., unless otherwise specified, or to certain days;

(C) Setting forth the maximum lengths of excavations to be opened at any one time;

(D) Requiring that access to driveways be maintained;

(E) Requiring that provisions be made for routing and protection of traffic;

(F) Relating to the care and disposition of excavated material during construction;

(G) Making provision for water courses during excavation;

(H) Setting forth minimum or maximum depths of excavation or structures;

(I) Providing for control of noise, dust, and debris during excavation;

(J) Prescribing acceptable methods and materials for securing proper backfill and resurfacing, including temporary surfacing, if necessary.

(Ord. 1152, passed 3-11-08)


92.41 CONDUCT OF WORK.

All work under such permits shall be done in conformity with the provisions of this subchapter, the terms of the application and permits, the standards and specifications of the city, and in a manner approved by the Community Development Director. Upon completion of the work, any excavation shall be filled, compacted, and the street surface restored to as good or better condition than before the work and in conformity with city standards for the particular street surface. Cold-mix asphalt patching will only be allowed as a temporary measure during adverse weather conditions, and the permanent patching shall be placed as soon as weather permits.

(Ord. 1152, passed 3-11-08)


92.42 NOTICE OF COMPLETION OF WORK.

The applicant shall notify the Community Development Director within 48 hours after completion of the work under the permit and the work shall be inspected and approved by the Community Development Director.

(Ord. 1152, passed 3-11-08)


92.43 BARRICADES AND SAFETY MEASURES.

Whenever any permittee places obstructions in a street or makes any excavation therein for any purpose, it shall be his or her duty to keep the obstruction or excavation safeguarded by substantial barricades and the display of lighted red lanterns or other lights or flares or other warning devices approved by the city from dusk until daylight. Whenever the public safety requires that obstructions or excavations require constant supervision, the permittee shall be responsible for furnishing such constant supervision.

(Ord. 1152, passed 3-11-08)


92.44 LIABILITY FOR ACCIDENTS.

Every person having occasion to place any obstruction in any street or alley or to make any excavation therein under provision of this subchapter shall be responsible to anyone for any injury by reason of the presence of such obstruction or excavation on a street when the obstruction or excavation is the proximate cause of the injury and shall also be liable to the city, in the event that the city is held responsible for any action or claims or otherwise arising out of the presence of the obstruction or excavation of the street.

(Ord. 1152, passed 3-11-08)


92.45 REPAIRS.

All permittees shall be personally responsible for the maintenance and repair of the street excavated under the provisions of the permits and shall place the excavated street in as good as or better condition than before such work was undertaken, at their own expense, and for one-year period after the work has been approved by the Community Development Director.

(Ord. 1152, passed 3-11-08)


92.46 OPTION OF CITY TO REPAIR EXCAVATION.

Whenever, in the opinion of the Community Development Director, it would be to the best interest of the city for the city itself to replace or repair the street excavation under the provisions of this subchapter, such work shall be done by the city under the direction of the Community Development Director and the cost of the work shall be either charged to the person to whom the permit for excavation has been granted or deducted from security deposited by him/her with the Community Development Director.

(Ord. 1152, passed 3-11-08)


92.47 APPLICABILITY TO CITY EMPLOYEES.

The provisions of this subchapter shall not be deemed to apply to the construction or maintenance of streets by the city, by its employees, or by persons operating under contract with the city.

(Ord. 1152, passed 3-11-08)


92.48 EMERGENCIES.

In the event of an emergency affecting the public safety, a cut may be made in a street providing that a report of the cut is made to the Community Development Director within 48 hours, and all provisions of this subchapter are complied with as though making an application for an original permit.

(Ord. 1152, passed 3-11-08)


92.49 VIOLATIONS.

Any person who violates any provision of this subchapter may, upon conviction, be fined in an amount not to exceed $500.

(Ord. 1152, passed 3-11-08)

STREET NAMING AND NUMBERING SYSTEM


92.50 ESTABLISHED.

In the interest of public health, safety and welfare, a permanent city-wide addressing system is hereby established to provide a uniform addressing system. The system will allow for systematic expansion as the city expands, will provide all emergency vehicles with the necessary information to quickly locate any dwelling by site address and will further establish permanent mail delivery numbers and generally eliminate the confusion and delay caused by changing route and box system and other number systems.

(Ord. 1066, passed 3-23-99)


92.51 DEFINITIONS.

(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

ACCESS POINT. The primary entrance of the dwelling.

CITY BUILDING DEPARTMENT or BUILDING DEPARTMENT. Whoever is designated by the city to issue building permits within the city.

DWELLING. Residence, including house or mobile home, place of business or other location receiving an address through this subchapter.

POINT OF ORIGIN OF THE ADDRESSING SYSTEM. The intersection of 1st Street and Main Street in the city.

PRIVATE ROAD. Any road that is not deeded for public use and one in which no rights or interest have accrued to the public, and includes private driveways, and other private access ways, over 150 feet in length, or which serve as access to two or more residences.

PUBLIC ROAD. A road over which the public has a right of use that is a matter of public record.

ROAD. The entire right-of-way of any public or private way that provides ingress and egress from property by means of vehicles or other means, or that provides travel between places by means of vehicle.

X AXIS. The North-South line of Main Street of the city.

Y AXIS. The East-West line of 1st Street of the city.

(B) Key to street prefix and suffix.

(1) All East-West streets North of the Y axis and East of the X axis shall be addressed North-East (NE).

(2) All East-West streets South of the Y axis and East of the X axis shall be addressed as South-East (SE).

(3) All East-West streets North of the Y axis and West of the X axis shall be addressed as North-West (NW).

(4) All East-West streets South of the Y axis and West of the X axis shall be addressed as South-West (SW).

(5) All North-South streets North of the Y axis and West of the X axis shall be addressed as North-West (NW).

(6) All North-South streets South of the Y axis and West of the X axis shall be addressed as South-West (SW).

(7) All North-South streets North of the Y axis and East of the X axis shall be addressed as North-East (NE).

(8) All North-South streets South of the Y axis and East of the X axis shall be addressed as South-East (SE).

(9) All streets that begin and end on the same street shall be called loops.

(10) Main Street shall be known as N. Main St. and S. Main St.

(Ord. 1066, passed 3-23-99)


92.52 PROCEDURES.

(A) Naming or renaming of roads. The city shall have the authority to name or rename any road in the following circumstances.

(1) When an existing public or private road is named or renamed.

(2) When a new public or private road is established.

(3) When a private road requires a name in order to designate an address for a dwelling.

(B) Petition to name or rename a road.

(1) A petition to name or rename a road shall be submitted to the City Building Department. The petition shall include, at minimum, the following.

(a) Signatures of more than 50% of the residents along the road.

(b) The name and phone number of the designated contact person.

(c) The location of the road by description or map.

(d) The legal status of the road, if known.

(e) The existing road name, if known.

(f) The proposed road name.

(g) The reason for the request.

(2) A request may also be submitted by any public agency or utility whose function is affected by road names.

(C) Processing of applications. The City Building Department shall process all applications for road naming and renaming by the following.

(1) Verifying the legal status of the road.

(2) Checking the proposed road name to avoid duplication or similarity with other existing road names and with those on approved preliminary partitions or subdivisions. No name will be approved that contains a compass direction (North, South, East or West) except in the prefix.

(3) Performing a field check when necessary.

(4) Assisting the applicant or other affected person to find alternate names when necessary.

(5) Notifying the appropriate departments and agencies.

(6) Inquiring of owners of all property abutting the road to determine general consensus concerning the proposed road name.

(7) Preparing a recommendation and proposed ordinance on the proposed road name for the City Council.

(8) Recommending a name to the City Council when the property owners do not propose a name for an unnamed road, or cannot agree on a name, or in any other circumstances where the Building Department believes it is warranted.

(D) Subdivision road names proposed by developer. The names of roads in a proposed subdivision partitioning or planned unit development shall be proposed by the developer for review and approval by the Building Department and submission to the City Council.

(E) Addresses, new road/street names assigned by Building Department. Addresses and new road/street names will be assigned by the City Building Department and will be coordinated with the Manager of the E9-1-1 Dispatch Center.

(Ord. 1066, passed 3-23-99)


92.53 STANDARDS.

(A) All addresses and street names shall conform to the standards established by United States Postal Service (USPS) and the National Emergency Number Association (NENA).

(B) All dwellings within the city shall be uniformly addressed from the point of origin using the standard of 16 blocks per mile or 330 feet per block, and by the following methods.

(1) A dwelling with an access point on a primarily North-South street shall be addressed based on the distance from the Y axis to the access point as measured in a Northerly or Southerly direction. In the case of a switchback or portion of the street that is generally parallel to the Y axis, a proportioning adjustment will be made in accordance with an established procedure to assure sequential numbers.

(2) A dwelling with an access point on a primarily East-West street shall be addressed based on the distance from the Y axis to the access point as measured in a Easterly or Westerly direction. In the case of a switchback or portion of the street that is generally parallel to the Y axis, a proportioning adjustment will be made in accordance with an established procedure to assure sequential numbers.

(3) A basically North-South street will have odd numbers on the West side of the street, and even numbers on the East side of the street.

(4) A basically East-West street will have odd numbers on the North side of the street, and even numbers on the South side of the street.

(5) The numbers will increase while going North from the Y axis on a basically North-South street.

(6) The numbers will increase while going South from the Y axis on a basically North-South street.

(7) The numbers will increase while going East from the Y axis on a basically East-West street.

(8) The numbers will increase while going West from the Y axis on a basically East-West street.

(9) Apartment houses, mobile home parks and other multi unit complexes shall be addressed as one dwelling. The management of the establishment shall assign unit addresses in a manner acceptable to the City Planning Department which shall coordinate the addressing with the County Planning Department.

(10) All loops shall be numbered counter clockwise with even numbers on the outside of the loop and odd numbers on the inside of the loop. Numbering shall begin with the entrance to the loop closest to the crossing point of the X/Y axis.

(Ord. 1066, passed 3-23-99)


92.54 FEES.

The City/County Building Department will be allowed to establish reasonable fees to offset the cost of assigning an address to a previously unaddressed location. The fee shall include one sign and installation thereof and shall not exceed the actual cost of sign and installation.

(Ord. 1066, passed 3-23-99)


92.55 DISPLAY OF ADDRESS NUMBER.

(A) Within 90 days after the effective date of this subchapter or within 30 days after issuance of a new number, each dwelling within the city shall display its address number prominently to the standard provided as follows so long as not in conflict with the then current Uniform Fire Code. In case of conflict, the Uniform Fire Code prevails.

(1) House numbers. Dwellings in the city shall be physically addressed with four-inch high house numbers, which are of contrasting color to the background. These numbers shall be placed on the side of the residence containing the access point, in a location which is visible from the road abutting the access point and shall be legible.

(2) Curb address marking or rural address. Curb address marking or rural address signs shall also be installed.

(a) When there is a curb at the road adjacent to the access point of the dwelling, the curb address markings shall consist of curb markings placed at the center of the property (if not available, to the right of the driveway two feet) on the vertical portion of the curb. The sign background color shall be of forest green (road sign green) and shall extend no less than two and one-half inches beyond the numbering. The numbers shall be of bright white and shall be three inches in height and a brush stoke of 3/4 inch in width.

(b) When there is no curb and the dwelling is more than 100 feet from the road, a rural address sign shall be placed at the end and to the right of the driveway. In the event that the driveway serves more than one residence or commercial building, more than one sign shall be required to properly identify the correct access to a given property. The rural address signs are a green reflective sign with white reflective lettering and a metal post.

(3) Commercial and industrial property addressing.

(a) Locations for property identification of commercial or industrial use shall consist of rural address signs when deemed necessary by the Fire Chief to properly identify access to the property. Specific address numbers meeting the prescribed specifications shall be placed on the front entrance door or on the front of the structure at an approved location as approved by the Fire Chief.

(b) Complexes with four or more occupancies shall be required to place a complex address identification locator map, placed at the right side of the main entrance as approved by the Fire Chief.

(B) At final inspection of new construction located in the county or the city addressing area, the Building Official or his/her designee shall inspect the dwelling to ascertain whether numbers are displayed as required above, and shall not sign off on final inspection until the above conditions are satisfied.

(Ord. 1066, passed 3-23-99)


92.56 SUBDIVISION MAP SUBMISSION.

Upon approval of any subdivision within the city wherein any street is dedicated to the public, copies of the subdivision map with addresses of the lots shown thereon shall be provided by the City Planning Department to the City Police Department Communications Division.

(Ord. 1066, passed 3-23-99)1

Prior legislation: Ord. 579; ’91 Code §§ 2-4.1, 2‑4.3 - 2-4.9. 


CHAPTER 93: NUISANCES

Section

General Provisions

93.01    Definitions

93.02    Nuisances declared

Animals

93.10    Carcass removal

93.11    At-large animals

93.12    Swine

93.13    Horses

93.14    Dangerous animals

Nuisances Affecting Public Health

93.25    Enumeration of nuisances

Nuisances Affecting Public Safety

93.35    Containers

93.36    Wells and holes

93.37    Fences

93.38    Attractive nuisances

93.39    Snow and ice

93.40    Noxious vegetation

93.41    Rubbish

93.42    Trees

93.43    Surface waters; drainage

Nuisances Affecting Public Use and Enjoyment

93.55    Radio and television interference

93.56    Junk

93.57    Outdoor burning

93.58    Noise

93.59    Parking

Abatement Procedure

93.70    Notice to abate

93.71    Abatement by persons responsible

93.72    Joint responsibility

93.73    Abatement by city

93.74    Assessment of costs

93.75    Summary abatement

93.99    Penalty

Cross reference:

Animals, see Ch. 90

GENERAL PROVISIONS


93.01 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

ANIMAL. All animals and birds except cats and dogs.

AT LARGE. Within the city upon any street, alley, park, public place or property not owned by an owner or person in charge of the animal.

PERSON. A natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation, trust, estate or any other public or private entity whatsoever.

PERSON IN CHARGE OF PROPERTY. An agent, occupant, lessee, contract purchaser or other person having possession or control of property or the supervision of any construction project.

PERSON RESPONSIBLE. The person responsible for abating a nuisance shall include the following.

(1) The owner.

(2) The person in charge of property, as defined in this section.

(3) The person who caused to come into or continue in existence a nuisance as defined in this chapter or another ordinance of this city.

PUBLIC PLACE. A building, way, place or accommodation, whether publicly or privately owned, open and available to the general public.

(’91 Code, § 4-4.1) (Ord. 911, passed 4-28-87)


93.02 NUISANCES DECLARED.

The acts, conditions or objects specifically enumerated and defined in this chapter are declared public nuisances; and such acts, conditions or objects may be abated by any of the procedures set forth in §§ 93.70 through 93.75 of this chapter.

(’91 Code, § 4-4.45) (Ord. 911, passed 4-28-87)

ANIMALS


93.10 CARCASS REMOVAL.

(A) No person shall permit a carcass of an animal, dog or cat owned or controlled by him to remain upon public property, or to be exposed on private property, for a period of time longer than is reasonably necessary to remove or dispose of the carcass.

(B) No person shall permit animal, cat or dog feces to remain on property controlled by the person for a period of time longer than is reasonably necessary to remove and dispose of the feces.

(’91 Code, § 4-4.2) (Ord. 911, passed 4-28-87) Penalty, see § 93.99


93.11 AT-LARGE ANIMALS.

(A) No owner or person in charge of an animal shall permit the animal to be at large.

(B) Any animal found at large may be taken into custody by the city police and held by the city or a designated facility. If the owner or person in charge of the animal is known, that person shall be notified in writing of the impoundment and given notice that unless the fee for transfer of the animal to the place of impoundment, costs of care and feeding of the animal together with an administrative fee of not more than $20 are paid to the city within no less than five days (or eight days in the event of notification by mail) from the date of notification, the owner’s rights will be forfeited, and the animal may be handled according to the place of impoundment’s policies, rules and regulations, including humane destruction of the animal. Notification of the owner or person in charge will be effective upon personal delivery of the notice or mailing a first-class letter to the last known address of the owner or person in charge of an impounded animal.

(’91 Code, § 4-4.4) (Ord. 911, passed 4-28-87; Am. Ord. 1251, passed 4-9-19) Penalty, see § 93.99

Cross reference:

Animals, see Ch. 90


93.12 SWINE.

No person shall keep any pig, hog or swine within the city.

(’91 Code, § 4-4.5) (Ord. 911, passed 4-28-87) Penalty, see § 93.99


93.13 HORSES.

Except as authorized by the city Police Department for police or public safety, no person shall permit any horse owned by him/her or under his/her control to be in or upon any public park property except on a designated bridle path.

(’91 Code, § 4-4.6) (Ord. 911, passed 4-28-87; Am. Ord. 1099, passed 6-25-02) Penalty, see § 93.99


93.14 DANGEROUS ANIMALS.

No person may permit a wild or domesticated dangerous animal to run at large. No person may keep any dangerous or venomous reptile in captivity, or transport any snake into the city.

(’91 Code, § 4-4.7) (Ord. 911, passed 4-28-87) Penalty, see § 93.99

NUISANCES AFFECTING PUBLIC HEALTH


93.25 ENUMERATION OF NUISANCES.

No person shall cause or permit on property owned or controlled by him/her a nuisance affecting public health. The following are nuisances affecting public health and may be abated as provided in this chapter.

(A) Privies. Open vaults or privies constructed and maintained within the city, except those constructed or maintained in connection with construction projects in accordance with the health division regulations.

(B) Debris. Accumulations of debris, rubbish, manure and other refuse that are not removed within a reasonable time and that affect the health of the city.

(C) Stagnant water. Stagnant water which affords a breeding place for mosquitoes and other insect pests.

(D) Water pollution. Pollution of a body of water, well, spring, stream or drainage ditch by sewage, industrial wastes or other substances placed in or near the water in a manner that will cause harmful material to pollute the water.

(E) Food. Decayed or unwholesome food which is offered for human consumption.

(F) Odor. Premises which are in such a state or condition as to cause an offensive odor or which are in an unsanitary condition.

(G) Surface drainage. Drainage of liquid wastes from private premises.

(H) Septic tanks. Septic tanks which are in an unsanitary condition or which cause an offensive odor.

(’91 Code, § 4-4.11) (Ord. 911, passed 4-28-87) Penalty, see § 93.99

NUISANCES AFFECTING PUBLIC SAFETY


93.35 CONTAINERS.

No owner or person in charge of property shall create a hazard by maintaining or leaving in a place accessible to children a container with a compartment of more than one and one-half cubic feet capacity and a door or lid which locks or fastens automatically when closed and which cannot be easily opened from the inside.

(’91 Code, § 4-4.15(1)) (Ord. 911, passed 4-28-87) Penalty, see § 93.99


93.36 WELLS AND HOLES.

No owner or person in charge of property shall create a hazard by being the owner or otherwise having possession of property upon which there is a well, cistern, cesspool, excavation or other hole of a depth of four feet or more and a top width of 12 inches, or more, fail or refuse to cover or fence it with a suitable protective construction.

(’91 Code, § 4-4.15(2)) (Ord. 911, passed 4-28-87) Penalty, see § 93.99


93.37 FENCES.

(A) No owner or person in charge of property shall create a hazard by being the owner or otherwise having possession of property which there is a fence that is not structurally stable or which is in such disrepair that children could get through the disrepaired areas.

(’91 Code, § 4-4.15(3))

(B) (1) No owner or persons in charge of property shall construct or maintain a barbed-wire fence thereon, or permit barbed-wire to remain as part of a fence along a sidewalk or public way; except the wire may be placed above the top of other fencing not less than six feet high.

(2) No owner or person in charge of property shall construct, maintain or operate an electric fence along a sidewalk or public way or along the adjoining property of another person.

(’91 Code, § 4-4.21)

(Ord. 911, passed 4-28-87) Penalty, see § 93.99


93.38 ATTRACTIVE NUISANCES.

(A) No owner or person in charge of property shall not permit thereon any of the following.

(1) Unguarded machinery, equipment or other devices which are attractive, dangerous and accessible to children.

(2) Lumber, logs or piling placed or stored in a manner as to be attractive, dangerous and accessible to children.

(3) An open pit, quarry, cistern or other excavation projects without reasonable safeguards to prevent injury or death to playing children.

(B) This section shall not apply to authorized construction projects with reasonable safeguards to prevent injury or death to playing children.

(’91 Code, § 4-4.16) (Ord. 911, passed 4-28-87) Penalty, see § 93.99


93.39 SNOW AND ICE.

No owner or person in charge of property, improved or unimproved, abutting on a public sidewalk shall permit the following.

(A) Snow to remain on the sidewalk for a period longer than the first two hours of daylight after the snow has fallen.

(B) Ice to remain on the sidewalk for more than two hours of daylight after the ice has formed unless the ice is covered with sand, ashes or other suitable material to assure safe travel.

(’91 Code, § 4-4.17) (Ord. 911, passed 4-28-87)


93.40 NOXIOUS VEGETATION.

(A) Between April 1 and November 1 of any calendar year, no owner or person in charge of property may allow noxious vegetation to be on the property or in the right-of-way of a public thoroughfare abutting on the property within the city limits. It shall be the duty of an owner or person in charge of property to cut down and haul away or to destroy grass, shrubbery, brush, bushes, weeds, or other noxious vegetation as often as needed to prevent them from becoming unsightly.

(B) Definitions.

(1) The term NOXIOUS VEGETATION does not include vegetation that constitutes an agricultural crop, unless that vegetation is a health hazard or a fire or traffic hazard within the meaning of subsection (B)(2) of this section.

(2) The term NOXIOUS VEGETATION does include any of the following:

(a) Vegetation more than ten inches high and not within the exception stated in subsection (B)(1) of this section and that does not create a fire or traffic hazard.

(b) Vegetation that is either: (1) a health hazard; (2) a fire hazard because it is near other combustibles, (3) a traffic hazard because it impairs the view of a public thoroughfare or right-of-way; (4) impairing the use of any public thoroughfare or right-of-way; or (5) maturing or allowed to go to seed and/or spreading to abutting properties. 

(’91 Code, § 4-4.18) (Ord. 911, passed 4-28-87; Am. Ord. 1251, passed 4-9-19) Penalty, see § 93.99


93.41 RUBBISH.

No person shall deposit upon public or private property any kind of rubbish, trash, debris, refuse or any substance that would mar the appearance, create a stench or fire hazard, detract from the cleanliness or safety of the property or would be likely to injure a person, animal or vehicle traveling upon a public way.

(’91 Code, § 4-4.19) (Ord. 911, passed 4-28-87) Penalty, see § 93.99


93.42 TREES.

No owner or person in charge of property shall allow to stand a dead or decaying tree that is a hazard to the public or to persons or property on or near the property.

(’91 Code, § 4-4.20) (Ord. 911, passed 4-28-87) Penalty, see § 93.99


93.43 SURFACE WATERS; DRAINAGE.

(A) No owner or person in charge of a building or structure shall allow or permit rainwater, ice or snow to fall from the building or structure onto a street or public sidewalk or to flow across the sidewalk.

(B) The owner or person in charge of property shall install and maintain in proper state of repair adequate drainpipes or a drainage system, so that any overflow water accumulating on the roof or about the building is not carried across or upon the sidewalk.

(’91 Code, § 4-4.22) (Ord. 911, passed 4-28-87) Penalty, see § 93.99

NUISANCES AFFECTING PUBLIC USE AND ENJOYMENT


93.55 RADIO AND TELEVISION INTERFERENCE.

(A) No person shall operate or use an electrical, mechanical or other device, apparatus, instrument or machine that causes reasonably preventable interference with radio or television reception by a radio or television receiver of good engineering design.

(B) This section does not apply to devices licensed, approved and operated under the rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission.

(’91 Code, § 4-4.31) (Ord. 911, passed 4-28-87) Penalty, see § 93.99


93.56 JUNK.

(A) No person responsible shall keep any junk outdoors on any street, lot or premises, or in a building that is not wholly or entirely closed.

(B) Definitions.

(1) JUNK as used in this section includes all inoperative vehicles, abandoned vehicles, unlicensed vehicles, old vehicle parts, old machinery, old machinery parts, old appliances or parts thereof, appliances that are not being used for the purpose they are manufactured for, discarded furniture, mattresses, carpeting, old or scrap copper, brass, lead, or any other non-ferrous metal, old or discarded exercise equipment, machines, or parts thereof, old or discarded rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber, debris, waste or used lumber, or salvaged wood, iron, steel or other old or scrap ferrous materials, old or discarded glass, tinware, plastic or old or discarded household goods or hardware, old or discarded cardboard, wooden pallets or other shipping materials, and old or discarded apparel. Neatly stacked firewood located on a side yard or a rear yard is not considered junk.

(2) INOPERATIVE VEHICLE is a vehicle that cannot be immediately operated.

(C) This section shall not apply to junk kept in a duly licensed junkyard or automobile wrecking house. 

(D) This section shall not apply to repair work being done on vehicles when the repairs last less than 30 days or when the repairs are done on a vehicle not located on private property. 

(’91 Code, § 4-4.32) (Ord. 911, passed 4-28-87; Am. Ord. 1251, passed 4-9-19) Penalty, see § 93.99


93.57 OUTDOOR BURNING.

(A) Definitions. As used in this section, the following definitions shall apply:

CITY means the city of Prineville.

COMPLETELY EXTINGUISHED means that there shall not be any smoke coming from the burn barrel or burn pile and the burn barrel or burn pile shall contain no smoldering material, nor ashes or embers.

FIRE SEASON is that part of a year that Crook County Fire and Rescue designates, based upon weather, the amount of fuel, and moisture content of the fuel, as to when the likelihood of fire is greatly increased. Historically, the fire season runs from a day in June through a day in September of each year.

NO BURN DAY means a day designated by Crook County Fire and Rescue in which certain outdoor burning is inappropriate and/or unsafe.

OPEN PILE, OPEN BURN PILE, or BURN PILE shall mean an open ground level fire with a fuel area larger than a recreational fire.

OUTDOOR BURNING means burning material outdoors in a burn barrel, an open burn pile, or a recreational fire.

RECREATIONAL FIRE means an open ground level fire in which the total fuel area shall be three feet or less in diameter and two feet or less in height.

(B) Burn permits. Annual permits to burn are required before using burn barrels or open burn piles. Burn permits shall be effective January 1 through December 31 of the same year. The annual fee for each permit shall be as established by city resolution. The permit must be shown to a city or Crook County Fire and Rescue representative upon request. The permit will be issued to the applicant for burning items in a burn barrel or in an open pile at a specific address and such permit is not transferable to any other address. All persons burning in a burn barrel or in an open pile inside city limits shall keep a copy of the Crook County Fire and Rescue Outdoor Burning Regulations at the burn site.

(C) Outdoor burning requirements. Persons performing outdoor burning must meet all the following requirements:

(1) There shall be no burning upon restriction by Crook County Fire and Rescue due to fire/safety conditions.

(2) There shall be a person 14 years of age or over who is equipped with adequate fire suppression equipment physically present at the burn barrel, burn pile, or recreational fire at all times burning is done.

(3) The burn barrel, burn pile, or recreational fire shall be at least 25 feet away from any combustibles, vegetation, structures, or property boundary line and a ten-foot fuel break exposing mineral soil must be maintained around the burn barrel, open pile, or recreational fire.

(4) Burning shall be conducted in a manner and in conditions that prevent any burning materials, sparks, or embers going onto any combustible material.

(D) Burn barrels. Persons burning in a burn barrel must meet all the following requirements in addition to the requirements under subsection (C) of this section:

(1) The burn barrel must be covered with a maximum one-quarter-inch screen in good condition.

(2) There shall be no holes in the burn barrel except for air holes not less than one-quarter inch in diameter. There shall be no holes in the burn barrel caused by rust rot.

(3) Only dry paper shall be burned in the burn barrel.

(4) City Planning staff shall review and determine if property upon which the burn barrel is located has adequate area for compliance with the 25-foot setback prior to issuance of city permit for burn barrel.

(5) All burning in burn barrels may be done daily except for holidays set out under Oregon law and no burn days. Burning may be done beginning at 9:00 a.m. and be completely extinguished two hours before sunset except during a fire season when burning shall begin no earlier than 9:00 a.m. and be completely extinguished at noon.

(6) There must be a valid burn permit issued for the address for which the burn barrel is located.

(7) Prior to burning, the burn permit holder shall check the Crook County Fire and Rescue website, the city’s website, or call (541) 447-5011 to verify that burning is allowed.

(E) Open piles. Persons burning in an open pile must meet the following requirements in addition to those requirements in subsection (C) of this section:

(1) Open burn piles must only contain dry leaves, dry wood, or dry paper.

(2) Burn piles may not exceed six feet in diameter and three feet in height.

(3) City Planning staff shall review and determine if property has adequate area for compliance with the 25-foot setback prior to issuance of city permit for burn pile. 

(4) All burning in open piles may be done daily except for holidays set out under Oregon law, on no burn days, and during the fire season. Burning may be done beginning at 9:00 a.m. and be completely extinguished two hours before sunset. 

(5) There must be a valid burn permit issued for the address for which the burn pile is located.

(6) Prior to burning, the burn permit holder shall check the Crook County Fire and Rescue website, the city’s website, or call (541) 447-5011 to verify that burning is allowed.

(F) Subsection (E) of this section shall not apply to any fire in which the Crook County Fire and Rescue has agreed to participate.

(G) All commercial, construction, and demolition open burning is prohibited within the city limits.

(H) Recreational fire. Persons burning a recreational fire must meet the following requirements in addition to those requirements in subsection (C) of this section:

(1) No permit is required, but City Planning staff shall review and determine if the property upon which the recreational fire is located complies with the 25-foot setback. 

(2) There shall be no recreational fires during the fire season on days designated as no burn days.

(3) A recreational fire must only contain dry leaves, dry wood, or dry paper.

(I) There shall be no burning upon restriction by the Fire Department due to fire/safety conditions. The Crook County Fire and Rescue Fire Chief is empowered to implement city outdoor burning regulations through Crook County Fire and Rescue programs. Crook County Fire and Rescue and local law enforcement are empowered to enforce city outdoor burn regulations.

(J) Penalties. The maximum penalty for a person responsible for each violation of this section shall be $500. Upon first conviction the fine shall be not less than $50. Upon a second conviction the fine shall be not less than $100, and on the third and subsequent convictions the fine shall be $500 and there shall be no further burn permits issued for burning at the address of the third conviction or issued to any person who has been convicted of violating this section three or more times.

(Ord. 1022, passed 9-12-95; Am. Ord. 1108, passed 12-9-03; Am. Ord. 1139, passed 11-14-06; Am. Ord. 1217, passed 9-22-15)

Cross reference:

Uniform Fire Code, see Ch. 95




93.58 NOISE.

(A) Purpose. This section is enacted to protect, preserve, and promote the health, safety, welfare, peace, and quiet of the citizens of the City of Prineville through the reduction, control, and prevention of loud and raucous noise, or any noise which unreasonably disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety; or causes public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm to reasonable persons of ordinary sensitivity. Nothing in this section shall limit the city or state in enforcing the regulations of Oregon Administrative Rule 340, Division 35 – Noise Control Regulations.

(B) Findings. The City Council of the City of Prineville finds:

(1) Loud and raucous noise degrades the environment of the city to a degree that:

(a) Is harmful to the health, welfare, and safety of its inhabitants and visitors;

(b) Interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property;

(c) Interferes with the well-being, tranquility, and privacy of the home; and

(d) Both causes and aggravates health problems.

(2) Both the effective control and the elimination of loud and raucous noise are essential to the health and welfare of the city’s inhabitants and visitors, and to the conduct of the normal pursuits of life, including recreation, work, and communication.

(3) The use of sound amplification equipment creates loud and raucous noise that may, in a particular manner and at a particular time and place, substantially and unreasonably invade the privacy, peace, and freedom of inhabitants of, and visitors to, the city.

(4) Certain short-term easing of noise restrictions is essential to allow the construction and maintenance of structures, infrastructure, and other elements necessary for the physical and commercial vitality of the city.

(5) The obligation to draft regulations that affect speech in a content-neutral fashion is of paramount importance to protect the freedom of expression guaranteed by Article I, Section 8, of the Oregon Constitution and the First Amendment of the United States Constitution. This section enacts narrowly drawn, content-neutral regulations that are to be interpreted as such so as not to infringe upon constitutionally protected rights.

(C) Scope. This section applies to the control of all sound originating within the jurisdictional limits of the city.

(D) Definitions.

CITY means the City of Prineville.

CITY MANAGER means the City Manager or designee.

EMERGENCY means any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage demanding immediate attention.

EMERGENCY WORK means any work performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating physical trauma or property damage, whether actually caused or threatened by an emergency, or work by private or public utilities when restoring utility service.

NOISE SENSITIVE AREA includes, but is not limited to, real property normally used for residential and/or sleeping purposes, or normally used as a school, church, hospital or public library.

PERSON means any individual, firm, association, partnership, joint venture, or corporation.

PLAINLY AUDIBLE means any sound that can be detected by a reasonable person of ordinary sensitivities using his or her unaided hearing faculties.

PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY means any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk, alley, or similar place normally accessible to the public which is owned or controlled by a government entity.

PUBLIC SPACE means any real property or structures on real property, owned by a government entity and normally accessible to the public, including but not limited to parks and other recreational areas.

RESIDENTIAL AREA means any real property which contains a structure or building in which one or more persons reside; provided, that the structure or building is properly zoned, or is legally nonconforming, for residential use in accordance with the terms and maps of the city’s zoning ordinance.

(E) General prohibition.

(1) No person shall make, continue, or cause to be made or continued:

(a) Any unnecessary or unreasonably loud or raucous noise; or

(b) Any noise which unreasonably disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary sensitivity, within the jurisdictional limits of the city; or

(c) Any noise which is so harsh, prolonged, unnatural, or unusual in time or place as to occasion unreasonable discomfort to any persons within the neighborhood from which said noises emanate, or as to unreasonably interfere with the peace and comfort of neighbors or their guests, or operators or customers in places of business, or as to detrimentally or adversely affect such residences or places of business.

(2) Factors for determining whether a sound is unreasonably loud and raucous include, but are not limited to, the following:

(a) The proximity of the sound to sleeping facilities, whether residential or commercial;

(b) The land use, nature, and zoning of the area from which the sound emanates and the area where it is received or perceived;

(c) The time of day or night the sound occurs;

(d) The duration of the sound; and

(e) Whether the sound is recurrent, intermittent, or constant.

(F) Noises prohibited. The following acts are declared to be per se violations of this section. This enumeration does not constitute an exclusive list:

(1) Unreasonable noises. The unreasonable making of, or knowingly permitting to be made, any unreasonably loud, unnecessary, boisterous or unusual noise, disturbance, commotion or vibration. The ordinary and usual sounds, noises, commotion or vibration incidental to the operation of any residential, commercial or public property when conducted in accordance with the usual standards of practice and in a manner which will not unreasonably disturb the peace and comfort of adjacent residences or which will not detrimentally affect the operators of adjacent places of business are exempted from this provision.

(2) Vehicle horns, nonemergency signaling devices, and similar devices. The unreasonable and/or unnecessary sounding of any horn, nonemergency signaling device, or other similar device.

(3) Radios, televisions, stereos, loudspeakers, musical instruments and similar personal sound making devices. The use or operation of a radio, television, stereo, musical instrument, or similar device that produces or reproduces sound in a manner that is plainly audible to any person other than the player(s) or operator(s) of the device, and those who are voluntarily listening to the sound, and which unreasonably disturbs the peace, quiet, and comfort of neighbors in residential or noise sensitive areas.

(4) Yelling, shouting, and similar activities. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing in residential or noise sensitive areas or in public places at any time or place so as to unreasonably disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of reasonable persons of ordinary sensitivities.

(5) Animals and birds. Unreasonably loud and raucous noise emitted by an animal or bird for which a person is responsible. A person is responsible for an animal if the person owns, controls or otherwise cares for the animal or bird.

(6) Loading or unloading merchandise, materials, equipment. The creation of unreasonably loud, raucous, and excessive noise in connection with the loading or unloading of any vehicle at a place of business or residence.

(7) Construction or repair of buildings, excavation of streets and highways. All outdoor construction shall be conducted in compliance with the hours listed in § 113.02, Hours set, unless exempted under subsection (G) of this section.

(8) Power tools and similar devices. The operation of power tools or similar devices in residential or noise sensitive areas which creates unreasonably loud and raucous noise or which creates a noise that would be reasonable except for the time of day/night in which the noise takes place.

(9) Commercial establishments adjacent to residential property. Unreasonably loud and raucous noise from the premises of any commercial establishment, including any outdoor area which is part of or under the control of the establishment.

(10) Idling of commercial motor vehicles. In accordance with Oregon House Bill 2081, no commercial motor vehicle shall be allowed to idle for more than five minutes in any continuous 60-minute period, except as authorized as an exception under House Bill 2081.

(G) Exemptions. Sounds caused by the following are exempt from the prohibitions set out in subsection (F) of this section and are in addition to the exemptions specifically set forth in subsection (F) of this section:

(1) Motor vehicles on traffic ways of the city; provided, that they do not create unmuffled engine or braking noise and the prohibitions of subsections (F)(2) and (3) of this section continue to apply.

(2) Sirens, whistles, or bells lawfully used by emergency vehicles, or other alarm systems used in case of fire, collision, civil defense, police activity, or imminent danger.

(3) The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency or the emission of sound in the performance of emergency work.

(4) Repairs or excavations of bridges, streets or highways or utility structures by or on behalf of the city, the state, or the federal government when public safety, welfare and convenience render it impractical to perform the work in the hours prescribed in § 113.02, Hours set.

(5) Outdoor school and playground activities. Reasonable activities conducted on public playgrounds and public or private school grounds, which are conducted in accordance with the manner in which such spaces are generally used, including but not limited to school athletic and school entertainment events.

(6) Other outdoor community events. Outdoor gatherings, public dances, shows and sporting events, and other similar outdoor events.

(7) Commercial and industrial businesses existing prior to the date of adoption of this section which are operating within their historically typical noise levels. Any increase in noise due to change of equipment, operations or any other reason shall be subject to the standards of this section.

(H) Enforcement. The following individuals shall enforce this section: The City Manager or Police Chief will have primary responsibility for the enforcement of the noise regulations contained in this section. Nothing in this section shall prevent the City Manager or Police Chief from obtaining voluntary compliance by way of warning, notice or education.

(I) Penalties.

(1) A person who violates a provision of this section is guilty of an infraction which is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.

(2) Each occurrence of a violation, or, in the case of continuous violations, each day a violation occurs or continues, constitutes a separate offense and may be punished separately.

(J) Severability clause. A determination of invalidity or unconstitutionality by a court of competent jurisdiction of any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this section shall not affect the validity of the remaining parts to this section.

(K) Savings clause. A prosecution which is pending on the effective date of this section and which arose from a violation of an ordinance repealed by this section, or a prosecution which is started within one year after the effective date of this section arising from a violation of an ordinance repealed by this section, shall be tried and determined exactly as if the ordinance had not been repealed.

(’91 Code, § 4-4.34) (Ord. 911, passed 4-28-87; Am. Ord. 962, passed 3-12-91; Am. Ord. 978, passed 6-11-91; Am. Ord. 1196, passed 8-27-13) Penalty, see § 93.99


93.59 PARKING.

(A) No person shall park any car or pickup on any public street for a period in excess of ten days. No person shall park any other vehicle on any public street for a period in excess of three days. The intent of this section is to penalize people who use the street as a storage area for their vehicles but not to penalize people who use their cars or pickups on a day-to-day or other similar basis and park that vehicle on the street. Movement of a vehicle within a 500-foot radius shall not extend the time limits for parking violations pursuant to this section.

(B) Definitions.

(1) STREET means every public way, road, thoroughfare, alley, and place, including bridges and other structures within the boundaries of this city, open, used or intended for use of the general public for vehicles or vehicular traffic as a matter of right.

(2) VEHICLE means any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway and includes vehicles that are propelled or powered by any means, which includes, but is not limited to, boats, trailers, motorhomes, and travel trailers.

(’91 Code, § 4-4.35) (Ord. 911, passed 4-28-87; Am. Ord. 1251, passed 4-9-19) Penalty, see § 93.99

Cross reference:

Parking, see Ch. 72

ABATEMENT PROCEDURE


93.70 NOTICE TO ABATE.

(A) If the City Manager or his/her designee is satisfied that a nuisance exists, the City Manager or his/her designee shall cause a notice to be posted on the premises or at the site of the nuisance, directing the person responsible to abate the nuisance.

(B) At the time of posting, the City Manager or his/her designee shall cause a copy of the notice to be forwarded by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, to the person responsible at the last known address of such person.

(C) The notice to abate shall contain:

(1) A description of the real property, by street address or otherwise, on which the nuisance exists.

(2) A direction to abate the nuisance within ten days from the date of the notice.

(3) A description of the nuisance.

(4) A statement that unless the nuisance is removed, the city may abate the nuisance and the cost of abatement will be charged to the person responsible.

(5) A statement that failure to abate a nuisance may warrant imposition of a fine.

(6) A statement that the person responsible may protest the order to abate by giving notice to the City Manager within ten days from the date of the notice, together with a statement from the person responsible as to why they feel no nuisance exists.

(D) If the person responsible is not the owner, an additional notice shall be sent to the owner stating that if the cost of abatement is not paid by the person responsible, then such cost may be assessed to and become a lien on the property.

(E) On completion of the posting and mailing, the person posting and mailing shall execute and file certificates stating the date and place of the mailing and posting, respectively, with the City Recorder.

(F) An error in the name or address of the person responsible shall not make the notice void, and in such case, the posted notice shall be sufficient.

(’91 Code, § 4-4.46) (Ord. 911, passed 4-28-87; Am. Ord. 1251, passed 4-9-19)


93.71 ABATEMENT BY PERSONS RESPONSIBLE.

(A) Within ten days after the posting and mailing of the notice, as provided in § 93.70, the person responsible shall remove the nuisance or show that no nuisance exists.

(B) A person responsible, protesting that no nuisance exists, shall file with the City Manager a written statement which shall specify the basis for so protesting.

(C) The statement shall be referred to the City Council as part of its regular agenda at its next succeeding meeting. At the time set for consideration of the abatement, the person protesting may appear and be heard by the Council; and the Council shall determine whether or not a nuisance in fact exists; and the determination shall be entered in the official minutes of the Council. Council determination shall be required only in those cases where a written statement has been filed as provided.

(D) If the Council determines that a nuisance does in fact exist, the person reasonable shall, within ten days after the Council determination, abate the nuisance.

(’91 Code, § 4-4.47) (Ord. 911, passed 4-28-87; Am. Ord. 1251, passed 4-9-19) Penalty, see § 93.99


93.72 JOINT RESPONSIBILITY

If more than one person is responsible, they shall be jointly and severally liable for abating the nuisance or the costs incurred by the city in abating the nuisance.

(’91 Code, § 4-4.48) (Ord. 911, passed 4-28-87; Am. Ord. 1251, passed 4-9-19) Penalty, see § 93.99


93.73 ABATEMENT BY CITY.

(A) Abatement. If, within the time limit set by the city in the notice, as provided in § 93.70, any nuisance described in the notice has not been removed and abated, or cause shown as shown in § 93.71 why such nuisance should not be removed or abated, or where summary abatement is authorized, the City Manager or his/her designee may cause the nuisance to be abated, including disposal in an approved manner.

(B) The officer charged with the abatement of the nuisance shall have the right at reasonable times to enter into or upon property to investigate the nuisance. The officer charged with abatement of the nuisance and others as necessary shall have the right at reasonable times to enter into or upon the property to cause the removal of the nuisance with the exception of any nuisance involving personal property as defined in § 96.01, which shall require a warrant pursuant to this section unless a judicially recognized exception to the warrant requirement of Article I, §9, of the Oregon Constitution or the Fourth Amendment of the United States Constitution exists.

(C) Warrants. The City Manager or his/her designee may request any Circuit Court judge to issue a nuisance abatement warrant whenever entry onto private property is necessary to remove and abate any nuisance, or whenever the City Manager or his/her designee has reasonable cause to believe that there exists upon any property any violation described in this title.

(D) Grounds for issuance of nuisance abatement warrants; affidavit.

(1) Affidavit. A nuisance abatement warrant will be issued only upon cause, supported by affidavit, particularly describing the applicant’s status in applying for the warrant, the statute, ordinance or regulation requiring or authorizing the removal and abatement of the nuisance, the property to be entered, the basis upon which cause exists to remove or abate the nuisance, and a statement of the general types and estimated quantity of the items to be removed or conditions abated.

(2) Cause. Cause will be deemed to exist if reasonable legislative or administrative standards for removing and abating nuisances are satisfied with respect to any property, or if there is cause to believe that a nuisance violation exists, as defined in this title, with respect to the designated property.

(E) Procedure for issuance of a nuisance abatement warrant.

(1) Examination. Before issuing a nuisance abatement warrant, the judge may examine the applicant and any other witness under oath and shall be satisfied of the existing of grounds for granting such application.

(2) Issuance. If the judge is satisfied that cause for the removal and abatement of any nuisance exists and that the other requirements for granting the application are satisfied, the judge will issue the warrant, particularly describing the person or persons authorized to execute the warrant, the property to be entered, and a statement of the general type and estimated quantity of the items to be removed or conditions abated. The warrant will contain a direction that it be executed during business hours, or where the judge has specially determined upon a showing that it cannot be effectively executed between those hours, that it be executed at any additional or other time of the day or night.

(3) Police assistance. In issuing a nuisance abatement warrant, the judge may authorize any peace officer, as defined in Oregon Revised Statutes, to enter the described property to remove any person or obstacle and to assist the representative of the city in any way necessary to enter the property and remove and abate the nuisance.

(4) Effect of abatement. Upon the issuance of the nuisance abatement warrant, the owner’s rights to any property authorized to be abated will be forfeited, and the property may be destroyed by the seizing agency or department.

(5) Return. A nuisance abatement warrant shall be executed within ten working days of its issue and returned to the judge by whom it was issued within ten working days from its date of execution. After the expiration of the time prescribed in this subsection, the warrant unless executed is void.

(F) Cost of nuisance abatement.

(1) Whenever a nuisance is abated by the city, the City Manager, or his/her designee, shall keep an accurate record of the expenses incurred by the city in physically abating the nuisances and shall include therein a charge of $50 or 15% of those expenses, whichever is the greater for administrative overhead.

(2) When the city has abated a nuisance maintained by any owner of real property, for each subsequent nuisance which is abated by the city within two consecutive calendar years concerning real property owned by the same person, an additional civil penalty of $500 shall be added to the costs, charges, and civil penalties. The additional civil penalty shall be imposed without regard to whether the nuisance abated by the city involved the same real property or is of the same character as the previous nuisance.

(3) Costs and penalties resulting from nuisance abatement shall be assessed as lien upon the real property as provided in § 93.74.

(’91 Code, § 4-4.49) (Ord. 911, passed 4-28-87; Am. Ord. 1251, passed 4-9-19)


93.74 ASSESSMENT OF COSTS.

(A) The City Manager, or his/her designee, by registered or certified mail, shall send to the person responsible a notice stating:

(1) The total cost of abatement, including the administrative overhead and any civil penalties so authorized.

(2) That the cost as indicated will be assessed to and become a lien against the property, unless paid within 30 days from the date of the notice.

(3) That if the owner or person responsible objects to the cost of the abatement as indicated, a notice of objection may be filed with the City Manager no more than ten days from the date of the notice.

(B) If an objection to the cost of abatement is filed as provided in subsection (A) of this section, the objection shall be referred to the City Council as part of its regular agenda at its next succeeding meeting. At the time set for consideration of the abatement, the person objecting may appear and be heard by the Council; and the Council shall hear and make a decision on the objection to the costs assessed. Council determination shall be required only in those cases where a written objection has been filed as provided.

(C) If the costs of abatement are not paid within 30 days from the date of the notice or the date of Council decision if an objection is filed, the costs of abatement shall be entered in the city lien docket and constitute a lien on the property from which the nuisance was removed or abated.

(D) The lien shall be enforced in the same manner as liens for street improvements are enforced and shall bear interest at the rate of 9% per annum and interest shall begin to run from the date of entry of the lien in the lien docket.

(E) An error in the name of the owner or person responsible shall not void the assessment, nor will a failure to receive the notice of the proposed assessment render the assessment void but it shall remain a valid lien against the property.

(’91 Code, § 4-4.50) (Ord. 911, passed 4-28-87; Am. Ord. 1251, passed 4-9-19)


93.75 SUMMARY ABATEMENT.

The procedure provided in this chapter is not exclusive, but is in addition to the procedures provided by other sections of the code. The Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, Chief of Police or the City Manager may proceed summarily to abate health or other nuisance which unmistakably exists and which imminently endangers health or property. 

(’91 Code, § 4-4.51) (Ord. 911, passed 4-28-87; Am. Ord. 1251, passed 4-9-19)


93.99 PENALTY.

(A) Any person or persons who shall be convicted of being the author or keeper of a nuisance, or otherwise guilty of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $250 for the first offense, and for the second and subsequent offenses, not less than $100, nor more than $1,000.

(B) All persons responsible shall be liable for any injuries resulting from a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.

(C) Each day’s violation of a provision of this chapter constitutes a separate offense.

(D) The abatement of a nuisance is not a penalty for violating this chapter, but is an additional remedy. The imposition of a penalty does not relieve a person of the duty to abate the nuisance; however, abatement of a nuisance within ten days of the date of the notice to abate, or if a written protest has been filed, then abatement within ten days of Council determination that a nuisance exists, will relieve the person responsible from the imposition of any fine under subsection (A) of this section.

(’91 Code, § 4-4.53) (Ord. 911, passed 4-28-87; Am. Ord. 1251, passed 4-9-19)


CHAPTER 94: AMUSEMENTS

Section

Outdoor Dances

94.01    Permit required

94.02    Permit approval

94.03    Permit information

94.04    Inspection

94.05    Permit denial or revocation; appeals

94.99    Penalty

Cross reference:

Parades, see Ch. 71

OUTDOOR DANCES


94.01 PERMIT REQUIRED.

No person shall operate an outdoor dance without first obtaining a permit from the Chief of Police.

(’91 Code, § 6-7.1) (Ord. 970, passed 3-12-91) Penalty, see § 94.99


94.02 PERMIT APPROVAL.

(A) The Chief of Police shall issue the permit if the Chief finds the following.

(1) The proposed dance will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety and recreation.

(2) The conduct of the dance will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of traffic.

(3) The conduct of the dance will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers to properly police the activity and the contiguous areas as to prevent normal police protection to the city.

(4) The conduct of the activity is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property or incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct.

(5) The proposed use of a park or park facility will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of the park.

(B) The Chief may impose conditions on the permit necessary to ensure compliance with this section.

(’91 Code, § 6-7.2) (Ord. 970, passed 3-12-91)


94.03 PERMIT INFORMATION.

A permit shall contain the following information.

(A) Date of the dance.

(B) Location of the dance, including, if applicable, restrictions to certain areas of the park.

(C) Hours when the dance will start and terminate.

(D) Special conditions imposed on the dance.

(’91 Code, § 6-7.3) (Ord. 970, passed 3-12-91)


94.04 INSPECTION.

The Chief of Police and city police officers may go upon the premises or facilities for which the permit has been granted for the purpose of inspection and enforcement of this subchapter and state law.

(’91 Code, § 6-7.4) (Ord. 970, passed 3-12-91)


94.05 PERMIT DENIAL OR REVOCATION; APPEALS.

(A) An applicant whose permit has been denied or revoked shall be given notice of the denial and revocation that contains the reason for the denial or revocation.

(B) A permit denial or revocation may be appealed to the Council by filing notice of the appeal with the City Manager.

(’91 Code, § 6-7.5) (Ord. 970, passed 3-12-91)


94.99 PENALTY.

Violation of a provision of § 94.01 is punishable by a fine not to exceed $100.

(’91 Code, § 6-7.6) (Ord. 970, passed 3-12-91)


CHAPTER 95: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION

Section

Uniform Fire Code

95.01    Adoption of Uniform Fire Code

95.02    Bureau of fire prevention

95.03    Jurisdiction

95.04    Districts established

95.05    Appeals

95.99    Penalty

UNIFORM FIRE CODE


95.01 ADOPTION OF UNIFORM FIRE CODE.

There is hereby adopted by the city for the purposes of providing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire, hazardous materials or explosion, that certain code known as the Uniform Fire Code published by the International Fire Code Institute, being in particular the 1994 edition with the 1996 amendments published by the Oregon State Fire Marshal; its appendix chapters in their entirety thereof; and the appendix standards chapters in their entirety thereof of which not less than three copies have been and are now filed in the office of the Recorder of the city; and same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein and from the date on which this subchapter shall take effect.

(’91 Code, § 7-4.1) (Ord. 946, passed 9-11-90; Am. Ord. 1047, passed 9-9-97)


95.02 BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION.

The Uniform Fire Code as adopted and amended herein shall be enforced by the Fire Department of the city which is hereby established and which shall be operated under the supervision of the Chief of the Fire Department.

(Ord. 1047, passed 9-9-97)


95.03 JURISDICTION.

Wherever the word "jurisdiction" is used in the Uniform Fire Code it shall mean the City of Prineville.

(Ord. 1047, passed 9-9-97)


95.04 DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED.

(A) Establishment of limits of district in which storage of flammable or combustible liquids in outside above ground tanks is prohibited. The limits referred to in Section 7902.2.2.1 and 7904.2.5.4.2 of the Uniform Fire Code in which the storage of flammable and combustible liquids is restricted are hereby established as follows: all areas of the city except those specifically zoned for industrial use.

(B) Establishment of limits in which the bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases is prohibited. The limits referred to in Section 8204.2 of the Uniform Fire Code, in which storage of liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) is restricted, are hereby established as follows: all areas of the city except those specifically zoned for industrial use.

(C) Establishment of limits of district in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is to be prohibited. The limits referred to in Section 7701.7.2 of the Uniform Fire Code, in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, are hereby established as follows: all areas of the city except those specifically zoned for industrial use, as outlined on the city zoning map.

(D) Establishment of limits of district in which the bulk storage of compressed natural gas is to be prohibited. The limits referred to in Section 5204.5.2 of the Uniform Fire Code in which the storage of compressed natural gas is prohibited, are hereby established as follows: all areas of the city except those specifically zoned for industrial use.

(Ord. 1047, passed 9-9-97) Penalty, see § 95.99


95.05 APPEALS.

Whenever the Chief disapproves an application or refuses to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code has been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the Chief to the Oregon State Fire Marshal Regional Appeals Board.

(Ord. 1047, passed 9-9-97) Penalty, see § 95.99


95.99 PENALTY.

(A) Any person who violates any of the provisions of the Uniform Fire Code as adopted and amended herein or fails to comply therewith, or who violates or fails to comply with any order made thereunder, or who builds in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who fails to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the Oregon State Fire Marshal Regional Appeals Board or by a court of competent jurisdiction within the required time shall, severally for each and every violation and noncompliance, respectively, be fined not less than $25, nor more than $100 for the first offense, and for the second and all subsequent offenses, not less than $50, nor more than $500. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy the violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each ten days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.

(B) Any applications of the penalty in division (A) of this section shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.

(Ord. 1047, passed 9-9-97)


CHAPTER 96: GARAGE SALES

Section

96.01    Definitions

96.02    Number of garage sales

96.03    Hours of operation

96.04    Number of days

96.05    Display of merchandise

96.06    Signs

96.07    Responsibility

96.08    Owner presumption

96.09    Illegal signs

96.10    Sale restrictions

96.99    Penalty


96.01 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms are defined as follows:

GARAGE SALE. A sale open to the public conducted from or on a residential premises or from a temporarily arranged site elsewhere within the city, for the purpose of disposing of personal property only. The term "garage sale" includes, but is not limited to, all sales entitled "garage, moving, lawn, yard, attic, porch, backyard, patio, basement, estate" or other sales of a similarly intended nature.

PERSONAL PROPERTY. Property which is utilized, owned, and maintained by an individual or by members of a residence and acquired in the normal course of living in or maintaining of a residence. It does not include merchandise which was purchased for resale or obtained from closeouts, fire sales, or other quantity liquidations, or commercial consignments.

SIGNS. Signs advertising a garage sale or directing the public by way of arrows or other directional signals to a particular location. Signs shall include any materials to which the sign is affixed as well as any support or anchor.

(Ord. 1169, passed 2-9-10)


96.02 NUMBER OF GARAGE SALES.

Except as allowed by this section, no person or group shall hold more than six garage sales during a calendar year. If members of more than one residence join in holding a garage sale, then such sale shall be considered as having been held for each and all such residents. The above limit of the number of garage sales held during any calendar year shall not apply to garage sales held by nonprofit corporations, not-for-profit associations or organizations, or garage sales to fundraise for charitable, educational, religious, or athletic purposes for community members, groups, or causes.

(Ord. 1169, passed 2-9-10)


96.03 HOURS OF OPERATION.

Garage sales may only be held between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.

(Ord. 1169, passed 2-9-10)


96.04 NUMBER OF DAYS.

Garage sales may be held for no more than three consecutive days.

(Ord. 1169, passed 2-9-10)


96.05 DISPLAY OF MERCHANDISE.

Personal property offered for sale may be displayed within the residence, in a garage, carport, and/or in the yard of a residence, or on other private property with the consent of the owner of such private property. No personal property offered for sale or to be given away shall be displayed on any public right-of-way, sidewalk, alley, or street.

(Ord. 1169, passed 2-9-10)


96.06 SIGNS.

No signs may be placed on any utility poles or regulatory signs or posts. No signs shall be placed in the street. Signs may be placed on private property with permission of the property owner. Each sign must have the name and address of the person conducting the garage sale advertised by the sign. All signs must be removed by 8:00 p.m. of the last day of the garage sale. Signs may not be exhibited for more than one day prior to the day the garage sale is to commence.

(Ord. 1169, passed 2-9-10)


96.07 RESPONSIBILITY.

The individual or individuals operating a garage sale and the owner or tenant of the property upon which the sale or activity is conducted shall be jointly and severally held responsible for the maintenance, order, and decorum on the premises during all hours of such sale or activity. No such individual shall permit any loud or boisterous conduct on the premises, nor permit vehicles to impede the passage of traffic on any road, alley, or street in the area of the premises.

(Ord. 1169, passed 2-9-10)


96.08 OWNER PRESUMPTION.

In the enforcement of this chapter, there is a presumption that a name, address, or telephone number listed on a sign shall be that of the individual responsible for posting the sign. In addition, signs directing the public to a particular residence are presumed to have been erected by the owner or occupant of the residence.

(Ord. 1169, passed 2-9-10)


96.09 ILLEGAL SIGNS.

Signs found within the city which do not comply with this chapter are hereby declared a nuisance to public safety, as they detract from the driving public’s attention to traffic signals as well as other vehicular and pedestrian traffic. Such signs may be summarily removed as evidence of unlawful activity in preparation for prosecution. If no prosecutorial action is taken, the signs may be destroyed.

(Ord. 1169, passed 2-9-10)


96.10 SALE RESTRICTIONS.

Only personal property shall be sold at garage sales.

(Ord. 1169, passed 2-9-10)


96.99 PENALTY.

Any person, firm, organization, association, or corporation found to be in violation hereof by a court of competent jurisdiction shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500 for each such violation. Each day such violation continues will be considered a separate violation.

(Ord. 1169, passed 2-9-10)


CHAPTER 97: HOMEGROWN MARIJUANA

Section

97.01    Definitions

97.02    Restrictions

97.03    Penalties


97.01 DEFINITIONS.

For the purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall be used, as well as those found in Ballot Measure 91:

CITY shall mean the City of Prineville.

MARIJUANA shall mean all parts of the plant Cannabis, family Moraceae, whether growing or not, other than marijuana solvents other than vegetable glycerin, such as butane, hexane, isopropyl alcohol, ethanol, and carbon dioxide.

PERSON. A natural person, firm, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, trust, estate, or any other public or private entity.

PERSON IN CHARGE OF PROPERTY shall mean an agent, occupant, lessee, contract purchaser or other person having possession or control of real property or the supervision of any construction project.

PERSON RESPONSIBLE. The person responsible shall include the following:

(1) The owner of real property.

(2) The person in charge of real property, as defined in this section.

(3) The person who caused to come into or continue in existence a nuisance as defined in this chapter.

(Ord. 1213, passed 6-23-15)


97.02 RESTRICTIONS.

(A) All marijuana plants shall be grown in an enclosed structure that can and shall be secured by a lock, such as a home or other structure such as a greenhouse.

(B) All lighting related to the growing or security of marijuana shall be shielded and directed away from neighboring properties and rights-of-way.

(C) There shall be no burning of marijuana plant waste. Marijuana plant waste may be composted or disposed of as allowed by law.

(Ord. 1213, passed 6-23-15)


97.03 PENALTIES.

(A) Any person or persons who violate any provisions of this chapter shall be fined not more than $500.

(B) Persons responsible shall be liable for any damages resulting from a violation of any provisions of this chapter.

(C) Each day’s violation of any provision of this chapter constitutes a separate offense.

(D) Violations of the provisions of this chapter are declared a public nuisance and may be abated by any of the procedures set out in Chapter 93.

(Ord. 1213, passed 6-23-15)




CHAPTER 98: CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY

Section

98.10    Chronic nuisance property

98.20    Definitions

98.30    Remedy

98.40    Procedure

98.50    Commencement of actions – Burdens of proof – Defenses – Mitigation of civil penalty

98.60    Closure during pendency of action – Emergency closures

98.70    Enforcement of closure order – Costs – Civil penalty

98.80    Severability

98.90    Attorney fees


98.10 CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY.

(A) Any property within the City of Prineville which becomes a chronic nuisance property is in violation of this chapter and subject to its remedies. 

(B) Any person who permits property under his or her ownership or control to be a chronic nuisance property shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to its remedies. 

(Ord. 1241, passed 7-24-18)


98.20 DEFINITIONS.

CHIEF means the City of Prineville Chief of Police or the Chief’s designee. 

CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY means:

(1) Property on which three or more nuisance activities exist or have occurred during any 30-day period; or 

(2) Property on which or within 200 feet of which any person associated with the property has engaged in three or more nuisance activities during any 30-day period; or 

(3) Property which, upon request for execution of a search warrant, has been the subject of a determination by a court that probable cause exists that possession, manufacture, or delivery of a controlled substance or related offenses as defined in ORS 167.203, 475.005 through 475.285 and/or 475.940 through 475.995 has occurred within the previous 30 days, and the Chief of Police has determined that the search warrant was based on evidence of continuous or repeated nuisance activities at the property; or 

(4) Property on which continuous or repeated nuisance activities as defined in subsections (6), (7), (8), (10), (12), (13) and/or (14) of the definition of nuisance activities in this section exist or have occurred.

CONTROL means the ability to regulate, restrain, dominate, counteract, or govern conduct that occurs on that property. 

NUISANCE ACTIVITIES means any of the following activities, behaviors, or conduct: 

(1) Harassment as defined in ORS 166.065(1)(a); 

(2) Intimidation as defined in ORS 166.155 through 166.165; 

(3) Disorderly conduct as defined in ORS 166.025; 

(4) Assault or menacing as defined in ORS 163.160 through 163.190;

(5) Sexual abuse, contributing to the delinquency of a minor, or sexual misconduct as defined in ORS 163.415 through 163.445; 

(6) Public indecency as defined in ORS 163.465; 

(7) Prostitution or related offenses as defined in ORS 167.007 through 167.017; 

(8) Alcoholic liquor violations as defined in ORS 471.105 through 471.482; 

(9) Offensive littering as defined in ORS 164.805; 

(10) Possession, manufacture, or delivery of a controlled substance or related offenses as defined in ORS 167.203, 475.005 through 475.285, and/or 475.940 through 475.995; 

(11) Illegal gambling as defined in ORS 167.117 and/or 167.122 through 167.127; 

(12) Unlawful use of weapon as defined in ORS 166.220; 

(13) Any attempt to commit (as defined in ORS 161.405) and/or conspiracy to commit (as defined in ORS 161.450) any of the above activities, behaviors or conduct; 

(14) Excessive noise as defined in § 93.58.

OWNER means any tenant, renter or lessee or any person, agent, firm, or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in a property. Owner also includes, but is not limited to: 

(1) A mortgagee in possession in whom is vested: 

(a) All or part of the legal title to the property; or 

(b) All or part of the beneficial ownership and a right to present use and enjoyment of the premises; or 

(2) An occupant who can control what occurs on that property; or

(3) Any person authorized to enter into a rental agreement.

PERMIT means to suffer, allow, consent to, acquiesce by failure to prevent, or expressly assent or agree to the doing of an act. 

PERSON means any actual person, association, partnership, or corporation capable of owning or using property in the City of Prineville. 

PERSON ASSOCIATED WITH means any person who, on the occasion of a nuisance activity, has entered, patronized, visited, or attempted to enter, patronize or visit, or waited to enter, patronize or visit a property or person present on a property, including without limitation any officer, director, customer, agent, employee, or any independent contractor of a property, person in charge, or owner of a property. 

PROPERTY means any real property including land and that which is affixed, incidental, or appurtenant to land, including but not limited to any premises, room, house, building or structure, or any separate part or portion thereof, whether permanent or not. 

(Ord. 1241, passed 7-24-18)


98.30 REMEDY.

(A) In the event a court determines property to be chronic nuisance property, the court may order that the property be closed and secured against all use and occupancy for not more than 180 days, or the court may employ any other remedy deemed by it to be appropriate to abate the nuisance. 

In establishing the length of closure of the property, the court may consider any of the following factors, as they may be appropriate, and shall cite those found applicable: 

(1) The actions taken by the owner(s) to mitigate or correct the problem at the property; 

(2) Whether the problem at the property was repeated or continuous; 

(3) The magnitude or gravity of the problem; 

(4) The cooperativeness of the owner(s) with the city; 

(5) For rental properties, whether a responsible tenant is ready to occupy the property; or 

(6) Any other factor deemed by the court to be relevant. 

(B) In addition to the remedies provided for in subsection (A) of this section, the court may impose upon the owner of the property a civil penalty in any amount up to $100 a day, payable to the city, or each day the owner had actual knowledge that the property was a chronic nuisance property and permitted the property to remain a chronic nuisance property. 

(Ord. 1241, passed 7-24-18)


98.40 PROCEDURE.

(A) When the Chief of Police receives two or more police reports documenting the occurrence of nuisance activities on or within 200 feet of a property, the Chief shall notify the owner(s) of record and the occupant(s) of the property of the incidences that have occurred and the remedies available to the city under this chapter. Notice under this provision is sufficient if it sent certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to such person at the address of the property where the incidences occurred, and to such other address as shown on the tax rolls of Crook County or such other place which is believed to give the owner actual notice. 

(B) When the Chief believes in good faith that property has become chronic nuisance property, the Chief shall notify the owner(s) of record in writing that the property has been determined to be chronic nuisance property. The notice shall contain the following information: 

(1) The street address and a legal description sufficient for identification of the property. 

(2) A statement that the Chief has found the property to be a chronic nuisance property with a concise description of the conditions leading to these findings.

(3) A copy of the notice shall be served on the owner at least ten days prior to the commencement of any judicial action by the city. Service shall be mailed first class, postage prepaid, addressed to such person at the address of the property believed to be a chronic public nuisance property, and to such other address as shown on the tax rolls of Crook County or such other place which is believed to give the owner actual notice of the determination by the Chief. 

(4) A copy of the notice shall be served on the occupant of the property if that person is different than the owner and shall occur not less than ten days prior to the commencement of any judicial proceedings and be made either personally or by mailing a copy of the notice by first-class mail, postage prepaid, to them at the property. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, commencement of judicial proceedings shall occur not less than 30 days from the date of the mailing of the notice described in subsection (A) of this section, except as provided in § 98.60. 

Furthermore, a copy of the notice shall be posted at the property if ten days have elapsed from the service or mailing of the notice to the owner(s), and no contact has been received by the city from them during that period of time. 

(5) The failure of any person or owner to receive actual notice of the determination by the Chief shall not invalidate or otherwise affect the proceedings under this chapter. 

(C) Concurrent with the notification procedures set forth above, the Chief shall send a copy of the notice to the City Attorney as well as any other documentation which the Chief believes supports the closure of the property and the imposition of civil penalties. The City Attorney may then commence civil proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction seeking the closure of the structure as well as the imposition of civil penalties against any or all of the owners thereof, and any such other relief as may be deemed appropriate. 

(Ord. 1241, passed 7-24-18)


98.50 COMMENCEMENT OF ACTIONS – BURDENS OF PROOF – DEFENSES – MITIGATION OF CIVIL PENALTY.

(A) In an action seeking the closure of a chronic nuisance property, the city shall have the initial burden of proof to show by a preponderance of evidence that the property is a chronic nuisance property. 

(B) It is a defense to an action seeking the closure of a chronic nuisance property that the owner of the property at the time in question could not, in the exercise of reasonable care or diligence, determine that the property had become chronic nuisance property, or could not, in spite of the exercise of reasonable care and diligence, control the conduct leading to the finding that the property is chronic nuisance property. 

(C) In an action seeking civil penalties pursuant to § 98.30(B), the city shall have the initial burden of proof to show by a preponderance of the evidence that the conditions of that subsection are specified. 

(D) In establishing the amount of any civil penalty requested, the court may consider any of the following factors, as they may be appropriate, and shall cite those found applicable: 

(1) The actions taken by the owner(s) to mitigate or correct the problem at the property; 

(2) Whether the problem at the property was repeated or continuous; 

(3) The magnitude or gravity of the problem; 

(4) The cooperativeness of the owner(s) with the city; 

(5) The cost to the city of investigating and correcting or attempting to correct the condition; and 

(6) Any other factor deemed by the court to be relevant. 

(Ord. 1241, passed 7-24-18)


98.60 CLOSURE DURING PENDENCY OF ACTION – EMERGENCY CLOSURES.

In the event that it is determined that the property is an immediate threat to the public safety and welfare, the city may apply to the court for such interim relief that is deemed by the Chief or City Attorney to be appropriate. In such an event, the notification procedures set forth in § 98.40(A) need not be complied with. 

(Ord. 1241, passed 7-24-18)


98.70 ENFORCEMENT OF CLOSURE ORDER – COSTS – CIVIL PENALTY.

(A) In the event that a court finds that property constitutes a chronic nuisance property as defined in this chapter, the court may order the remedies set out in § 98.30. In addition, in the event the court also finds that the owner had knowledge of activities or conditions at the property constituting a violation of this chapter and nonetheless permitted the activities to occur, the court may utilize the penalties provided for in § 98.30(B). 

(B) The court may authorize the city to physically secure the property against use or occupancy in the event that the owner(s) fail to do so within the time specified by the court. In the event that the city is authorized to secure the property, all costs reasonably incurred by the city to effect a closure shall be made an assessment lien upon the property. As used in this subsection, "costs" mean those costs actually incurred by the city for the physical securing of the property, as well as tenant relocation costs given pursuant to subsection (B)(4) of this section. 

(1) The city department effecting the closure shall prepare a statement of costs and the city shall thereafter submit that statement to the court for its review. If no objection to the statement is made within the period prescribed by Oregon Rules of Civil Procedure 68, a certified copy of the statement including a legal description of the property shall be forwarded to the City Recorder, who thereafter shall enter the same in the city’s lien docket.

(2) Liens imposed by this chapter shall be collected in all respects for street improvement liens and shall bear interest at the rate of 9% per year from ten days after entry in the lien docket.

(3) Any person who is assessed the costs of closure or a civil penalty by the court shall be personally liable for the payment thereof to the city. 

(4) A tenant, as defined in ORS 90.100, is entitled to reasonable relocation costs as those are determined by the city, if without actual notice the tenant moved into the property after either: 

(a) An owner(s) or agent received notice of any determination pursuant to § 98.40(A); or 

(b) An owner(s) or their agent received notice of an action brought pursuant to § 98.50. 

(Ord. 1241, passed 7-24-18)


98.80 SEVERABILITY.

If any provision of this chapter, or its application to any person or circumstances, is held to be invalid for any reason, the remainder of the chapter, or the application of its provisions to other persons or circumstances, shall not in any way be affected. 

(Ord. 1241, passed 7-24-18)


98.90 ATTORNEY FEES.

The court may, in its discretion, award reasonable attorney’s fees to the prevailing party regarding any action brought under this chapter. 

(Ord. 1241, passed 7-24-18)




TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS

Chapter

110.    MERCHANTS

111.    AMUSEMENTS

112.    TAXICABS

113.    CONSTRUCTION WORKERS


CHAPTER 110: MERCHANTS

Section

Secondhand Stores

110.01    Licensing

110.02    Statement of purchases

110.03    Holding merchandise before sale

Transient Merchants and Mobile Businesses

110.15    Definitions

110.16    Licensing; exemptions

110.17    Mobile business requirements

SECONDHAND STORES


110.01 LICENSING.

(A) License required. No person, firm or corporation shall operate or conduct in the city, a secondhand store, or engage in the business of buying used or secondhand goods or merchandise, without first having obtained from the city a license therefor, signed by the City Recorder.

(B) Application; fee; term. Application for the license shall be made in writing to the Council and shall set forth the name and address of the applicant and the legal description of the premises where it is proposed to conduct the business. The Council may grant or reject the application. No license fee shall be required and a license, if granted, shall extend for a term of one year.

(’91 Code, §§ 6-1.1 and 6-1.2) (Ord. 357A, passed 3-6-40) Penalty, see § 10.99


110.02 STATEMENT OF PURCHASES.

(A) Statement of purchases. No licensee hereunder shall, either personally or by agent or employee, purchase or receive from any person any used or secondhand goods or merchandise unless he/she shall at such time prepare on forms to be furnished by the City Recorder a statement written in ink or indelible pencil, giving an accurate description of the goods or merchandise; the name of the purchaser; day and hour of purchase; and the price paid; and secure the signature of the seller thereto. No entry on the statement shall be changed, erased, obliterated or defaced.

(B) Police Chief’s copy of statement. A purchaser shall deliver or cause to be delivered the statement received by him/her to the Chief of Police, or his/her representative, on a schedule set by the Chief of Police. The statements shall be preserved by the Chief in a register kept for that purpose.

(’91 Code, §§ 6-1.3 and 6-1.4) (Ord. 357A, passed 3-6-40; Am. Ord. 971, passed 3-12-91) Penalty, see § 10.99


110.03 HOLDING MERCHANDISE BEFORE SALE.

All articles so purchased shall be retained for a period of three days by the purchaser, in the condition the same were in when purchased, before the same shall be sold or disposed of.

(’91 Code, § 6-1.5) (Ord. 357A, passed 3-6-40) Penalty, see § 10.99

TRANSIENT MERCHANTS AND MOBILE BUSINESSES


110.15 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

MOBILE BUSINESS. Any business operating from a vehicle which is self-propelled, or which can be pushed or pulled on a sidewalk, street, or highway, on which food is prepared or processed, or from which food or other goods are sold or dispensed to the public.

TRANSIENT MERCHANT. Any person, or entity (partnership, corporation, joint venture, or limited liability company), whether it is the owner, agent, consignee, or employee, whether a resident of the city or not, who engages in a temporary business of buying or selling goods, wares, merchandise, or services within the city, and who, in furtherance of such purpose hires, leases, uses, or occupies any building, structure, parking lot, vacant lot, mobile business, tent, street, or alley for the exhibition and sale of the goods, wares, and merchandise, either privately or at public auction. The person, firm, or corporation so engaged shall not be relieved from complying with the provisions of this subchapter merely by reason of associating temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant, or auctioneer or by conducting the transient business in connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any local dealer, trader, merchant, or auctioneer.

(’91 Code, § 6-5.2) (Ord. 848, passed 7-28-81; Am. Ord. 1135, passed 9-26-06)


110.16 LICENSING; EXEMPTIONS.

(A) License required. The City Council finds and determines that it shall be unlawful for a transient merchant, as defined in § 110.15, to engage in the business within the city, without first obtaining a license therefor in compliance with provisions of this subchapter. The City Council also finds and determines that the sales create special problems of enforcing regulations for the protection of the public health, safety, morals and welfare of the city; that the mobility and temporary nature of the businesses affect the enforcement of traffic, sanitation, building and zoning regulations in the city; and that the businesses should be licensed, regulated and controlled.

(’91 Code, § 6-5.1)

(B) License application and issuance.

(1) License application. Applicants for licenses under this subchapter shall file a written, sworn application signed by the applicant, if an individual; by all partners of a partnership; by a member or manager if a limited liability company and by the president or authorized officer if a corporation; with the City Manager, showing the following.

(a) The name or names of the person or persons having the management or supervision of the applicant’s business during the time that it is proposed that it will be carried on in the city; the local address or addresses of the person or persons while engaged in the business; the permanent address or addresses of the person or persons; the capacity in which the person or persons will act (that is, whether as proprietor, agent or otherwise); the name and address of the person, firm or corporation for whose account the business will be carried on, if any; if a corporation, under the laws of what state it is incorporated and if a limited liability company, under the laws of what state it is organized.

(b) The place or places in the city where it is proposed to carry on the applicant’s business and the length of time during which it is proposed that the business shall be conducted, maximum of three days, maximum of 30 days or maximum of one year; and the applicant shall present written permission from the property owner where the temporary business will be located.

(c) If the business is to be conducted from a mobile business and the business is at any location for more than two hours at one time, the permit application shall include the following additional information:

1. Tax assessor’s map and tax lot numbers for the sites proposed;

2. Names and locations of adjacent streets;

3. Addresses and locations of any permanent structures on the site;

4. Locations of all driveways on the sites and on the adjacent properties;

5. Diagram of on-site parking lot and parking space configuration;

6. Proposed location of the business vehicle on the site;

7. Distances from proposed vehicle location to all structures, driveways, and streets; and

8. Location of any furniture, trash receptacles, etc., to be placed in the immediate vicinity of the vehicle.

(d) The last four places, other than the permanent place of business of the applicant, where the applicant has conducted a transient business, stating the nature thereof.

(e) A statement of the nature and character (type and whether new or used) of goods, wares or merchandise to be sold by the applicant in the city; and whether the above will be sold at auction, by direct sale or by the taking of orders for future delivery.

(f) A brief statement of the nature and character of the advertising done or proposed to be done in order to attract customers, and, if required by the City Manager, copies of all the advertising, whether by handbills, circulars, newspaper advertising or otherwise, shall be attached to the application as exhibits thereto. Signs permitted under this chapter shall be in accordance with the city signing ordinance set forth in Ch. 152 of this code. All signs shall be located on private property. Attachment to power poles, light standards, existing sign poles or other similar locations is prohibited.

(g) Whether or not the person or persons having the management or supervision of the applicant’s business have been convicted of a crime, or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishment assessed therefor.

(h) Credentials from the person, firm or corporation for which the applicant proposes to do business, authorizing the applicant to act as the representative.

(i) Such other reasonable information as to the identity or character of the person or persons having the management or supervision of the applicant’s business or the method or plan of doing the business as the City Manager may deem proper to fulfill the purpose of this chapter in protection of the public.

(2) License issuance.

(a) The application statement shall be reviewed by the City Manager, Chief of Police and Planning Director to determine whether the proposed business will comply with the zoning, building, sanitation and traffic laws of the city, and whether operation of the business will be hazardous or injurious to the public or adjoining property by reason of traffic, or sanitation, and whether or not the business will be unsightly, having reference to the condition and standards of the neighborhood.

(b) The fees for the license provided herein shall be set by resolution of the City Council for a license issued for a maximum of three days, a maximum of 30 days and a maximum of one year. If the City Manager, Chief of Police and Planning Director shall not file any objection to the issuance of a license, and if it shall be determined that the business would not be in violation of any of the laws of the city, then, after payment of the fees provided herein, the City Manager shall issue a license for the business, stating therein the location or locations of the business and the time during which the business shall be operated.

(c) There shall be a three-business-day waiting period prior to issuance of the license provided herein to allow for proper handling and investigation for the license.

(’91 Code, § 6-5.3)

(C) License placement. The license issued under this subchapter shall be valid for three days, 30 days or one year depending on the applicant’s request and must be displayed in plain sight at the transient merchant’s place of business in the city.

(D) License revocation. Upon determination that a permitted transient merchant within the city violates city ordinances, state or federal laws, or that the application contains false or misleading information, the City Manager may revoke the permit upon five days written notice to the transient merchant. The notice shall state the reasons for the revocation.

(E) License suspension. Upon determining that a permitted transient merchant presents an immediate danger to persons or property, the City Manager may suspend the permit. The suspension takes effect upon the transient merchant’s receipt of the suspension notice, or upon delivery of the notice to the establishment of the permittee’s business address. The notice shall state the reason for the suspension. The City Manager may continue a suspension as long as the reason for the suspension exists, or until a determination to an appeal regarding the suspension is made.

(F) Appeals. In the event that an application for a license under this chapter shall be denied, the license issued by the City Manager revoked or suspended after issuance, the applicant may file notice with the City Manager of intent to appeal to the Council of the City. The Council shall hear and determine the appeal at the next regular Council meeting that is at least four days after the receipt of the notice of appeal; and the decision of the Council at the hearing shall be final and conclusive. The appeal shall state the name and address of the applicant, the nature of the determination being appealed, the reason the determination is incorrect, and what the correct determination of the appeal should be. (’91 Code, §6-5.4)

(G) Exemptions. The provisions of this subchapter requiring applications for license shall not apply to the following:

(1) Sales required by law;

(2) Rummage, yard, garage, or estate sales by persons or entities not engaged in the business of sales of the items being sold.

(3) Sales to benefit non-profit groups, where the proceeds of the sale do not inure to the direct benefit of an individual member of the organization. A non-profit group is defined as an organization that is tax exempt under IRS rules and regulations.

(4) Sales to benefit private or public schools or private or public school organizations.

(5) Sales as part of or in connection with any athletic event, rodeo, carnival, festival, fair, public exhibition or event or similar activity held within the city.

(6) Self-employed minors engaged in intermittent or casual economic activity.

(’91 Code, § 6-5.2)

(Ord. 848, passed 7-28-81; Am. Ord. 1135, passed 9-26-06) Penalty, see § 10.99


110.17 MOBILE BUSINESS REQUIREMENTS.

Mobile businesses and mobile business vehicles shall comply with the following standards.

(A) At no time shall the business vehicle or operation block the public right-of-way or vision clearance.

(B) The mobile business operator shall be responsible for the pick up of all litter generated from the business and/or within 50 feet of the vehicle location throughout the period of operation on the site.

(C) All temporary structures, equipment, furniture, waste baskets, and other stand-alone items must be placed in the immediate vicinity of the business, and must be removed from the site upon cessation of business operation at the site.

(D) The mobile vehicle used in the operation of the business must comply with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations.

(Ord. 1135, passed 9-26-06) Penalty, see § 10.99


CHAPTER 111: AMUSEMENTS

Section

Social Games

111.01    Definitions

111.02    Licensing of premises

111.03    Revocation of license

111.04    Suspension of license

111.05    Appeals

111.06    Regulations

111.07    Administration and enforcement

111.08    Texas Holdem poker card tournaments

111.99    Penalty

SOCIAL GAMES


111.01 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

(A) BUY-IN FEE. In tournament-style Texas Holdem, all players who play in the tournament pay the same exact buy-in fee. The tournament winners split up the buy-in fee pursuant to terms agreed upon before the tournament begins. No other winnings or compensation to the players is permitted other than the buy-in fee. The total buy-in fee, including additional buy-in fees at any tournament shall not exceed $100. The maximum buy-in fee may be changed by Resolution of the Prineville City Council.

(B) GAMBLING. Any contest, game, gaming scheme or gaming device played for anything of value in which the outcome depends in a material degree upon an element of chance, notwithstanding that skill of the contestants may also be a factor therein; except the term GAMBLING shall not include social games.

(C) PERSONS FINANCIALLY INTERESTED. Persons financially interested shall include all persons who share in the profits of the business where social games are played on the basis of gross or net revenue, including landlords, lessors, lessees, the representative of licensee, and the owner or owners of the building, fixtures, or equipment used in the social games.

(D) REPRESENTATIVE OF LICENSEE. A designated person in each premises licensed under this chapter whose duties shall include supervision of any games played within the premises and see to it that they are played strictly in accordance with this chapter and within the provisions of the Oregon Revised Statutes. The representative of licensee shall be named on the license and any notices or other correspondence pursuant to this chapter shall be mailed or delivered to the premises to the attention of the representative of licensee.

(E) SOCIAL GAMES.

(1) A game, other than a lottery, between players in a private home where no house player, house bank or house odds exist, and there is no house income from the operation of the social game.

(2) Games, other than lottery, between players in a private business, in a private club or public accommodation where no house player, house bank or house odds exist, and there is no income for the operation of the social game.

(F) SOCIAL GAMING TABLE. Any table used or intended to be used for the playing of social games only for up to ten players, not including a dealer who is not a player.

(G) TEXAS HOLDEM. Texas Holdem is a seven-card poker card game. The players deal to each other and the deal passes between players. There may be a set betting on the first round of betting. The players are dealt two cards face down. After a round of betting, three community cards are turned face up in the middle of the social gaming table. There is then another round of betting. A fourth community card is turned up next to the three community cards. Another round of betting ensues. Finally, a fifth community card is turned up next to the other four community cards. A round of betting follows. Except for the maximum buy-in amount, there is no limit on the amount a player can bet at any time. Therefore, a player can bet all of his chips in any round of betting. Players may fold at any time during the game.

(Ord. 1127, passed 8-22-07)


111.02 LICENSING OF PREMISES.

(A) Application for premise license.

(1) No person who owns, manages or operates a private business, private club or place of public accommodation shall permit a social game between players at a place without first securing a premises license for such purpose from the City Council.

(2) The cost of a premises license shall be $175 annually, which cost shall hereafter be set by resolution of the City Council. The license period shall run from July 1, through the next June 30. The license fee shall be due by June 30 for the next fiscal year. There shall be no prorations of the fee.

(3) Application for a premises license shall include the following.

(a) The true name, address, date of birth, social security number, Oregon driver’s license number, or other acceptable identification of all persons financially interested in the business located on the premises.

(b) The personal history and business experiences of such persons.

(c) The past criminal record, if any, of all persons financially interested in the business.

(d) The nonrefundable $25 investigation fee, which shall hereafter be set by resolution of the City Council.

(e) Fingerprints and photographs if requested by Prineville City Police of persons financially interested in the business.

(f) The type or types of social games to be played and the number of social gaming tables to be used.

(4) No license issued under this section shall be assignable or transferable. The addition or the substitution of a person financially interested in a licensed business shall be reported immediately to the City Manager, who shall order an investigation by the Police Department. The change shall be approved or denied by the Council. Applications for change in person financially interested in a licensed business shall be accompanied by the nonrefundable investigation fee for each individual added or substituted on the business license. In the case of the sale or other transfer of a business when no person associated with the prior business remains a person financially interested in the business a new premises license shall be applied for together with the non-refundable investigation fee and the premises license fee.

(B) Criteria for grant or denial of application. A license shall not be granted, or if so, be revoked or suspended, if any applicant or any person financially interested in the business have:

(1) Supplied any false or misleading information in the application or have omitted any information requested in the application or this chapter;

(2) Plead no contest or have been convicted of any felony within the last ten years;

(3) Had a license in his/her name revoked or suspended three times by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission, the last of which was within the last five years;

(4) Been convicted and is currently on parole for any crime involving or related to gambling;

(5) Had two or more convictions within five years for gambling-related activities; or

(6) Violated any provision of this chapter.

(Ord. 1127, passed 8-22-06)


111.03 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.

A license is subject to revocation at any time for violation of this chapter or any provisions of state law related to gambling if any person financially interested in the business has committed any act that would have denied the receipt of the initial license. If at any time facts arise or become known to the City Manager which are sufficient to show such violation, the City Manager shall notify the licensee in writing that the license is to be revoked and that all social gaming activities must cease within ten days. The violations need not lead to a conviction, but must establish by a preponderance of evidence about the "licensee’s ability to perform the license activity without danger to property or public health or safety or violation of this chapter." The notice of revocation shall state the reasons for the revocation, set a period of not less than 30 days before social gaming activities can recommence and inform the licensee of procedures for filing an appeal.

(Ord. 1127, passed 8-22-06)


111.04 SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.

Upon determining that a person financially interested is in violation of any provisions of state law related to gambling or violation of this chapter, the City Manager may suspend the license for the social gaming activity. The suspension shall take effect immediately upon notice being received by the representative of the licensee, or being delivered to the licensee’s business address as stated on the licensee’s application for the license. Such notice shall state the reasons for the suspension and inform the licensee of the procedures for filing appeal. The City Manager may continue the suspension for as long as the reason for the suspension exists, or until a decision is made by the appellate authority on appeal regarding the suspension.

(Ord. 1127, passed 8-22-06)


111.05 APPEALS.

Upon decision of the City Manager, a final appeal regarding suspension or revocation of the license will be heard by the Prineville City Council. The licensee will have the opportunity to present its side to the Prineville City Council for final decision at an open public Council meeting.

(Ord. 1127, passed 8-22-06)


111.06 REGULATIONS.

(A) The City Council may limit the types of games played.

(B) Violation of the following acts is hereby unlawful.

(1) There shall be a maximum of five social gaming tables at any premises licensed under this chapter.

(2) The dealing of cards shall be offered to be rotated to all players in the game.

(3) All premises shall be open to police inspection during all hours of operation. The premises license and a copy of this chapter must be displayed for public view at all times.

(4) The playing of all card games shall be so arranged as to provide free access and visibility to any interested party. Doors leading into the premises must remain unlocked during all hours of operation.

(5) No person under the age of 18 shall be permitted to participate in any card game or to enter or remain upon the premises.

(6) Except for monies used for playing in a game, no charge shall be collected from any player for the privilege of participating in any game.

(7) No signs or advertising of gambling, playing of cards or advertising specific forms of card playing, enticing participants or procuring players shall be permitted. Signs visible from inside the building informing the public in which areas cards may be played will be allowed.

(8) For any period beginning from 10:00 a.m. one day to 2:00 a.m. the next day, the total buy-in fee, including additional buy-in fees for all social games shall not exceed $100. Except for the maximum buy-in fee, there is no limit on the amount a player can bet at any time. Each licensee is responsible to ensure that the buy-in fee limit is complied with.

(9) No person financially interested shall participate in any social gaming, nor procure players, back, farm out, assign, or sublet any card games lawfully permitted under this subchapter on the premises in which the person financially interested has an interest or works.

(10) No premises licensee shall permit persons who are visibly intoxicated to participate in gaming activities. The licensee shall supply the Police Department with the hours of operation of the establishment. The hours must be displayed in public view in the premises at all times.

(11) No participant in a social game shall be charged a price for any consumer goods that is higher or lower than the businesses normal price.

(12) No guns or firearms of any kind will be allowed on anyone’s person at the gaming table, except as carried by official law enforcement officers.

(13) No premises licensee shall permit any person to engage in unlawful gambling in or upon any licensed premises. The premises licensee shall regulate the times for the use of its premises.

(14) There shall be no social games allowed in a private business, in a private club, or a public accommodation between 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. of any day.

(15) All social gaming transactions shall be in cash, checks, debit or credit cards, as allowed by the premises licensee.

(C) Premise licensee shall have the responsibility to ensure that the game is a social game, between players only, and that there are no persons dealing on a regular basis and that there is no one engaging in the game as a business or commercial enterprise.

(Ord. 1127, passed 8-22-06)


111.07 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.

The city and its law enforcement agencies shall have, in addition to any other powers that may be conferred by statute, ordinance or otherwise, the right to inspect and examine, in connection with social games, all premises, equipment and supplies, in, upon or about premises where social games are played. In the course of exercising their duties under this section, they may summarily seize and remove from the premises and impound any gaming equipment or supplies for the purposes of examination and inspection of the gaming equipment and supplies.

(Ord. 1127, passed 8-22-06)


111.08 TEXAS HOLDEM POKER CARD TOURNAMENTS.

(A) Any person, business, private club, non-profit organization, or place of public accommodation desiring to permit patrons or invitees to engage in Texas Holdem poker card tournaments within the city and any tournament organizer shall acquire an maintain a valid license from the city. Licenses shall be granted only upon application to the city and upon approval of the City Manager or designee. Licenses shall be renewed annually, not later than June 30 of each year; provided further, there shall be no prorating of any license fee for license applications made at other times throughout the year.

(B) Applications and the standards for granting the applications for Texas Holdem poker card tournaments shall be the same as § 111.02(A)(3), above. In addition to persons financially interested, all tournament sponsors must provide the information as set out in § 111.02(A)(3), above.

(C) There shall be no limit on the number of social gaming tables. Advertising for Texas Holdem tournaments is acceptable, but such advertisement shall not use the term "gambling." Except when inconsistent with this § 111.07. All regulations in § 111.06 above are applicable to Texas Holdem tournaments.

(D) The Texas Holdem tournament license allows the holder of the license to have not more than 12 tournaments prior to the next June 30.

(E) The licensee is required to notify the Prineville Police Department of tournament dates by written notification at least one month prior to each tournament date.

(Ord. 1127, passed 8-22-06)


111.99 PENALTY.

In addition to the suspension or revocation of any license issued under this chapter, persons financially interested, representatives of licensee, any licensee, tournament sponsor, firm, corporation, business, association, or person(s) associated with the licensee who violates any provision of this chapter, may upon conviction, be fined in the amount not to exceed $500 for each violation.

(Ord. 1127, passed 8-22-06)


CHAPTER 112: TAXICABS

Section

112.01    Definitions

112.02    Operators to secure license

112.03    Cancellation of license

112.04    Certificate from City Manager

112.05    Contents of certificate

112.06    Application for granting of license

112.07    Fees

112.08    Transfer of license; fee

112.09    Penalties for incompetency, recklessness and the like

112.10    Age limit for chauffeur

112.11    Taxicab rates

112.12    Authorized fares to be charged; penalty for violation

112.13    Direct route to be traveled; fares not charged when vehicles disabled

112.14    Receipt of fare to be given

112.15    Report of lost articles

112.16    Load limit

112.17    Driver’s conduct

112.18    Appeals

112.99    Penalty


112.01 DEFINITIONS.

For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

CITY MANAGER. The City Manager for the City of Prineville or the City Manager’s designee.

MOTOR VEHICLE. Shall mean and include every self-propelled vehicle by or upon which any person or persons may be transported or carried upon any public highway, street, or alley, except vehicles used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.

PERSON. Shall mean and include natural persons of either sex, firms, co-partnerships, associations, corporations, limited liability companies, or other legal entities, whether acting by themselves, by servant, agent, or employee. The singular number shall include the plural, and the masculine pronoun shall include the feminine and neuter.

TAXICAB. Every motor vehicle except cars for rent without driver, used for the transportation of passengers for hire, and not operated exclusively over a fixed and defined route.

(Ord. 1136, passed 9-12-06)


112.02 OPERATORS TO SECURE LICENSE.

No person shall engage in the business of operating a taxicab without first securing a license therefor under the provisions of this chapter. No license shall be issued to any person until his fingerprints have been placed on file in the office of the Chief of Police, and no person who has been convicted of a felony shall be granted a license without the previous approval of the Chief of Police.

(Ord. 1136, passed 9-12-06) Penalty, see § 112.99


112.03 CANCELLATION OF LICENSE.

Any license issued under this chapter may be cancelled by the City Manager for any violation of the terms hereof, or for any violation of the traffic ordinances of the city or state laws governing traffic, or for the violation of any laws governing and regulating the sale, manufacture, possession, and transportation of any intoxicating liquors or controlled substances, and this provision shall apply equally to the drivers of taxicabs and to the companies operating taxicabs.

(Ord. 1136, passed 9-12-06)


112.04 CERTIFICATE FROM CITY MANAGER.

No such license shall be issued except upon certification of the City Manager and such license shall be in accordance with such certificate and with the terms of this chapter.

(Ord. 1136, passed 9-12-06)


112.05 CONTENTS OF CERTIFICATE.

All taxicab certifications issued by the City Manager shall set forth the name of the person to whom the license is to be issued, the number of vehicles proposed to be operated, the maker and the maker’s number of each vehicle, the seating capacity of each, and the number of the state license of each vehicle to be operated by such licensee.

(Ord. 1136, passed 9-12-06)


112.06 APPLICATION FOR GRANTING OF LICENSE.

Every person desiring to obtain a license for the operation of a taxicab under this chapter shall file written application therefor with the City Manager, setting forth the name of the person to whom license is to be issued, the number of vehicles proposed to be operated, the name of the maker and the maker’s number of each, the seating capacity of each, and the number of the state license of each such vehicle, and should the state license number of such vehicle be changed during the life of such license, such change, and number shall be immediately reported to the City Manager. When a certificate is issued, the City Manager shall, upon receipt of the license fee or fee herein provided for each taxicab to be operated under such license, issue a license to such applicant in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the certificate described in § 112.05.

(Ord. 1136, passed 9-12-06)


112.07 FEES.

There shall be paid to the city by each taxi service operating in the city, an annual license fee of $50 per year or part of the year that such service operates within the city, and a further annual license fee of $25 for each taxicab operated, such license fees to cover the cost of the regulation of such service and are to be paid in advance.

(Ord. 1136, passed 9-12-06) Penalty, see § 112.99


112.08 TRANSFER OF LICENSE; FEE.

The City Manager shall transfer a license issued under the provisions of this chapter from one car to another car, upon being satisfied that the change of ownership of a car is bona fide, authorize the transfer of the license covering such car to such new owner, executing a written notice of his approval of such transfer. A fee of $25 shall be collected for all transfers as herein authorized.

(Ord. 1136, passed 9-12-06)


112.09 PENALTIES FOR INCOMPETENCY, RECKLESSNESS AND THE LIKE.

Any driver or chauffeur of any taxicab who has been found guilty in a court of competent jurisdiction of any incompetency in driving, or of any violation of the traffic ordinance or the terms of this chapter, may be debarred from driving any taxicab in the city for a period not to exceed one year; and if the owner of a vehicle operated in the city knowingly permits a debarred driver during the period of one year to operate such vehicle, the license of the owner may be revoked by the City Manager.

(Ord. 1136, passed 9-12-06)


112.10 AGE LIMIT FOR CHAUFFEUR.

No licensee under this chapter shall permit a person under the age of 21 years to operate a taxicab owned or controlled by him in the city.

(Ord. 1136, passed 9-12-06) Penalty, see § 112.99


112.11 TAXICAB RATES.

Licensee shall have the right to set rates for users of licensee’s taxi service. The schedule of rates shall be conspicuously posted or placed in each taxicab in such a manner as to be easily read by users of said taxicab service. In addition, licensee shall provide the office of the City Manager with the current rate schedule in effect. The City Council reserves the right to reinstitute, at any time, through proper ordinance amendment procedures, rate controls for all fees charged by licensees to customers under this chapter.

(Ord. 1136, passed 9-12-06) Penalty, see § 112.99


112.12 AUTHORIZED FARES TO BE CHARGED; PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.

Any driver of a taxicab who shall charge any passenger a rate of fare other than provided for in § 112.11 shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished, in addition to the other penalties provide, by having his operator’s license suspended for a period of not less than one month or more than one year.

(Ord. 1136, passed 9-12-06)


112.13 DIRECT ROUTE TO BE TRAVELED; FARES NOT CHARGED WHEN VEHICLES DISABLED.

Any driver of a taxicab employed to carry passengers to a definite point shall take the most direct route possible that will carry the passenger safely and expeditiously to his destination. Fares shall not be charged for any period during which a taxicab is disabled.

(Ord. 1136, passed 9-12-06) Penalty, see § 112.99


112.14 RECEIPT OF FARE TO BE GIVEN.

Whenever demanded by the passenger, the driver in charge of a taxicab shall deliver the person paying for the hiring of said taxicab, at the time of such payment, a receipt therefor in legible printing or writing, containing the name of the taxicab owner and his address, the name of the driver, the total amount paid and the date of payment.

(Ord. 1136, passed 9-12-06) Penalty, see § 112.99


112.15 REPORT OF LOST ARTICLES.

The driver of any taxicab shall promptly notify the nearest police station within 24 hours of all property of value left in his vehicle by any passenger.

(Ord. 1136, passed 9-12-06)


112.16 LOAD LIMIT.

No driver of any taxicab shall carry more than the ordinary seating capacity for which said taxicab or vehicle was designed and built. No more than one person shall be permitted in the seat with the driver or chauffer, and no person or passenger shall be allowed to be or remain on the doors, steps, or running board of any taxicab while the same is in motion.

(Ord. 1136, passed 9-12-06) Penalty, see § 112.99


112.17 DRIVER’S CONDUCT.

No driver of any taxicab shall drive or operate the same while under the influence of intoxicants, or operate the same in a careless or reckless manner, or use any profane or obscene language while carrying passengers in the taxicab, or smoke in the taxicab.

(Ord. 1136, passed 9-12-06) Penalty, see § 112.99


112.18 APPEALS.

In the event that an application for license is denied or revoked after issuance, the applicant or licensee may file a notice with the City Manager of the licensee’s intent to appeal such denial or revocation to the City Council. The City Council shall hold a hearing to determine the appeal within 30 days of filing of the intent to appeal. The decision of the City Council shall be final and conclusive.

(Ord. 1136, passed 9-12-06)


112.99 PENALTY.

Violation of a provision of this chapter is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.

(Ord. 1136, passed 9-12-06)


CHAPTER 113: CONSTRUCTION WORKERS

Section

113.01    Definitions

113.02    Hours set

113.03    Permits

113.04    Violation


113.01 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

CONSTRUCT. Excavating, repairing, building, demolishing, or altering.

ENCLOSED BUILDING. A building that is enclosed on all sides, including overhead, with solid materials and which has doors or windows that are closed.

HOLIDAYS. Those legal holidays set out in O.R.S. 187.010 and O.R.S. 187.020 as those statutes may be amended from time to time.

PUBLIC UTILITIES. Water, sewer, electric, telephone, cable and natural gas.

(Ord. 1102, passed 3-13-03)


113.02 HOURS SET.

Except as provided in § 113.03, and except for construction in an enclosed building, no person shall construct a building or other structure, street, sidewalk, driveway, or public utility line later than 10:00 p.m. daily (except holidays) or earlier than 6:00 a.m. Monday through Friday (except holidays) and 7:00 a.m. on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays.

(Ord. 1102, passed 3-13-03) Penalty, see § 10.99


113.03 PERMITS.

(A) In cases of emergency or other public necessity, the City Manager may issue a permit allowing activities described in § 113.02 to take place at any hour. Emergency permits may not be issued for a period exceeding three days, but may be renewed for successive periods not exceeding three days each, or as long as the emergency continues.

(B) Denial of permits by the City Manager may be appealed to the City Council within five days after denial, and the hearing on the appeal will be heard at the next regularly scheduled City Council meeting. The date of the denial shall be the date a permit is orally denied or the date a written denial is made, whichever is later.

(C) Granting the permit may be appealed at any time by any person who resides or works within hearing of the noise generated as a result of the granting of the permit.

(D) Emergency permits may include such restrictions or conditions necessary to safe-guard the public peace.

(E) This chapter shall not apply to emergency work performed on public improvements or public utilities. Such activities may be conducted without restrictions.

(Ord. 1102, passed 3-13-03)


113.04 VIOLATION.

Each day this chapter is violated shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such.

(Ord. 1102, passed 3-13-03) Penalty, see § 10.99


TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES

Chapter

130.    GENERAL OFFENSES

131.    CAMPING IN CERTAIN PLACES

132.    EXCLUDING CERTAIN PERSONS FROM PUBLIC PROPERTY


CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES

Section

General Provisions

130.01    Applicability of provisions

130.02    Solicitation; assistance; confederation

130.03    Attempt

130.04    Nuisance abatement

Alcohol and Drugs

130.15    Drinking in public places

130.16    Transactions with intoxicated persons

Offenses Against Public Peace and Safety

130.25    Weapons

130.26    Street and sidewalk offenses

130.27    Begging

130.28    Lodging

130.29    Notices and advertisements

130.30    Hauling

Offenses Against Public Morals

130.45    Public indecency

Minors

130.55    Endangerment

130.56    Places of amusement

130.57    Curfew

Offenses Against Public Administration and Authority

130.70    Police and fire communications

130.71    Deliveries to prisoners

130.72    Fire control

130.99    Penalty

GENERAL PROVISIONS


130.01 APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS.

This chapter applies to acts committed on property owned or leased by the city that is outside the corporate limits of the city.

(’91 Code, § 4-6.51) (Ord. 965, passed 4-9-91)


130.02 SOLICITATION; ASSISTANCE; CONFEDERATION.

No person shall solicit, aid, employ or engage another, or confederate with another to violate a provision of any city ordinance.

(’91 Code, § 4-6.52) (Ord. 965, passed 4-9-91) Penalty, see § 130.99


130.03 ATTEMPT.

A person who attempts to commit an offense mentioned in this chapter or any ordinance of the city but who, for any reason, is prevented from consummating the act is guilty of an offense.

(’91 Code, § 4-6.53) (Ord. 965, passed 4-9-91) Penalty, see § 130.99


130.04 NUISANCE ABATEMENT.

No provision in this chapter shall preclude abatement of a nuisance as provided in the city’s general nuisance ordinance set forth in Ch. 93 of this code.

(’91 Code, § 4-6.56) (Ord. 965, passed 4-9-91)

ALCOHOL AND DRUGS


130.15 DRINKING IN PUBLIC PLACES.

No person shall drink or consume alcoholic liquor in or on a street, alley, mall, parking lot or structure, motor vehicle, public grounds or other public place unless the place has been licensed for that purpose by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission. Provided, however, consumption of alcoholic liquor is permitted in a park when a permit has been obtained from the Council.

(’91 Code, § 4-6.1) (Ord. 965, passed 4-9-91) Penalty, see § 130.99


130.16 TRANSACTIONS WITH INTOXICATED PERSONS.

No person shall purchase property from a person who is in an intoxicated condition or under the influence of a narcotic drug, or advance, loan money to, or have dealings with the person respecting the title to property.

(’91 Code, § 4-6.44) (Ord. 965, passed 4-9-91) Penalty, see § 130.99

OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY


130.25 WEAPONS.

(A) No person, other than a peace officer, or a person authorized in writing by the Chief of Police or his/her designee, may fire or discharge a crossbow or a gun, including spring- or air-actuated pellet gun, or a weapon that propels a projectile by use of gunpowder or other explosive, jet or rocket propulsion.

(B) The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit firing or discharging a weapon by any person in the defense or protection of his/her property, person or family.

(C) Any person shooting an arrow from a bow violates this chapter if the arrow travels across a boundary line of the property from where the arrow was shot.

(’91 Code, § 4-6.6) (Ord. 965, passed 4-9-91; Am. Ord. 994, passed 3-9-93) Penalty, see § 130.99


130.26 STREET AND SIDEWALK OFFENSES.

(A) Obstruction of building entrances. No person shall obstruct an entrance to a building.

(B) Open cellar doors or grates. No owner or person in charge of property shall permit a cellar door or grate located in or on a sidewalk or public pathway to remain open unless the entrance is being used and, when being used, there are adequate safeguards for pedestrians using the sidewalk.

(C) Obstruction of fire hydrants. No owner of property adjacent to a street upon which a fire hydrant is located shall place or maintain a bush, shrub or tree or other obstruction within eight feet of the fire hydrant.

(D) Obstructing passageways.

(1) No person shall, except as otherwise permitted by ordinance or with permission of the City Council, obstruct, cause to be obstructed or assist in obstructing pedestrians or vehicular traffic on a sidewalk or street.

(2) The provisions of this subsection (D) shall not apply to the delivery of merchandise or equipment. However, no person shall permit the merchandise or equipment to remain on a street or sidewalk beyond a reasonable time.

(’91 Code, §§ 4-6.35 through 4-6.38) (Ord. 965, passed 4-9-91) Penalty, see § 130.99


130.27 BEGGING.

No person shall physically accost another in a public place to solicit alms.

(’91 Code, § 4-6.42) (Ord. 965, passed 4-9-91; Am. Ord. 977, passed 5-28-91) Penalty, see § 130.99


130.28 LODGING.

No person shall lodge in a car, outbuilding or other place not intended for that purpose without permission of the owner or person entitled to possession.

(’91 Code, § 4-6.43) (Ord. 965, passed 4-9-91) Penalty, see § 130.99


130.29 NOTICES AND ADVERTISEMENTS.

No person shall attach or cause to be attached a placard, bill, advertisement or poster upon real or personal property, whether public or private, without first securing permission from the owner or person in control of the property. This section shall not be construed as an amendment to or a repeal of any city regulation of the use and location of signs.

(’91 Code, § 4-6.45) (Ord. 965, passed 4-9-91) Penalty, see § 130.99


130.30 HAULING.

No person shall haul sand, gravel, rock, wood or other substances in a vehicle or conveyance that is so constructed or in a condition as to allow the sand, gravel, rock, wood or other substances to fall on and litter public streets.

(’91 Code, § 4-6.46) (Ord. 965, passed 4-9-91) Penalty, see § 130.99

OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS


130.45 PUBLIC INDECENCY.

No person shall, while in, or in view of, a public place, perform the following.

(A) An act of sexual intercourse.

(B) An act of deviant sexual intercourse.

(C) An act of exposing his/her genitals with the intent of arousing the sexual desire of him/herself or another person.

(D) An act of urination or defecation except in toilets provided for that purpose.

(’91 Code, § 4-6.11) (Ord. 965, passed 4-9-91) Penalty, see § 130.99

MINORS


130.55 ENDANGERMENT.

(A) No person shall employ a person under 18 years of age in or about a cardroom, poolroom, billiard parlor or dance hall, unless the establishment is a "recreational facility" as defined in § 130.56.

(B) No person shall solicit, aid or cause a person under 18 years of age to do the following.

(1) Violate a law of the United States or a state, or to violate a city or county ordinance.

(2) Run away or conceal him/herself from a person or institution having lawful custody of the minor.

(’91 Code, § 4-6.16) (Ord. 965, passed 4-9-91) Penalty, see § 130.99


130.56 PLACES OF AMUSEMENT.

(A) No person under 18 years of age shall enter, visit or loiter in or about a public cardroom, poolroom or billiard parlor.

(B) No person operating or assisting in the operation of a public cardroom, poolroom or billiard parlor shall permit a person under 18 years of age to engage in a game of cards, pool, billiards, dice or games of chance, for amusement or otherwise.

(C) This section shall not apply to playing billiards or pool in a recreational facility. As used in this section, RECREATIONAL FACILITY means an area, enclosure or room in which facilities are offered to the public to play billiards or pool for amusement only and is clean, adequately supervised, adequately lighted and ventilated; no alcoholic liquor is sold or consumed; and, where access does not require passing through a room where alcoholic liquor is sold or consumed.

(’91 Code, § 4-6.17) (Ord. 965, passed 4-9-91) Penalty, see § 130.99

Cross reference:

Amusements, see Ch. 111


130.57 CURFEW.

(A) Curfew imposed.

(1) No minor under the age of 18 years shall be on a street, highway, park, alley or other public place between the hours specified in division (B) of this section, except for any of the following.

(a) The minor is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian; or other person 18 years of age or older and authorized by the parent or by law to have custody of the minor.

(b) The minor is engaged in a lawful pursuit or activity or is engaged in travel to or from a lawful pursuit or activity, which pursuit or activity or travel from the pursuit or activity requires the minor’s presence upon the public places.

(c) The minor is emancipated pursuant to state law.

(2) For the purpose of this section, a LAWFUL PURSUIT OR ACTIVITY is any of the following.

(a) Any pursuit or activity that begins prior to curfew hours, is authorized by the minor’s parents or lawful guardian and is not prohibited by law.

(b) Employment.

(B) Curfew hours. For the purpose of this section, the hours of curfew are as follows.

(1) For minors 16 and 17 years of age, the applicable hours of curfew are the hours between 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m., Friday and Saturday nights.

(2) For minors 16 and 17 years of age, on all other nights, and for minors 15 years of age and younger, the applicable hours of curfew are the hours between 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m.

(C) Action taken in the event of violation. Any peace officer or Crook County juvenile officer having reasonable grounds to believe a minor has violated this chapter may take the minor into temporary custody. The person taking temporary custody of a minor under this chapter shall as soon as practicable notify the parents, guardian or other person having care or custody of the minor. If the minor is in violation of this chapter, the minor shall be cited to appear in the Crook County Juvenile Court during regular court hours and may be released to the custody of the minor’s parents, guardian or other person having care or custody of the minor as soon as the citation has been served upon the minor except in the following cases.

(1) Where it appears that the welfare of the minor or others may be endangered by the minor’s release.

(2) Where the Crook County Juvenile Court otherwise orders.

(’91 Code, § 4-5) (Ord. 916, passed 7-28-87; Am. Ord. 940, passed 8-22-89) Penalty, see § 130.99

OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION AND AUTHORITY


130.70 POLICE AND FIRE COMMUNICATIONS.

No person shall operate any generator or electromagnetic wave or cause a disturbance of a magnitude that interferes with the proper functioning of a police or fire department radio communication system. Interference caused by equipment operated in compliance with Federal Communications Commission regulations does not violate this section.

(’91 Code, § 4-6.26) (Ord. 965, passed 4-9-91) Penalty, see § 130.99


130.71 DELIVERIES TO PRISONERS.

No person shall deliver, by any means, intoxicating liquor, dangerous drugs or narcotic drugs, as defined by state law, to a person confined in the city detention facility or attempt to convey or deliver any article to a prisoner without the consent of the officer in charge.

(’91 Code, § 4-6.27) (Ord. 965, passed 4-9-91) Penalty, see § 130.99


130.72 FIRE CONTROL.

(A) No person shall intentionally give any false alarm of fire or aid or abet in the commission of such an act.

(B) No person at a fire shall refuse to obey promptly any order of any member of the Fire Department or resist, obstruct or hinder any member of the Fire Department.

(C) No person, unless authorized by the Fire Chief, shall unfasten, open or draw water from, or otherwise interfere with any fire hydrant.

(’91 Code, § 4-6.28) (Ord. 965, passed 4-9-91) Penalty, see § 130.99


130.99 PENALTY.

(A) When in any city ordinance, an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or doing an act is required, or the failure to do an act is declared to be unlawful or an offense, each day a violation continues constitutes a separate offense.

(B) Violation of a provision of this chapter is punishable by a fine not to exceed $1000. However, if a violation of a provision is identical to a state statute with a lesser penalty, punishment shall be limited to the lesser penalty prescribed in state law.

(’91 Code, §§ 4-6.54 and 4-6.55) (Ord. 965, passed 4-9-91)


CHAPTER 131: CAMPING IN CERTAIN PLACES

Section

131.01    Definitions

131.02    Camping prohibited in certain places

131.03    Scheduling and notice of campsite cleanup

131.04    Removal, storage and retrieval of personal property

131.98    Nonexclusive remedy

131.99    Penalty


131.01 DEFINITIONS.

The following definitions apply in this chapter:

TO CAMP. To set up, or to remain in or at, a campsite.

CAMPSITE. Any place where any bedding, sleeping bag, or other sleeping matter, or any stove or fire, is placed, established, or maintained, whether or not such place incorporates the use of any tent, lean-to, shack, or any other structure, or any vehicle or part thereof.

CHIEF OF POLICE. The City of Prineville Chief of Police.

CITY. The City of Prineville.

JUNK. Items that have no apparent utility or are in an unsanitary condition.

PERSONAL PROPERTY. Items which are reasonably recognizable as belonging to individual persons and which have apparent utility.

(Ord. 1160, passed 12-9-08)


131.02 CAMPING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN PLACES.

It is unlawful for any person to camp in or upon any sidewalk, street, alley, lane, public right-of-way, park, or parking lot, or any other place to which the general public has access, or under any bridgeway. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the use of designated picnic areas on public property for cooking, or prohibit camping by permit authorized by the City Manager or designee.

(Ord. 1160, passed 12-9-08)


131.03 SCHEDULING AND NOTICE OF CAMPSITE CLEANUP.

(A) Cleanup of illegal campsites will be scheduled on an as-needed basis by the Chief of Police or designee.

(B) Permanent signs may be posted advising that camping is prohibited. Whether or not a permanent sign is posted, a specific dated and timed notice will be posted and distributed in the area of a scheduled cleanup at least 24 hours before the cleanup.

(C) Notwithstanding subsections (A) and (B) of this section, cleanup of campsites may occur immediately and without notice if the Chief of Police or designee determines that either of the following conditions exists:

(1) An exceptional emergency such as possible site contamination by hazardous materials or where there is an immediate danger to human life or safety;

(2) Illegal activity other than camping.

(D) At the time of the cleanup, written notice will be posted and distributed announcing the telephone number where information on picking up the stored personal property can be obtained during normal business hours.

(Ord. 1160, passed 12-9-08)


131.04 REMOVAL, STORAGE AND RETRIEVAL OF PERSONAL PROPERTY.

(A) Personal property will be separated from junk during cleanups. Junk will be immediately discarded. Items of personal property will be turned over to the Police Department and stored. The personal property shall be stored for no less than 30 days, during which time it will be reasonably available to persons claiming ownership of the personal property.

(B) The Police Department shall arrange in advance for a location to store personal property. The storage facility should be reasonably secure.

(C) Any personal property that remains unclaimed for 30 days after the cleanup may be disposed of, sold, donated, used, or transferred as unclaimed personal property.

(D) Weapons, drug paraphernalia, and items which reasonably appear to be either stolen or evidence of a crime may be retained by the Police Department.

(Ord. 1160, passed 12-9-08)


131.98 NONEXCLUSIVE REMEDY.

The remedies described in this chapter shall not be the exclusive remedies of the city for violations of this chapter.

(Ord. 1160, passed 12-9-08)


131.99 PENALTY.

Violation of this chapter is a nuisance and is subject to a maximum fine of $500.

(Ord. 1160, passed 12-9-08)


CHAPTER 132: EXCLUDING CERTAIN PERSONS FROM PUBLIC PROPERTY

Section

132.01    Purpose

132.02    Definitions

132.03    Authority

132.04    Prohibited acts generally

132.05    Rules of conduct

132.06    Enforcement and exclusion

132.07    Warning – Conduct subject to exclusion

132.08    Notice

132.09    Right to appeal – Hearing procedure

132.10    Application for waiver

132.11    Criminal trespass


132.01 PURPOSE.

The purpose of this chapter is to protect law-abiding citizens in their use of public places within the City of Prineville and to authorize exclusion of certain persons from public places when those persons violate applicable federal or state laws, city ordinances and rules promulgated by public bodies where the conduct of such person is violent or disrupts others or the conduct of the operations of the public bodies.

(Ord. 1225, passed 9-27-16)


132.02 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply:

“Applicable provision of law” includes any applicable provision of this chapter, of any city ordinance applying to the use of public places, any applicable criminal or traffic law of the state of Oregon, any federal law, any law regarding controlled substances or alcoholic beverages, any applicable City of Prineville (COP) ordinance or regulation, and any ordinances, orders, rules or regulations of any public body. For purposes of this chapter, “applicable” means relating to the person’s conduct in the public place.

“Authorized employee” means: 

(A) An employee of a public body authorized by such public body to exclude persons from public places managed by the public body; 

(B) A city Code Enforcement Officer; and 

(C) A peace officer.

“Chief of Police” means the city’s Chief of Police.

“City” means the City of Prineville.

“City Manager” means the Prineville City Manager or his or her designee.

“City property” means any building, structure, or land owned or leased by the city, including, but not limited to City Hall, city parks, trails, bike paths, bridges, streets, alleys, city parking lots, and any open public space within the city. 

“Hearings Officer” means a person appointed by the City Manager, which person may be an employee of the city.

“Public body” means the City of Prineville, Crook County Parks and Recreation District, Crook County, Crook County Fire and Rescue, and any other special district, municipal corporation, or division or agency of the state of Oregon or the United States.

“Public place” means any property owned or managed by any public body, including, but not limited to, city property and public park areas managed by Crook County Parks and Recreation District.

“Rules of conduct” means the rules and regulations set out in § 132.05. 

(Ord. 1225, passed 9-27-16)


132.03 AUTHORITY.

(A) In addition to other remedies provided for city ordinance violations, to include this chapter, or any laws of the state of Oregon or the federal government, a person may be excluded by an authorized employee from a specific public place if such person violates any applicable provision of law in a public place. 

(B) Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to authorize the exclusion of any person lawfully exercising free speech rights or other rights protected by the Oregon or U.S. Constitution. However, a person engaged in such protected activity who commits acts that are not protected, but that violate applicable provisions of law shall be subject to exclusion as provided by this chapter.

(Ord. 1225, passed 9-27-16)


132.04 PROHIBITED ACTS GENERALLY. 

(A) Any act or thing prohibited or the failing to do any required act or thing by this chapter, in a public place, within the corporate limits of the city is hereby declared to be a violation of this chapter.

(B) Any act or omission made unlawful under this chapter shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or concealing any such act or omission. 

(Ord. 1225, passed 9-27-16)


132.05 RULES OF CONDUCT.

While on or about any public place:

(A) No person shall violate any federal or state laws, city ordinance, or Crook County Park and Recreation District rule. 

(B) No person shall enter or remain on any city property for purposes other than to conduct legitimate business with the city or to use that property lawfully under the laws and rules that apply.

(C) No person shall enter or attempt to enter any secure portion of any city property that is not open to members of the general public without authorization from the City Manager.

(D) No person shall engage in conduct that degrades the appearance of city property, including but not limited to depositing trash or defacing property.

(E) No person shall spit on any surface on any public place other than the ground.

(F) No person shall engage in conduct that disrupts or interferes with operations of the city government, or disturbs city customers or employees, including but not limited to conduct that creates unreasonable noise or consists of loud or boisterous physical behavior.

(G) No person shall engage in conduct that subjects customers or employees of the city government to annoyance or alarm, including but not limited to conduct that involves the use of abusive or threatening language or gestures.

(H) Unless specifically authorized, no person shall use a public place for the purpose of housing or camping, including but not limited to placing objects such as vehicles, bicycles, backpacks, carts, or other items in a manner that interferes with the free passage of persons.

(Ord. 1225, passed 9-27-16)


132.06 ENFORCEMENT AND EXCLUSION.

(A) An exclusion issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be for the following timeframes:

(1) Thirty days for an exclusion based on an offense or rule not covered by subsection (A)(2) or (3) of this section. 

(2) Ninety days if the basis for the exclusion is a felony or misdemeanor offense under federal law or state law. In addition, if the person to be excluded has been excluded from any public place at any time within two years before the date of the present exclusion, the exclusion shall also be for 90 days.

(3) One hundred eighty days if the person to be excluded has been excluded from one or more public places under this chapter on two or more occasions within two years before the date of the present exclusion.

(4) Twenty-four hours when a person’s behavior does not violate one or more of the provisions set forth in § 132.07, but causes either of the following:

(a) A significant and immediate threat to public health or safety; or

(b) A serious disturbance that prevents other persons from enjoying a public place.

If a person receives two 24-hour exclusions within any 90-day period, then any subsequent exclusions may be for a period of 30 days.

(5) Nothing herein precludes a no-contact condition of pretrial release or probation condition, which operates to exclude the individual from specified public places.

(B) If a person is issued a subsequent exclusion while a previous exclusion is stayed pending appeal (or pending judicial review, should a court stay the exclusion), the stayed exclusion shall be counted in determining the appropriate length of the subsequent exclusion. If the previous exclusion is set aside, the term of the subsequent exclusion shall be determined, as if the previous exclusion had not been issued. If multiple exclusions issued to a single person for one public place are simultaneously stayed pending appeal, the effective periods of those which are affirmed shall run consecutively. 

(Ord. 1225, passed 9-27-16)


132.07 WARNING – CONDUCT SUBJECT TO EXCLUSION.

Before issuing an exclusion under this chapter, the authorized employee shall first give the person a verbal warning and opportunity to desist from the violation of an applicable provision of law. An exclusion shall not be issued if the person promptly complies with the direction and desists from violating the applicable provision of law. Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, no warning shall be required if the person is to be excluded for engaging in conduct that:

(A) Is classified as a felony or as a misdemeanor under the following chapters of the Oregon Revised Statutes (ORS), or is an attempt, solicitation or conspiracy to commit any such felony or misdemeanor defined in the ORS:

(1) ORS Chapter 162, Offenses Against the State and Public Justice;

(2) ORS Chapter 163, Offenses Against Persons;

(3) ORS Chapter 164, Offenses Against Property, except for ORS 164.805, Offensive Littering;

(4) ORS Chapter 165, Offenses Involving Fraud or Deception;

(5) ORS Chapter 166, Offenses Against Public Order; Firearms and Other Weapons; Racketeering;

(6) ORS Chapter 167, Offenses Against Public Health, Decency and Animals;

(7) ORS Chapter 475, Controlled Substances; Illegal Drug Cleanup; Paraphernalia; Precursors; or

(B) Otherwise involves a controlled substance or alcoholic beverage; or

(C) Has resulted in injury to any person or damage to any property; or

(D) Constitutes a violation of any of the following provisions of the Code of Prineville:

(1) Chapter 90, Animals;

(2) Section 93.14, Dangerous animals;

(3) Section 130.25, Weapons;

(4) Section 131.02, Overnight camping on public property;

(5) Section 130.45(D), Urination or Defecation in Public Places, except if the conduct involves only urination on a permeable surface (such as grass, dirt, mulch or other plant materials) in a park; or

(E) Is conduct for which the person previously has been warned or excluded for committing in a public place.

(Ord. 1225, passed 9-27-16)


132.08 NOTICE.

A report shall be taken documenting facts, and a written notice shall be given to any person excluded from any public place, whether it be an exclusion warning or an exclusion for a specific time. The notice shall identify the applicable provision of law the person has violated and contain a brief description of the offending conduct, the places of exclusion, and the start date and end date of the exclusion period, or that it is an exclusion warning. The notice shall be signed by the authorized employee and shall prominently display a warning of the consequences for failure to comply. The notice shall include information on the right to appeal, including the time limit and the place of delivering the appeal.

(Ord. 1225, passed 9-27-16)


132.09 RIGHT TO APPEAL – HEARING PROCEDURE. 

(A) A person receiving an exclusion notice under § 132.08 may appeal to the city to have the exclusion rescinded or the exclusion period shortened. An appeal shall be filed by providing a written request for hearing within five business days of the date of the exclusion notice. Failure to file written notice of appeal within five business days will be deemed a waiver of any appeal rights.

(B) The request for an appeal hearing must be in writing, contain a copy or description of the notice of exclusion, and a statement of the basis on which the decision to exclude is invalid, unauthorized, or otherwise improper.

(C) A hearing on the appeal shall be scheduled within ten business days of receiving the request, unless the appellant requests a later date. Notice of the hearing time and date shall be mailed to the appellant at the address he or she furnished to the authorized employee and to the person issuing the exclusion notice.

(D) At the hearing, the appellant may contest the validity of the exclusion and may present evidence. The public body shall have the burden of proving the validity of the exclusion by a preponderance of the evidence. The public body may present evidence either by testimony or by written report of the authorized employee. If the public body’s evidence is presented only by written report and the Hearings Officer cannot resolve a question by information contained in the report, the hearing may be held open for a reasonable time to complete the record.

(E) If the Hearings Officer finds the public body has proved each element necessary to issue the exclusion notice, and if the exclusion is otherwise in accordance with law, the Hearings Officer shall uphold the exclusion.

(F) If the Hearings Officer finds that the public body has not met its burden of proof or that the exclusion is otherwise unlawful, then the Hearings Officer shall enter an order rescinding the exclusion.

(G) If an appeal of the exclusion is timely filed under this section, the exclusion shall be stayed pending the outcome of the appeal. If the exclusion is affirmed, the remaining period of exclusion shall be effective immediately upon the issuance of the decision, unless the Hearings Officer specifies a later effective date.

(H) The determination of the Hearings Officer is a final decision and is not appealable to the City Council. Appeals from any determination by the Hearings Officer under this chapter shall be by writ of review to the Circuit Court of Crook County, Oregon, as provided in ORS 34.010 through 34.100. 

(Ord. 1225, passed 9-27-16)


132.10 APPLICATION FOR WAIVER.

At any time within the period of exclusion, a person receiving such notice of exclusion may apply in writing to the Chief of Police for a limited waiver of some or all of the effects of the exclusion for good cause. If a waiver is granted under this section, the Chief of Police shall promptly notify the public body which manages the public place from which the person was excluded of such action and enter the waiver information into the exclusion database kept by the Prineville Police Department. In exercising discretion under this section, the Chief of Police shall consider the seriousness of the violation for which the person has been excluded, the particular need of the person to be in the public place during some or all of the period of exclusion, such as for work or to attend or participate in a particular event (without regard to the content of any speech associated with that event), and any other criterion the Chief of Police determines to be relevant to the determination of whether or not to grant a waiver. Notwithstanding the granting of a waiver under this section, the period of waiver will be included for purposes of calculating the appropriate length of exclusion under § 132.06. The decision of the Chief of Police to grant or deny a waiver, in whole or in part, under this section is committed to the sole discretion of the Chief of Police and is not subject to appeal or review. Exclusions and waivers of exclusions will also be forwarded to the public body managing the public place from which the person was excluded.

(Ord. 1225, passed 9-27-16)


132.11 CRIMINAL TRESPASS.

No person shall enter or remain in any public place at any time during which there is in effect a valid exclusion issued under this chapter excluding that person from that place. A person who knowingly violates a valid notice of exclusion from a public place under this chapter commits the crime of Criminal Trespass II. 

(Ord. 1225, passed 9-27-16)


TITLE XV: LAND USAGE

Chapter

150.    BUILDING REGULATIONS

151.    FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION

152.    SIGN ORDINANCE

153.    LAND DEVELOPMENT

153A.    MEDICAL MARIJUANA AND OVERLAY ZONE

153B.    MARIJUANA GROWING, PROCESSING AND SELLING

153C.    TEMPORARY WORKER HOUSING

154.    COMPREHENSIVE PLAN

155.    NATURAL FEATURES OVERLAY DISTRICT (NFOD) AND SLOPE HAZARD REQUIREMENTS


CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS

Section

Adoption of Codes

150.01    Adoption of State Specialty Codes

150.02    Adoption of Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings

Travel Trailers and Mobile Homes

150.15    Definitions

150.16    Parking permits

Administration and Enforcement

150.30    Authority of enforcement officers

150.31    Remedies

150.99    Penalty

ADOPTION OF CODES


150.01 ADOPTION OF STATE SPECIALTY CODES.

O.R.S. Ch. 456 and Department of Commerce Administrative Order No. DC34 regarding structural, O.R.S. Ch. 457 and Department of Commerce Administrative Order No. DC35 regarding mechanical, and O.R.S. Ch. 476 and Fire Marshal Administrative Order No. FM65 regarding fire and safety specialty codes, and all acts and amendments applicable to cities, are hereby adopted and made by reference a part of this chapter.

(’91 Code, § 7-1.1) (Ord. 726, passed 6-25-74)


150.02 ADOPTION OF UNIFORM CODE FOR THE ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS.

The Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, most recent Edition, regarding the repair, vacation or demolition of buildings or structures which endanger the life, limb, health, morals, property, safety or welfare of the general public, all amendments thereto and as modified herein, are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein.

(’91 Code, § 7-3.1) (Ord. 811, passed 12-12-78)

TRAVEL TRAILERS AND MOBILE HOMES


150.15 DEFINITIONS.

For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

MOBILE HOME. A portable dwelling unit designed and built to be towed on its own chassis, comprised of frame and wheels, dependent on external utility connections and designed without permanent foundation for year-round residential use. A unit may contain parts that fold, collapse or telescope for towing and be expanded later to provide additional cubic capacity, as well as two or more separately towable components, designed to be joined into on integral unit. For purposes of this definition, it shall be immaterial whether the unit or components are placed upon property for a temporary, semi-permanent or permanent foundation, or that the unit or components comply structurally with the city’s building code.

PERSON. Shall be defined to mean any individual, firm, trust, partnership, association or corporation.

TRAVEL TRAILER. A portable unit designed and built on its own chassis, comprised of frame and wheels, intended for highway use, either towed or self-propelled, equipped with sleeping, cooling and plumbing facilities, independent of external utility connection and intended for use principally for temporary recreational or vacation purposes, but not for residential purposes; includes travel trailers or coaches, motorized homes and campers, pickup coaches, camping trailers and any other motorized or towed camping vehicles such as vans or converted buses.

(’91 Code, § 8-2.1)


150.16 PARKING; PERMITS.

(A) Unless otherwise approved by the city by special permit, it shall be unlawful to a park or place, keep or maintain any travel trailer or mobile home and use the same for sleeping or living or cooking purposes within the city for any period of time exceeding 72 hours, except in a State of Oregon licensed mobile home park. It is to be understood that the parking of travel trailers and mobile homes in the city that are not actually being used for the purposes defined in § 150.15 are not regulated by this subchapter, but are regulated by other city ordinances and state statutes and administrative rules.

(B) This chapter shall not apply to travel trailers and mobile homes that were lawfully parked within the city and which otherwise comply with the ordinances of the city and the laws of the state relating to the same as of August 26, 1964, the date of enactment of Ord. 563. No travel trailer or mobile home now lawfully parked shall be replaced with any other travel trailer or mobile home. This provision shall not apply to travel trailers and mobile homes which are located in mobile home parks.

(C) Provided, however, that a travel trailer or mobile home used for sleeping or living or cooking purposes may be parked in the city outside of a mobile home park for a period not to exceed 15 days after the owner or occupant thereof has secured from the City Recorder a permit, the fee for which shall be set by resolution of the City Council. This permit shall not be issued unless the applicant shall show to the City Recorder that the proposed parking and use of the travel trailer or mobile home will comply with the laws of the state and all ordinances of the city. When a permit has been issued for a particular travel trailer or mobile home, as herein provided, an additional permit shall not be issued for the same travel trailer or mobile home within a 30-day period from the date of the issuance of the original permit.

(’91 Code, § 8-2.2) (Ord. 790, passed 8-9-77) Penalty, see § 150.99

Cross reference:

Parking regulations, see Ch. 72

ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT


150.30 AUTHORITY OF ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS.

Wherever in the building code it is provided that anything must be done to the approval of or subject to the direction of any enforcement officer, this shall be construed to give the officer only the power to determine whether the rules and regulations established by the ordinance have been complied with, and shall not be considered as giving the officer discretionary powers.

(’91 Code, § 7-1.4) (Ord. 726, passed 6-25-74)


150.31 REMEDIES.

A person violating a provision of this chapter [except § 150.15 et seq.] shall be subject to the provisions of this section as follows.

(A) Unlawful construction or use is a nuisance. The location, erection, construction, maintenance, repair or alteration of an access or use of an access in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a nuisance.

(B) Remedies for unlawful access or use. In case an access is, or is proposed to be located, constructed, maintained, repaired, altered or used in violation of this chapter, the City Council or City Attorney of the city or a person whose interest in real property in the city is or may be affected by the violation may, in addition to other remedies provided by law, institute injunction, mandamus, abatement or other appropriate proceedings to prevent, temporarily or permanently enjoin, abate or remove the unlawful location, construction, maintenance, repair, alteration or use.

(’91 Code, § 7-1.7) (Ord. 726, passed 6-25-74) Penalty, see § 150.99


150.99 PENALTY.

(A) Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no other specific penalty is provided shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $500, subject to division (B) of this section.

(B) Any person violating any provision of this chapter which is identical to a code, rule or order adopted by reference in this chapter, shall, upon conviction, be punished by the penalty prescribed n that code, rule or order.

(C) Each calendar date on which a violation occurs constitutes a separate violation.


CHAPTER 151: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION

Section

Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose, Objectives and Definitions

151.01    Statutory authority

151.02    Findings of fact

151.03    Statement of purpose

151.04    Methods of reducing flood losses

151.05    Definitions

General Provisions

151.10    Lands to which this chapter applies

151.11    Basis for area of special flood hazard 

151.12    Coordination with specialty codes adopted by the State of Oregon Building Codes Division

151.13    Establishment of a development permit

151.14    Interpretation

151.15    Warning and disclaimer of liability

Administration

151.20    Designation of Floodplain Administrator

151.21    Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator

151.22    Development permit required 

151.23    Watercourse alterations

151.24    Requirement to submit new technical data

Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction

151.30    Site improvements and subdivisions

151.31    Regulatory floodway

151.32    Zones with base flood elevations but no regulatory floodway

151.33    Areas of special flood hazard without base flood elevations

151.34    Specific building design and construction standards

151.35    Below-grade crawlspaces

151.36    Recreational vehicles

151.37    Essential facilities

151.38    Tanks, fences and walls

151.39    Other development, including accessory structures, in noncoastal special flood hazard areas

Variance Procedures and Criteria

151.40    Variance

151.41    Criteria for variances

151.42    Variance decision

Enforcement

151.50    Penalties for violation

151.51    Severability

151.52    Abrogation and greater restrictions

STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE, OBJECTIVES AND DEFINITIONS


151.01 STATUTORY AUTHORITY.

The State of Oregon has delegated1 the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the City of Prineville does ordain as follows.

(Ord. 1183, passed 10-25-11)


151.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.

(A) The flood hazard areas of the City of Prineville are subject to periodic inundation that results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.

(B) These flood losses are caused by structures in flood hazard areas, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in flood hazard areas causing increases in flood heights and velocities.

(C) The City of Prineville has the primary responsibility for planning, adoption and enforcement of land use regulations to accomplish proper management of special flood hazard areas. [44 CFR 59.12]

(Ord. 1183, passed 10-25-11)


151.03 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.

The objectives of this chapter are to:

(A) Protect human life, health and property; 

(B) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water purification and sewage treatment plants, water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 

(C) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas; 

(D) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 

(E) Minimize the need for rescue, emergency services, and relief associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 

(F) Minimize prolonged business interruptions and unnecessary disruption of commerce, access and public service during times of flood; 

(G) Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard;

(H) Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions; and

(I) Manage the alteration of areas of special flood hazard, stream channels and shorelines to minimize the impact of development on the natural and beneficial functions.

(Ord. 1183, passed 10-25-11)


151.04 METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.

In order to accomplish its purpose, this chapter includes methods and provisions to:

(A) Require development that is vulnerable to floods, including structures and facilities necessary for the general health, safety and welfare of citizens, to be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 

(B) Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion;

(C) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion;

(D) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that will unnaturally divert floodwaters or that may increase flood hazards to other lands; 

(E) Preserve and restore natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which carry and store floodwaters; and

(F) Coordinate with and supplement provisions of State of Oregon Specialty Codes enforced by the State of Oregon Building Codes Division. 

(Ord. 1183, passed 10-25-11)


151.05 DEFINITIONS.

Unless specifically defined in this section, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted according to the meaning they have in common usage. 

ACCESSORY STRUCTURE means a structure on the same or adjacent parcel as a principal structure, the use of which is incidental and subordinate to the principal structure. 

ADDITION means an alteration to an existing structure that results in any increase in its ground floor area.

APPEAL means a request for review of the Floodplain Administrator’s interpretation of provisions of this chapter. 

AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community’s flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. [44 CFR 59.1, simplified]

AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Zones designating areas of special flood hazard on flood insurance rate maps always include the letters A or V. Also known as the SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). [44 CFR 59.1, simplified]

BASE FLOOD means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. [44 CFR 59.1]

BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) means the water surface elevation during the base flood in relation to a specified datum. The base flood elevation (BFE) is depicted on the FIRM to the nearest foot and in the FIS to the nearest 0.1 foot. 

BASEMENT means any area of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. [44 CFR 59.1]

BELOW-GRADE CRAWLSPACE means an enclosed area below the base flood elevation in which the interior grade is not more than two feet below the lowest adjacent exterior grade and the height, measured from the interior grade of the crawlspace to the top of the crawlspace foundation, does not exceed four feet at any point. 

BREAKAWAY WALL means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.

CRITICAL FACILITY. See ESSENTIAL FACILITY. 

DATUM. The vertical datum is a base measurement point (or set of points) from which all elevations are determined. Historically, that common set of points has been the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (NGVD29). The vertical datum currently adopted by the federal government as a basis for measuring heights is the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88). 

DEVELOPMENT means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood hazard. [44 CFR 59.1] 

DIGITAL FIRM (DFIRM) means digital flood insurance rate map. It depicts flood risk and zones and flood risk information. The DFIRM presents the flood risk information in a format suitable for electronic mapping applications. 

ELEVATED BUILDING means a nonbasement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.

ENCROACHMENT means the advancement or infringement of uses, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or other development into a regulatory floodway which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 

ESSENTIAL FACILITY or CRITICAL FACILITY means:

(1) Hospitals and other medical facilities having surgery and emergency treatment areas;

(2) Fire and police stations;

(3) Tanks or other structures containing, housing or supporting water or fire-suppression materials or equipment required for the protection of essential or hazardous facilities or special occupancy structures;

(4) Emergency vehicle shelters and garages;

(5) Structures and equipment in emergency-preparedness centers;

(6) Standby power-generating equipment for essential facilities; and

(7) Structures and equipment in government communication centers and other facilities required for emergency response. [ORS 455.447 and Table 1-1 of ASCE 24]

FLOOD or FLOODING means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 

(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 

(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. [44 CFR 59.1]

FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. [44 CFR 59.1]

FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles, regulatory floodway boundaries and water surface elevations of the base flood. [44 CFR 59.1, modified]

FLOODWAY (REGULATORY FLOODWAY) means the channel of a river or other watercourse and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. [44 CFR 59.1]

HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE (HAG) means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed walls of a structure. Refer to the Elevation Certificate, FEMA Form 81-31, for HAG for more information. 

HISTORIC STRUCTURE means a structure that is: 

(1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;

(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or to a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 

(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or

(4) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 

(a) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or

(b) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. [44 CFR 59.1]

LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC) means an official FEMA determination, by letter, to amend or revise effective flood insurance rate maps and/or flood insurance studies. LOMCs are issued in the following categories: 

LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). An amendment to the flood insurance rate maps based on technical data showing that an existing structure or parcel of land that has not been elevated by fill (natural grade) was inadvertently included in the special flood hazard area because of an area of naturally high ground above the base flood.

LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR).

(1) A LOMR-F (letter of map revision based on fill) is a letter from FEMA stating that an existing structure or parcel of land that has been elevated by fill would not be inundated by the base flood.

(2) A LOMR revises the current flood insurance rate map and/or flood insurance study to show changes to the floodplains, floodways or flood elevations. LOMRs are generally based on manmade alterations that affected the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in modification to the existing regulatory floodway, the effective base flood elevation, or the special flood hazard area. It is recommended a conditional letter of map revision be approved by FEMA prior to issuing a permit to start a project if the project has a potential to affect the special flood hazard area. (See CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION.)

CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR). A formal review and comment by FEMA as to whether a proposed project complies with the minimum National Flood Insurance Program floodplain management criteria. A CLOMR does not amend or revise effective flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary and floodway maps, or flood insurance studies. 

LOWEST FLOOR is the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a structure’s lowest floor; provided, that the enclosed area is built and maintained in accordance with the applicable design requirements of the specialty codes and this chapter. [44 CFR 59.1, modified for clarity] The lowest floor of a manufactured dwelling is the bottom of the longitudinal chassis frame beam in A zones. [Manufactured Dwelling Specialty Code, page 13]

MANUFACTURED DWELLING or MANUFACTURED HOME means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term MANUFACTURED DWELLING does not include a recreational vehicle. [44 CFR 59.1]

MEAN SEA LEVEL means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 or other datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community’s FIRM are referenced. [44 CFR 59.1, modified to add new datum]

NEW CONSTRUCTION means a structure for which the start of construction commenced after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. [44 CFR 59.1, modified for clarity]

OREGON SPECIALTY CODES means the combined specialty codes adopted under ORS 446.062, 446.185, 447.020(2), 455.020(2), 455.496, 455.610, 455.680, 460.085, 460.360, 479.730(1) or 480.545, but does not include regulations adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to ORS Chapter 476 or ORS 479.015 to 479.200 and 479.210 to 479.220. The combined specialty codes are often referred to as building codes.

RECONSTRUCTION means the repair of a structure damaged by any cause (not just flooding) without increasing the floor area of the structure.

RECREATIONAL VEHICLE means a vehicle that is: 

(1) Built on a single chassis; 

(2) Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 

(3) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towed by a light duty truck; and

(4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. [44 CFR 59.1]

REHABILITATION means any improvement and repairs that are made to the interior and exterior of an existing structure that do not result in any increase in the ground floor area of the structure. This is perhaps the most common category and includes activities like remodeling a kitchen, gutting the building and redoing the interior, and adding a second story.

START OF CONSTRUCTION includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The ACTUAL START means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the ACTUAL START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not the alteration affects the external dimensions of a building. [44 CFR 59.1]

STRUCTURE means a walled and roofed building, a manufactured dwelling, a modular or temporary building, or a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground. [44 CFR 59.1, modified for clarity]

SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of its market value before the damage occurred. [44 CFR 59.1]

SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT means reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The market value of the structure is:

(1) The real market value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or 

(2) In the case of damage, the real market value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. The term does not include either: 

(a) A project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 

(b) Alteration of a historic structure; provided, that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure. [44 CFR 59.1]

VARIANCE means a grant of relief from a requirement of this chapter. [44 CFR 59.1]

VIOLATION means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 

WATER-DEPENDENT USE means a facility that cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, or ship repair facilities. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities. 

WATER SURFACE ELEVATION means the height, in relation to a specific datum, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. [44 CFR 59.1]

WATERCOURSE means the channel and banks of an identifiable watercourse, and not the adjoining floodplain areas. The flood-carrying capacity of a watercourse refers to the flood-carrying capacity of the channel (except in the case of alluvial fans, where a channel is not typically defined).

(Ord. 1183, passed 10-25-11)

GENERAL PROVISIONS 


151.10 LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.

This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the City of Prineville. Nothing in this chapter is intended to allow uses or structures that are otherwise prohibited by the zoning ordinance or specialty codes. 

(Ord. 1183, passed 10-25-11)


151.11 BASIS FOR AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.

The area of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Crook County, Oregon and Incorporated Areas, dated February 2, 2012, and as amended, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) or digital flood insurance rate maps (DFIRM), is adopted by reference and declared a part of this chapter. The FIS and the FIRM are on file at the City Planning Department, City Hall, 387 NE 3rd St., Prineville, Oregon. [44 CFR Part 60.3(b)(1), (c)(1) and (d)(2)]

(Ord. 1183, passed 10-25-11)


151.12 COORDINATION WITH SPECIALTY CODES ADOPTED BY THE STATE OF OREGON BUILDING CODES DIVISION.

Pursuant to the requirement established in ORS Chapter 455 that the City of Prineville administer and enforce the State of Oregon Specialty Codes, the City Council of Prineville does hereby acknowledge that the specialty codes contain certain provisions that apply to the design and construction of buildings and structures located in areas of special flood hazard. Therefore, this chapter is intended to be administered and enforced in conjunction with the specialty codes. 

(Ord. 1183, passed 10-25-11)


151.13 ESTABLISHMENT OF A DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.

A development permit shall be required prior to initiating development activities in any areas of special flood hazard established in § 151.11. [44 CFR Part 60.3(a)]

Development permit applications that propose any changes to the floodway, alterations to special flood hazard area boundaries, or increases to base flood elevations more than one foot are subject to the provisions of § 151.24 (Requirement to submit new technical data).

(Ord. 1183, passed 10-25-11)


151.14 INTERPRETATION.

In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 

(A) Considered as minimum requirements; 

(B) Reasonably construed at the discretion of the Floodplain Administrator;

(C) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes, including state specialty codes. 

(Ord. 1183, passed 10-25-11)


151.15 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.

The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of Prineville or any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or an administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. [FEMA Region X] 

(Ord. 1183, passed 10-25-11)

ADMINISTRATION


151.20 DESIGNATION OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.

The Planning Director or designee is hereby appointed as the Floodplain Administrator, who is responsible for administering and implementing the provisions of this chapter. [44 CFR 59.22(b)]

(Ord. 1183, passed 10-25-11)


151.21 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.

Duties of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to: 

(A) Review all proposed development to determine whether it will be located in areas of special flood hazard or other flood-prone areas. [44 CFR 60.3(a)(1)]

(B) Review applications for new development or modifications of any existing development in areas of special flood hazard for compliance with the requirements of this chapter. [44 CFR 60.3(a)(1)]

(C) Review proposed development to ensure that necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law. Copies of such permits shall be maintained on file. [44 CFR 60.3(a)(2)]

(D) Review all development permit applications to determine if proposed development is located in the regulatory floodway, and if so, ensure that the encroachment standards of § 151.31 are met. [44 CFR 60.3(d)(1)]

(E) When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been established in § 151.11, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other authoritative source in order to administer the provisions of this chapter. [44 CFR 60.3(b)(4)]

(F) When base flood elevations are not available from an authoritative source, the Floodplain Administrator shall require base flood elevations to be developed in accordance with § 151.30(C) or take into account the flood hazards, to the extent they are known, to determine whether a proposed building site or subdivision will be reasonably safe from flooding.2 [44 CFR 60.3(a)(3) and 60.3(a)(4)] 

Note: The Oregon Residential Specialty Code authorizes the building official to require the applicant to determine a base flood elevation where none exists. 

(G) Where a determination is needed of the location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (including, for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), the Floodplain Administrator shall make a determination. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the determination. 

(H) Issue development permits when the provisions of this chapter have been met, or deny the same in the event of noncompliance. [44 CFR 59.24]

(I) Obtain, verify and record the actual elevation in relation to the vertical datum used on the effective FIRM, or in relation to the highest adjacent grade where no base flood elevation is available, of the lowest floor level, including basement, of all new construction or substantially improved buildings and structures, including manufactured dwellings. [44 CFR 60.3(b)(5), amended to address no BFE and manufactured dwellings]

(J) Obtain, verify and record the actual elevation of finished construction, in relation to the vertical datum used on the effective FIRM, or highest adjacent grade where no base flood elevation is available, to which any new or substantially improved nonresidential buildings or structures have been floodproofed. When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain certification of elevation to which the structure was floodproofed from a registered professional engineer or architect. [44 CFR 60.3(b)(5), amended to address no BFE]

(K) Ensure that all records and certifications pertaining to the provisions of this chapter are permanently maintained in the City of Prineville Planning Department and available for public inspection. [44 CFR 60.3(b)(5)]

(Ord. 1183, passed 10-25-11)


151.22 DEVELOPMENT PERMIT REQUIRED.

For habitat restoration projects, applicants shall follow procedures in § 151.23 (Watercourse alterations) and/or § 151.31 (Regulatory floodway).

Applications involving structures shall submit a FEMA-approved elevation certificate (FEMA Form 81-31 or as amended) for proposed structures or substantially improved structures (based on construction drawings) at the time of application for a floodplain development permit, for buildings under construction at the time of the inspection required by the Oregon Residential Specialty Code, and upon building completion prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy.

Application for a development permit shall be made to the Floodplain Administrator or designee on forms furnished by the Floodplain Administrator or designee prior to starting development activities. [44 CFR 60.3(a)(1) and (b)(1)] Specifically, the following information is required: 

(A) Application stage.

(1) The site plan shall include any proposed or required fill within the City of Prineville. The reviewing authority may require the floodway to be delineated by a professional surveyor if developing near the floodway boundary on the DFIRM. 

(2) An elevation certificate is required with submittal of any development within the special flood hazard area to ensure proper development of the structure. 

(3) Certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of the NFIP and specialty codes. [44 CFR 60.3(c)(4)]

(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development. [44 CFR 60.3(b)(6)]

(5) Proof that application has been made for necessary permits from other governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law. [44 CFR 60.3(a)(2) requires that other permits be received prior to issuing permit]

(B) Construction stage.

(1) Copies of all necessary permits from other governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law must be provided prior to start of construction. 

(2) Development activities shall not begin without an approved development permit.

(3) For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the Floodplain Administrator and Building Department Official an as-built certification of the floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is placed and prior to further vertical construction. [Oregon Residential Specialty Code R109]

(4) Any deficiencies identified by the Floodplain Administrator or Building Department Official shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to work proceeding. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections shall be cause for the Floodplain Administrator or Building Department Official to issue a stop work order for the project. [Good Practice based on 44 CFR 59.14]

(C) Certificate of occupancy.

(1) In addition to the requirements of the specialty codes pertaining to certificate of occupancy, and prior to the final inspection, the owner or authorized agent shall submit the following documentation for finished construction that has been signed and sealed by a registered surveyor or engineer:

(a) For elevated buildings and structures in non-coastal areas of special flood hazard (all A zones), a completed flood elevation certificate with the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, or where no base flood elevation is available the height above highest adjacent grade of the lowest floor. [44 CFR 60.3(b)(5)]

(b) For nonresidential buildings and structures that have been floodproofed, the elevation to which the building or structure was floodproofed. [44 CFR 60.3(b)(5)]

(2) Failure to submit certification or failure to correct violations shall be cause for the Floodplain Administrator or Building Department Official to withhold a certificate of occupancy until such deficiencies are corrected. [Good Practice]

(D) Expiration of floodplain development permit. A floodplain development permit shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the work commences. Extensions for periods of not more than 180 days each shall be requested in writing. [44 CFR 59.1]

(Ord. 1183, passed 10-25-11)


151.23 WATERCOURSE ALTERATIONS.

(A)  A CLOMR shall be submitted as part of the city’s floodplain application to alter a watercourse. 

(B) A watercourse alteration does not include the following:

(1) Habitat restoration of the channel or banks of a channel (see § 151.31).

(2) Constructing a side channel for fish passage permitted by a state or federal agency (see § 151.31).

(C)  A watercourse alteration does include the following:

(1)  Installation of a culvert.

(2)  Physically moving the river or stream channel from one place to another.

(D) Development shall not diminish the flood-carrying capacity of a watercourse. If any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development, the applicant must submit certification by a registered professional engineer that the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be diminished. [Good Practice]

(E) Applicant will be responsible for obtaining all necessary permits from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including but not limited to Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334; the Endangered Species Act of 1973, 16 U.S.C. 1531 through 1544; and State of Oregon Division of State Lands regulations.

(F) If the altered or relocated watercourse is part of an area of special flood hazard, the applicant shall notify adjacent communities and the Oregon Department of Land Conservation and Development prior to any alteration or relocation of the watercourse. Evidence of notification must be submitted to the Floodplain Administrator and to the Federal Emergency Management Agency as set forth in § 151.24. [44 CFR 60.3(b)(6)]

(G) The Floodplain Administrator shall assure that maintenance for the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse is provided so that the flood-carrying capacity will not be diminished. [44 CFR 60.3(b)(7)] It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to provide a maintenance plan and perform required maintenance. 

(H) The applicant shall meet the requirements to submit technical data in § 151.24 when an alteration of a watercourse results in the expansion, relocation or elimination of the special flood hazard area. [Good Practice]

(Ord. 1183, passed 10-25-11)


151.24 REQUIREMENT TO SUBMIT NEW TECHNICAL DATA.

(A) Within six months of project completion, an applicant who obtains an approved conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) from FEMA or whose development alters a watercourse or modifies floodplain boundaries or base flood elevations shall obtain from FEMA a letter of map revision (LOMR) reflecting the as-built changes to the FIRM. [44 CFR Part 65.3]

(B) It is the responsibility of the applicant to have technical data prepared in a format required for a CLOMR or LOMR and to submit such data to FEMA on the appropriate application forms. Submittal and processing fees for these map revisions shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 

(C) Applicants shall be responsible for all costs associated with obtaining a CLOMR or LOMR. 

(D) The Floodplain Administrator shall be under no obligation to sign the community acknowledgement form, which is part of the CLOMR/LOMR application, until the applicant demonstrates that the project will meet or has met all applicable requirements of this chapter.

(Ord. 1183, passed 10-25-11)

PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION


151.30 SITE IMPROVEMENTS AND SUBDIVISIONS.

(A) All plans and permits for proposed new site improvements, subdivisions, and manufactured home parks shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and ensure that building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding.3 The test of reasonableness is a local judgment and includes historical data, high water marks, photographs of past flooding, etc. [44 CFR 60.3(a)(3) and (4)]

(B) Building lots shall have adequate buildable area outside of regulatory floodways. 

(C) Where base flood elevation data has not been provided or is not available from another authorized source, it shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments which contain at least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is less). [44 CFR 60.3(a)(4)]

(D) Site improvements, subdivisions, and manufactured home parks shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate damage and infiltration of floodwaters. Replacement public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric and water systems likewise shall be sited and designed to minimize or eliminate damage and infiltration of floodwaters. [44 CFR 60.3(a)(4) and (5)]

(E) New and replacement on-site waste disposal systems and sanitary sewerage systems shall be located and constructed to avoid functional impairment, or discharges from them, during flooding. [44 CFR 60.3(a)(6)]

(F) Subdivisions and manufactured home parks shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. [44 CFR 60.3(a)(4) and (c)(1)] In AO and AH zones, drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from all proposed and existing structures. [44 CFR 60.3(c)(11)] 

(Ord. 1183, passed 10-25-11)


151.31 REGULATORY FLOODWAY.

(A) Except as provided in subsection (C) of this section, encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, fences or other development, are prohibited in the regulatory floodway unless certification by a registered professional civil engineer is provided demonstrating through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that such encroachment will not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. [44 CFR 60.3(d)(3)]

(B) Upon demonstration of no other alternative, applicants shall obtain a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) from FEMA before an encroachment, including fill, new construction, substantial improvement, fences, or other development, in the regulatory floodway is permitted that will cause any increase in the base flood elevation. [44 CFR 60.3(d)(4)]

(C) Projects for stream habitat restoration may be allowed without certification by a registered professional civil engineer, provided: [Oregon Solutions Regulatory Streamlining Project 2009]

(1) A development permit is obtained prior to initiating development activities; and

(2) The project qualifies for a Department of the Army Corps, Portland District Regional General Permit for Stream Habitat Restoration (NWP-2007-1023) or other state or federal permit that determines that any rise in 100-year flood levels is as close to zero as practically possible; and

(3) A qualified professional (a registered professional engineer, or staff of NRCS, the county, or fisheries, natural resources, or water resources agencies) has provided a feasibility analysis and certification that the project was designed to keep any rise in 100-year flood levels as close to zero as practically possible given the goals of the project; and

(4) No structures would be impacted by a potential rise in flood elevation; and

(5) An agreement to monitor the project, correct problems, and ensure that flood-carrying capacity remains unchanged is included as part of the local approval.

(Ord. 1183, passed 10-25-11)


151.32 ZONES WITH BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS BUT NO REGULATORY FLOODWAY.

(A) Within the AE zone on the community’s FIRM where base flood elevation is provided but no regulatory floodway has been designated, new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be prohibited, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. [44 CFR 60.3(c)(10) and ORSC R324.1.3.2]

(B) Applicants of proposed projects that increase the base flood elevation more than one foot shall obtain from FEMA a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) before the project may be permitted. As soon as possible, but no later than six months after project completion, an application for a letter of map revision (LOMR) shall be submitted by the applicant to FEMA. The applicant is responsible for paying any costs associated with the CLOMR and LOMR process. [44 CFR 60.3(c)(13)]

(Ord. 1183, passed 10-25-11)


151.33 AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD WITHOUT BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS.

(A) When areas of special flood hazard have been provided but base flood elevation or floodway data have not been identified by FEMA in a flood insurance study and/or flood insurance rate maps, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize scientific or historic base flood elevation and regulatory floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer this chapter. [44 CFR 60.3(b)(4)] If base flood elevations are not available, subsection (C)(3) of this section or § 151.30(C) for subdivisions shall apply. 

(B) Where the Floodplain Administrator has obtained base flood elevation data, §§ 151.32 and 151.34 through 151.38 shall apply. [44 CFR 60.3(b)(4)]

(C) In areas of special flood hazard without base flood elevation data:

(1) Encroachments, including structures or fill, shall be located as far as possible and on the highest ground possible from the flood hazard; 

(2) No encroachments, including structures or fill, shall be located within 50 feet of a special flood hazard area, measured from the ordinary high water mark, unless a base flood elevation is developed by a licensed professional engineer; and

(3) The lowest floor of any building or structure, including manufactured dwellings, shall be elevated a minimum of three feet above highest adjacent grade. Below-grade crawlspaces are prohibited. 

(Ord. 1183, passed 10-25-11)


151.34 SPECIFIC BUILDING DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.

Buildings and structures, including manufactured dwellings, within the scope of the building codes, including repair of substantial damage and substantial improvement of such existing buildings and structures, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the flood-resistant construction provisions of these codes, including but not limited to the Residential Specialty Code, Manufactured Dwelling Installation Specialty Code, and Structural Specialty Code. 

(A) In all special flood hazard areas (all A zones or three feet above highest adjacent grade where no BFE is defined):

(1) New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure; [44 CFR 60.3(a)(3)(i)]

(2) New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; [44 CFR 60.3(a)(3)(ii)]

(3) New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage; and [44 CFR 60.3(a)(3)(iii)]

(4) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or otherwise elevated or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. [44 CFR 60.3(a)(3)(iv)]

(B) Specific building design and construction standards for noncoastal residential construction (all A zones with base flood elevations).

(1) New construction and substantial improvement of residential structures located in non-coastal flood zones shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation or three feet above highest adjacent grade where no BFE is defined; and [44 CFR 60.3(c)(2)]

(2) Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding are prohibited, or shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement either must be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:

(a) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided;

(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and

(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. [44 CFR 60.3(c)(5)] Exception: engineered openings.

(C) Specific building design and construction standards for noncoastal, nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated according to Tables 1-1 and 2-1 of the American Society of Civil Engineers, Flood Resistant Design and Construction Standard (ASCE 24) or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:

(1) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; [44 CFR 60.3(c)(3)]

(2) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; [44 CFR 60.3(c)(3)]

(3) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting provisions of this subsection based on their development and/or review of the structural design, specifications and plans. Such certifications shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator; [44 CFR 60.3(c)(3)]

(4) Nonresidential structures that are elevated, not floodproofed, must meet residential standards described in subsection (B) of this section;

(5) Applicants floodproofing nonresidential buildings shall be notified that flood insurance premiums will be based on rates that are one foot below the floodproofed level (e.g., a building floodproofed to the base flood level will be rated as one foot below). 

(D) Specific building design and construction standards for manufactured dwellings. New, replacement, and substantially improved manufactured dwellings shall:

(1) Be placed on ground that is a minimum of one foot above BFE unless any solid foundation walls are designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic forces by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Skirting that is not attached to the frame or foundation of a manufactured dwelling is not considered to be a solid foundation wall. Designs for meeting the requirement to automatically equalize hydrostatic forces must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:

(a) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided;

(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and

(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters; [Manufactured Dwelling Installation Specialty Code, Definitions and Section 4-3.1(5) and NFIP 60.3(c)(5) and FEMA TB-1]

(2) Have the bottom of the longitudinal chassis frame beam installed at or above BFE; [see Manufactured Dwelling Installation Specialty Code Interpretation xx] 

(3) Be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement during the base flood. Anchoring methods may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors (reference FEMA’s “Manufactured Home Installation in Flood Hazard Areas” guidebook for additional techniques); and [44 CFR 60.3(c)(6)]

(4) Have electrical crossover connections installed a minimum of 12 inches above BFE. [Manufactured Dwelling Installation Specialty Code 6-4.2(1)]

(E) Standards for shallow flooding areas (AO or AH zones). Shallow flooding areas appear on FIRMs as AO or AH zones with depth designations. The base flood depths in these zones range from one to three feet above ground where a clearly defined channel does not exist, or where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is often characterized as sheet flow. In these areas subsection (A) of this section and the following provisions shall apply:

(1) New construction and substantial improvements of residential structures and manufactured homes within AO or AH zones shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest grade adjacent to the building, a minimum of one foot above the depth number specified on the FIRM (at least three feet if no depth number is specified). [Building Code R324.2.1, 44 CFR 60.3(c)(7)]

(2) New construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures within AO or AH zones shall either:

(a)  Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade of the building site, one foot or more above the depth number specified on the FIRM (at least three feet if no depth number is specified); [Oregon Structural Specialty Code Section 1612] [44 CFR 60.3(c)(7)]

(b) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be completely floodproofed to or above that level so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. If this method is used, compliance shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; and [44 CFR 60.3(c)(8)]

(c) If not floodproofed, any enclosed areas below the depth number shall meet the venting requirements of subsection (B)(2) of this section. (Insurance premiums could be significant without venting.)

(Ord. 1183, passed 10-25-11)


151.35 BELOW-GRADE CRAWLSPACES.

Below-grade crawlspaces are allowed subject to the following standards as found in FEMA Technical Bulletin 11-01, Crawlspace Construction for Buildings Located in Special Flood Hazard Areas:

(A) The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. Hydrostatic loads and the effects of buoyancy can usually be addressed through the required openings stated in subsection (B) of this section. Because of hydrodynamic loads, crawlspace construction is not allowed in areas with flood velocities greater than five feet per second unless the design is reviewed by a qualified design professional, such as a registered architect or professional engineer. Other types of foundations are recommended for these areas. 

(B) The crawlspace is an enclosed area below the base flood elevation (BFE) and, as such, must have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. The bottom of each flood vent opening can be no more than one foot above the lowest adjacent exterior grade. 

(C) Portions of the building below the BFE must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage. This includes not only the foundation walls of the crawlspace used to elevate the building, but also any joists, insulation, or other materials that extend below the BFE. The recommended construction practice is to elevate the bottom of joists and all insulation above BFE. 

(D) Any building utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated above BFE or designed so that floodwaters cannot enter or accumulate within the system components during flood conditions. Ductwork, in particular, must either be placed above the BFE or sealed from floodwaters. 

(E) The interior grade of a crawlspace below the BFE must not be more than two feet below the lowest adjacent exterior grade.

(F) The height of the below-grade crawlspace, measured from the interior grade of the crawlspace to the top of the crawlspace foundation wall, must not exceed four feet at any point. The height limitation is the maximum allowable unsupported wall height according to the engineering analyses and building code requirements for flood hazard areas.

(G) There must be an adequate drainage system that removes floodwaters from the interior area of the crawlspace. The enclosed area should be drained within a reasonable time after a flood event. The type of drainage system will vary because of the site gradient and other drainage characteristics, such as soil types. Possible options include natural drainage through porous, well-drained soils and drainage systems such as perforated pipes, drainage tiles or gravel or crushed stone drainage by gravity or mechanical means. 

(H) The velocity of floodwaters at the site should not exceed five feet per second for any crawlspace. For velocities in excess of five feet per second, other foundation types should be used. 

Note: For more detailed information refer to FEMA Technical Bulletin 11-01. 

There are increased insurance costs associated with below-grade crawlspaces. There is a charge added to the basic policy premium for a below-grade crawlspace.

(Ord. 1183, passed 10-25-11)


151.36 RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.

In all areas of special flood hazard, recreational vehicles that are an allowed use or structure under the zoning ordinance must either: [44 CFR 60.3(e)(9) and 44 CFR 60.3(c)(14)] 

(A) Be placed on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 

(B) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and have no permanently attached structures or additions. 

(Ord. 1183, passed 10-25-11)


151.37 ESSENTIAL FACILITIES.

Construction of new essential facilities shall be, to the extent possible, located outside the limits of the area of special flood hazard. Construction of new essential facilities shall be permissible within the area of special flood hazard if no feasible alternative site is available. Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances or priority organic pollutants as defined by the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to all essential facilities to the maximum extent possible. 

(Ord. 1183, passed 10-25-11)


151.38 TANKS, FENCES AND WALLS.

(A) New and replacement tanks in flood hazard areas either shall be elevated above the base flood elevation on a supporting structure designed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement during conditions of the base flood, or be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty, during conditions of the design flood. [From ASCE 24]

(B) New and replacement tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents shall be placed a minimum of two feet above base flood elevation or fitted with covers designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the tank during conditions of the design flood. [From ASCE 24]

(C) New and replacement fencing shall be designed to collapse under conditions of the base flood or to allow the passage of water by having flaps or openings in the areas at or below the base flood elevation sufficient to allow floodwater and associated debris to pass freely. 

(Ord. 1183, passed 10-25-11)


151.39 OTHER DEVELOPMENT, INCLUDING ACCESSORY STRUCTURES, IN NONCOASTAL SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.

(A) All development (including substantial improvements) in noncoastal high hazard areas (all A zones) for which provisions are not specified in this chapter or Oregon Specialty Codes shall:

(1) Be located and constructed to minimize flood damages; [44 CFR 60.3(a)(3)]

(2) Be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; [44 CFR 60.3(a)(3)]

(3) If located in a regulatory floodway, meet the limitations of § 151.31, Regulatory floodway; [44 CFR 60.3(d)(3)]

(4) Be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the base flood; [44 CFR 60.3(a)(3)]

(5) Have all enclosures below the base flood elevation designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for complying with this requirement must be certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect or:

(a) Provide a minimum of two openings with a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 

(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above the higher of the exterior or interior grade or floor immediately below the opening; 

(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions without manual intervention;

(6) Have electrical and other service facilities located and installed so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of the base flood. [44 CFR 60.3(a)(3)]

(B) Walled and roofed accessory structures, including substantial improvement to existing accessory structures, shall meet the requirements of subsection (A) of this section and shall: 

(1) Be less than 200 square feet and not exceed one story; 

(2) Not be used for human habitation and may be used solely for parking of vehicles or storage of items having low damage potential when submerged; 

(3) Not be used to store toxic material, oil or gasoline, or any priority persistent pollutant identified by the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality unless confined in a tank installed in compliance with this chapter or stored at least one foot above base flood elevation.

(Ord. 1183, passed 10-25-11)

VARIANCE PROCEDURES AND CRITERIA


151.40 VARIANCE.

(A) An application for a variance is subject to a public hearing review by the Planning Commission. An application must be submitted to the City of Prineville on a form provided by the City of Prineville and include at a minimum the same information required for a development permit and an explanation for the basis for the variance request. 

(B) The burden to show that the variance is warranted and meets the criteria set out herein is on the applicant. 

(C) Upon consideration of the criteria in § 151.41 (Criteria for variances) and the purposes of this chapter, the reviewing authority may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.

(D) The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a permanent record of all variances and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. [44 CFR 60.6(a)(6)]

(Ord. 1183, passed 10-25-11)


151.41 CRITERIA FOR VARIANCES.

(A) Variances shall not be issued within a designated regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. [44 CFR 60.6(a)(1)]

(B) Generally, the only condition under which a variance from the elevation standard may be issued is for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items in subsections (H)(1) through (11) of this section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. [44 CFR 60.6(a)(2)]

(C) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. [44 CFR 60.6(a)(4)]

(D) Variances shall only be issued upon a:

(1) Showing of good and sufficient cause;

(2) Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and

(3) Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights or additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. [44 CFR 60.6(a)(3)]

(E) Variances may be issued for a water-dependent use; provided, that the:

(1) Criteria of subsections (A) through (D) of this section are met; and

(2) Structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. [44 CFR 60.6(a)(7)]

(F) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the Statewide Inventory of Historic Properties, without regard to the procedures set forth in this section. [44 CFR 60.6(a)]

(G) Variances as interpreted in the National Flood Insurance Program are based on the general zoning law principle that they pertain to a physical piece of property; they are not personal in nature and do not pertain to the structure, its inhabitants, economic or financial circumstances. They primarily address small lots in densely populated residential neighborhoods. As such, variances from the flood elevations should be quite rare. [44 CFR 60.6]

(H) In passing upon such applications, the reviewing authority shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and the:

(1) Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

(2) Danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

(3) Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage; 

(4) Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;

(5) Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;

(6) Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;

(7) Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;

(9) Safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

(10) Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and

(11) Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges.

(Ord. 1183, passed 10-25-11)


151.42 VARIANCE DECISION.

The decision to either grant or deny a variance shall be in writing and shall set forth the reasons for such approval or denial. If the variance is granted, the property owner shall be put on notice along with the written decision that the permitted building will have its lowest floor below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance likely will be commensurate with the increased flood damage risk. [44 CFR 60.6(a)(5)]

(Ord. 1183, passed 10-25-11)

ENFORCEMENT


151.50 PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.

Penalties for violations shall follow § 153.261 (Enforcement and remedies) of the City of Prineville’s Land Use Code as amended.

(Ord. 1183, passed 10-25-11)


151.51 SEVERABILITY.

This chapter is hereby declared to be severable. Should any portion of this chapter be declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall continue in full force and effect and shall be read to carry out the purpose(s) of the chapter before the declaration of partial invalidity. [FEMA Region X]

(Ord. 1183, passed 10-25-11)


151.52 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.

This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, building codes, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.

(Ord. 1183, passed 10-25-11)1

Almost all Oregon cities and some Oregon counties will derive their authority to adopt a flood damage prevention ordinance from the home rule provisions of the Oregon Constitution. See Article XI, Section 2 of the Oregon Constitution and your local government charter, if applicable. All counties, including those without home rule charters, have been granted authority to enact ordinances under Oregon Revised Statute 203.035. 2

44 CFR 65.2 defines “reasonably safe from flooding” as base flood waters will not inundate the land or damage structures and that any subsurface waters related to the base flood will not damage existing or proposed buildings. 3

44 CFR 65.2 defines “reasonably safe from flooding” as base flood waters will not inundate the land or damage structures and that any subsurface waters related to the base flood will not damage existing or proposed buildings. 


CHAPTER 152: SIGN ORDINANCE

Section

152.01    Title

152.02    Findings

152.03    Purpose and intent

152.04    Terminology

152.05    General definitions

152.06    Specific definitions

General Provisions and Procedures

152.10    General provisions

152.11    Sign permit

152.12    Procedure

152.13    Sign measurement

152.14    Permit exceptions

Exempt, Temporary and Prohibited Signs

152.20    Exempt signs

152.21    Temporary signs (no permit required)

152.22    Prohibited signs

Signs Permitted by Zones

152.30    Signs permitted in the open space park reserve zone

152.31    Signs in residential zones

152.32    Signs permitted in general commercial zones

152.33    Signs permitted in industrial zones and airport zones

Signs Regulated by Class

152.40    Wall signs

152.41    Roof signs

152.42    Freestanding (pole) signs

152.43    Ground mounted or monument signs

152.44    Projecting signs

152.45    Awnings and canopy signs

152.46    Marquee signs

152.47    Directional signs

152.48    Billboards

Maintenance, Construction and Safety Standards

152.50    Maintenance

152.51    Construction and safety standards

152.52    Clearance from high voltage power lines

152.53    Clearance from fire escapes, exits or standpipes

Permitted Materials/Illumination

152.60    Permitted materials

152.61    Illumination

Variances

152.65    Variance application

152.66    Time limit on a permit for a variance

Historical Signs

152.70    Application

152.71    Site and design review

Appeals

152.75    Appeals

Nonconforming and Abandoned Signs

152.80    Nonconforming signs

152.81    Abandoned signs

Inspection and Enforcement

152.85    Inspection

152.86    Enforcement

Special Provisions

152.90    Fees

152.91    Severability

152.92    Penalties

152.93    Interpretation

152.94    Violation declared a nuisance


152.01 TITLE.

This chapter shall be known as the "Sign Ordinance" of the city and may be so cited and pleaded and shall be referred to herein as "this chapter."

(’91 Code, 8-5.1.010) (Ord. 824, passed 11-27-79; Am. Ord. 1171, passed 4-27-10)


152.02 FINDINGS.

The City Council further determines and takes public notice that this chapter, by the actions as set forth hereinabove and below, is in compliance with the Comprehensive Plan of the city, the public hearing process conducted by the City Planning Commission on March 3, 2010, prior to its recommendation from the Planning Commission and receipt thereof by the Council, and by the public hearing process conducted by this Council prior to its adoption of this chapter.

(’91 Code, § 8-5.1.020) (Ord. 824, passed 11-27-79; Am. Ord. 1171, passed 4-27-10)


152.03 PURPOSE AND INTENT.

(A) Purpose. The purpose of these standards is to provide reasonable and necessary regulations for the erection and maintenance of signs in order to:

(1) Protect the health, safety, property and welfare of the public.

(2) Promote a neat, clean, orderly and attractive appearance within the city.

(3) Improve the effectiveness of signs in identifying and advertising businesses and facilities.

(4) Eliminate signs that demand, rather than invite, public attention.

(5) Provide for reasonable, orderly and effective display of outdoor advertising compatible with their surroundings.

(6) Preserve, protect and enhance the economic, scenic, historic and aesthetic values and objectives of the city and its citizens.

(7) Provide effective signing to meet the anticipated differing needs of various areas in the city.

(B) Intent. It is not the intent of this chapter to regulate the written or depicted copy of any individual sign, but only the height, area, location and other similar aspects of signs and sign structures. Nor is it the intent of this chapter to regulate purely graphic material as herein defined: noncommercial holiday signs and decorations; signs on products, product containers or product dispensers; public informational and safety signs; or signs required by local, state or federal law. It is the intent of this chapter to regulate signs in a manner as to provide that permitted signs are as follows:

(1) Compatible with their surroundings, pursuant to objectives of proper design and zoning amenities.

(2) Allowing and promoting optimum conditions for meeting the sign user’s needs, while at the same time promoting the amenable environment desired by the general public.

(3) Designed, constructed, installed and maintained in a manner that they do not endanger public safety or traffic safety.

(4) Legible, readable and visible in the circumstances in which they are used.

(5) Respectful of the reasonable rights of other advertisers whose messages are displayed.

(’91 Code, § 8-5.1.030) (Ord. 824, passed 11-27-79; Am. Ord. 1171, passed 4-27-10)


152.04 TERMINOLOGY.

The word "city" shall mean the City of Prineville, Oregon. The words "City Council" shall mean the City Council of Prineville, Oregon. The words "Manager," "Planning Director" and "Building Official" shall mean the Manager, Planning Director and Building Official respectively of the City of Prineville. The words "Planning Commission" shall mean the Prineville Planning Commission.

(’91 Code, §§ 8-5.2.010, 8-5.2.020) (Ord. 824, passed 11-27-79; Am. Ord. 1138, passed 1-9-07; Am. Ord. 1171, passed 4-27-10. Formerly 152.06(B))


152.05 GENERAL DEFINITIONS.

For the purposes of this chapter, words used in the present tense include the future, the singular includes the plural, the word "shall" is mandatory and the word "building" includes structures other than sign structures.

(’91 Code, §§ 8-5.2.010, 8-5.2.020) (Ord. 824, passed 11-27-79; Am. Ord. 1138, passed 1-9-07; Am. Ord. 1171, passed 4-27-10. Formerly 152.06(A))


152.06 SPECIFIC DEFINITIONS.

The following words and phrases used in this chapter have the meanings given to them in this section:

ANIMATION. Any form of movement by electric, mechanical or kinetic means including, but not limited to, rotation, revolving or wind activation of all or a portion of sign, or incorporating flashing, sequencing or intermittent light for sign illumination.

ARTERIAL. A restricted access street of substantial continuity which is primarily a traffic artery for inter-communication and so designated by the City of Prineville.

AWNING. A structure attached to a building, projecting over a thoroughfare or entrance.

BANNER. Flexible sign characteristically hung on a building, or otherwise suspended down or along its face or suspended by a freestanding support structure. The banner may include text or other graphic symbols.

BANNER, SPONSORED. A banner that is provided by a business not specifically located on the site in which it is displayed. A logo or advertisement for the sponsoring business may encompass no more than 20% of the area of the banner. Any logo or advertisement for an off-premises business that exceeds this amount shall be considered an off-premises sign which is prohibited.

BENCH SIGN. Any sign painted on or otherwise attached to a bench or other seat placed in a public right-of-way or meant to be seen by the public.

BILLBOARD. A sign structure subject to the provisions of the Oregon Motorist Information Act of 1971 and erected for the purpose of leasing advertising space to promote an interest other than that of an individual, business, product or service available on the premises the billboard is located on.

BUILDING CODE. Current codes adopted by the State of Oregon Building Codes Division.

BUSINESS. All of the activities carried on by the same legal entity on the same premises and shall include, but not be limited to, service, commercial and industrial uses and fraternal, benevolent, education, government and social organizations.

BUSINESS COMPLEX. One property ownership with the property owner and one or more business tenants as occupants or two or more business tenants as occupants of the property. In a business complex, business tenants include retail shops, executive or administrative services including medicinal clinics and accessory pharmacies, professional offices, and personal service establishments which perform personal services on the premises and similar uses.

CANOPY. A permanent roofed structure which may be freestanding or partially attached to a building for the purpose of providing shelter to patrons in automobiles or on foot, but shall not mean a completely enclosed structure.

CHARITABLE EVENT. A fund-raising activity that supports a public or nonprofit organization; also a private initiative to raise support for an individual, group or cause that does not directly generate income for the business or individual conducting the fund-raiser.

CLEAR VISION AREA. As defined by the City of Prineville Land Use Code.

COMMUNITY EVENT. A festival, meeting, performance, open market or other gathering open to the general public that is public in nature and not hosted by an individual business.

CUTOUT. A display in the form of letters, figures, characters, or other representations in cutout or irregular form attached to or superimposed upon an advertising sign.

DISPLAY SURFACE. The area made available by the sign structure for the purpose of displaying a message or image thereon.

EAVE. Lowest horizontal line of any roof.

ERECT. To construct, paint, place, affix or otherwise bring into being.

FACADE. Any side of a building. For the purposes of this chapter, FACADE may refer to the entire side of a building or individual segments distinguished by architectural features or uses.

FRONTAGE, BUILDING. That facade of a building which faces and is parallel to, or most nearly parallel to, the public street which provides the primary direct vehicular access to the building.

FRONTAGE, STREET. A lot line fronting a public street.

INCOMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL. A material that will not ignite at or below a temperature of 1,200 degrees Fahrenheit during an exposure of five minutes and which will not continue to burn or glow at that temperature. The test for an incombustible material shall be conducted as specified in the Building Code.

KIOSK. A small, freestanding structure which may have one or more surfaces used to display advertising or to identify or index a business or businesses.

MARQUEE. A permanent roofed structure attached to or supported by a building, but does not mean a "canopy" as defined herein.

NONSTRUCTURAL TRIM. A molding, batten, cap, nailing strip or stringer, lattice, cutout, letter or walkway attached to a sign structure.

PARAPET or PARAPET WALL. That portion of a building that rises above the roof level.

PERGOLA. A structure usually consisting of parallel colonnades supporting an open roof of girder and cross rafters, also known as an arbor, trellis or ramada.

PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership, association, joint venture, or other legal entity.

PROMOTIONAL EVENT. An activity conducted by a business for a limited time that is intended to highlight specific goods and/or services offered by the business.

ROOF LINE. The line which marks the highest point of the vertical front of a building in the case of a false front, or the line where the roof is joined to the vertical front wall of the building in other cases.

SHOPPING CENTER. A site planned and developed as a unit with an undivided, nonsegregated parking area and advertised as a center or mall and has multiple occupancy by businesses.

SIGN. A sign is any object or device or part thereof situated outdoors or indoors which is used to advertise or identify an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event or location by means including pictures, colors, motion illumination or projected images. Signs do not include the following:

(1) Flags of nations, or an organization of nations, states and cities, fraternal, religious and civic organizations.

(2) Merchandise, pictures or models or products or services in a window display.

(3) Time and temperature devices not related to a product.

(4) National, state, religious, fraternal, professional and civic symbols or crests.

(5) Works of art which in no way identify a product.

SIGN - AWNING or CANOPY. A sign located on or attached to an awning or canopy.

SIGN - DIRECTIONAL. An on-premises sign designed to be read by a person already on the premises and used only to identify and locate an office, entrance, exit, motor vehicle route, telephone or similar place, service or route.

SIGN - DIRECTORY. A sign giving the name, address number or location of the occupants of a building or buildings.

SIGN - FREESTANDING (POLE SIGN). A sign supported by one or more uprights or braces and not attached or incidentally attached to any building or structure and cannot be identified as a ground mounted sign with one exception as shown, being no wider than five feet. The sign area calculation of such a sign shall include the entire structure. This essentially allows for a greater height of a sign that would otherwise be defined as a ground mounted sign.


[IMAGE]


SIGN - GROUND MOUNTED or MONUMENT. A sign which is not attached to any structure or building, and has a support which places the bottom thereof less than four feet from the ground.
[IMAGE]


SIGN - INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED. A sign which is wholly or partially illuminated by an internal light source from which source light passes through the display surface to the exterior of the sign.

SIGN - MOBILE SIGN. Any sign which is mounted or designed for mounting on wheels, or which is mounted or designed for mounting on self-propelled or towed vehicle, and the primary purpose of which is advertising.

SIGN - MOTOR VEHICLE DIRECTIONAL. A sign identifying motor vehicle entrances or exits to or from the premises on which the sign is located.

SIGN - NONCONFORMING (ILLEGAL). A sign erected after the adoption of the ordinance codified in these standards that does not conform to the provisions of this chapter.

SIGN - NONCONFORMING (LEGAL). A sign erected prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in these standards that does not conform to the provisions of this chapter.

SIGN - OUTDOOR ADVERTISING. A sign which advertises goods, products or services which are not sold, manufactured or distributed on or from the premises or facilities on which the sign is located.

SIGN - PARAPET or PERGOLA. Any sign or other commercial graphic attached to a parapet, ramada, pergola or other similar structure.

SIGN - PORTABLE. Any sign or other graphic which is designed to be or is capable of being transported from one place to another.

SIGN - PROJECTING. A sign which extends perpendicular or nearly perpendicular from the building face to which it is attached.


[IMAGE]


SIGN - ROOF SIGN. A sign located on or above the roof of any building, not including a false mansard roof or other fascia.

SIGN - TEMPORARY SIGN. A banner, pennant, poster or advertising display intended to be displayed for a limited period of time.

SIGN - WALL SIGN. A sign painted or otherwise affixed to the face of a building, marquee, or roof overhang parallel to such face and extending not more than 18 inches therefrom.

TENANT. Entity with the right to temporarily possess another’s property in exchange for rent under a lease or similar arrangement.

ZONE. A zoning district established pursuant to the City of Prineville Zoning Standards.

(’91 Code, §§ 8-5.2.010, 8-5.2.020, 8-5.8.070) (Ord. 824, passed 11-27-79; Am. Ord. 1138, passed 1-9-07; Am. Ord. 1171, passed 4-27-10)

GENERAL PROVISIONS AND PROCEDURES


152.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS.

(A) Except as provided in this chapter, no person shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use or maintain any sign, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.

(B) No person in control of any premises within the city shall permit thereon any sign which violates the provisions of this chapter.

(C) Nothing in this chapter is intended to, nor shall permit, the erection or maintenance of any sign at any place or in any manner unlawful under any other city ordinance or state or federal law.

(D) This chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any person or persons constructing, erecting, installing, operating, owning or leasing a sign within the city limits for damages to anyone injured by any defect therein, nor shall the city or any agent thereof be held as assuming any liability by reason of the approval and issuance of a permit authorizing construction, erection or installation of same.

(E) No sign shall be attached to or placed against a building or other structure in such a manner as to prevent or inhibit ingress or egress through any door or window required or designated for access to any building, nor shall any sign obstruct or be attached to a fire escape.

(F) No sign or other street graphic other than a city or other public agency sign shall be allowed to be erected, installed, replaced, or maintained in, over or on any public rights-of-way, including parkways, except as provided in §§ 152.21 and 152.44.

(G) Any sign or other street graphic which is supported by more than one means and therefore cannot be clearly defined as a ground, marquee, wall, roof, projecting, or other sign shall be administratively assigned to the sign category most logically applicable and the appropriate standards applied.

(’91 Code, §§ 8-5.1.040, 8-5.8.080) (Ord. 824, passed 11-27-79; Am. Ord. 1171, passed 4-27-10. Formerly 152.04, 152.41)


152.11 SIGN PERMIT.

Except as provided in § 152.14, no sign shall be erected, structurally altered or relocated until a sign permit has been issued.

(’91 Code, § 8-5.5.010) (Ord. 824, passed 11-27-79; Am. Ord. 1171, passed 4-27-10. Formerly 152.20(A))


152.12 PROCEDURE.

(A) Applications for a sign permit shall be made in writing upon forms furnished by the city. Such applications shall include a scale drawing of the sign including dimensions, height and materials and showing its relationship to the ground or to any building or structure to which the sign is proposed to be installed or affixed. When appropriate, a plot plan drawn to scale shall be submitted which indicates the location of proposed signing relative to street and property lines. Prior to the issuance of a sign permit, the Building Official may review the construction aspects of the proposed sign. The City Manager or designee may require other pertinent information where, in their opinion, such information is necessary to determine compliance with the provisions of these standards.

(B) The city shall issue a permit for a sign covered by applications duly made unless the sign is in violation of the provisions of this chapter. Sign permits mistakenly issued in violation of these standards are void.

(C) The city may revoke a sign permit if the city finds that there was a material and misleading false statement of fact in the application for the permit.

(D) A sign permit shall be null and void if work for which the permit was issued has not been completed within a period of six months of the date of issuance of the permit.

(E) Where an electrical permit for a sign installation is required, it shall be obtained from the Building Department prior to making the final electrical connection from the sign to the electrical power source.

(’91 Code, § 8-5.5.020) (Ord. 824, passed 11-27-79; Am. Ord. 1171, passed 4-27-10. Formerly 152.21)


152.13 SIGN MEASUREMENT.

(A) The following criteria shall be used in measuring a sign to determine compliance with this chapter:

(1) Area of a sign. Area of a sign is the area within any perimeter which encloses the limits of any writing, representation, emblem, figure or character. The area of a sign having no such perimeter or the area of a sign having an irregular shape shall be computed by enclosing the surface area within a known geometric shape or shapes. The area of all signs in existence at the time of the enactment of the ordinance codified in these standards, whether conforming or nonconforming, shall be counted in establishing the permitted sign area of all new signs to be allowed for an individual business or premises. Where a sign is of a three dimensional or round or irregular solid shape, the largest cross-section shall be used as though it were a flat surface to determine sign area.

Examples:
[IMAGE]


(2) Individual sign elements. When signs are constructed of individual elements such as lettering attached directly to the building, the sign area is calculated by an imaginary rectangle around each element or phrase that is distinctly separate.
[IMAGE]


(3) Clearance. Clearance of a sign is measured from the average grade at the ground or curb line to the lowest point of the sign.

(4) Height. Height is measured from the grade of the curb line closest to the base of the sign to the highest point of the sign. In the absence of a curb line, the edge of the street pavement shall be used.

(B) Area of front building facade. When the area of the front building facade is used to determine sign area, said area shall be computed by multiplying the width of the building frontage or portion thereof by the height of the building or portion thereof which is devoted to the particular business. "False fronts" and mansard roofs may be included when calculating the area of the building facade.

(Ord. 1171, passed 4-27-10)


152.14 PERMIT EXCEPTIONS.

The following signs or procedures shall not require a sign permit. However, these signs shall be subject to the provisions of §§ 152.21, Temporary signs (no permit required), and 152.22, Prohibited signs.

(A) Exempt signs listed in § 152.20.

(B) Temporary signs listed in § 152.21.

(C) The changing of advertising or message on an approved painted or printed sign or sign specifically designed for the use of replaceable copy, except for changing the name of the business or use advertised.

(D) The painting, repainting, cleaning and normal maintenance and repair of an existing sign.

(’91 Code, § 8-5.5.010) (Ord. 824, passed 11-27-79; Am. Ord. 1171, passed 4-27-10. Formerly 152.20(B))

EXEMPT, TEMPORARY AND PROHIBITED SIGNS


152.20 EXEMPT SIGNS.

The following signs are exempt from this chapter:

(A) Institutional signs. Any sign or bulletin board setting forth or denoting the name of any public, charitable, fraternal or religious institution, when located on the premises of the institution, provided the sign or bulletin board shall not exceed 32 square feet in surface area. Reader board signs are permitted with a maximum surface area of 32 square feet, either wall mounted or pole mounted, with the maximum height of a pole sign being eight feet from the ground or curb line to the base of the reader board.

(B) Public signs. Signs of a public, noncommercial nature, which shall include safety signs, danger signs, no trespassing signs, memorial plaques, historical markers, kiosks and all signs erected by a public officer in the performance of a public duty.

(C) Noncommercial nature. Provided, however, the permitted area for said signs shall be subject to the area and location requirements of the pertinent zone in which they are located.

(D) Directional signs. Provided they are in compliance with § 152.47, Directional signs.

(E) Historic signs. Signs determined to have historical value as determined in accordance with § 152.71.

(F) Memorial signs and tablets. Nonilluminated memorial signs or tablets indicating the name of a building or date of erection, not exceeding two square feet in surface area, which are part of the building construction, or are attached as wall signs.

(G) Residential. Signs for individual dwelling units such as name plates, residential garage or yard sale signs, neighborhood watch or speed signs or the like.

(H) Name plates and directories. Nonilluminated name plates and building directories relating only to the address, location and use of occupancy of the building to which attached and not exceeding 12 square feet of surface area, which are part of the building construction, or are attached as wall signs.

(I) Small signs. Signs not exceeding six square feet in area; also a commercial wall sign not exceeding 16 square feet in area provided it is the only sign over six square feet on the building or in the case of a mall the leasable tenant space. These signs shall not cause a business to exceed the requirements of this chapter.

(J) Daily advertising. Signs taken in at night advertising commercial sales such as sandwich boards not exceeding eight square feet per side and one per business. Signs are allowed within the public right-of-way (not street) provided they do not block vehicle or pedestrian ways, or clear vision areas and shall be placed to meet ADA standards and to minimize any other possible conflicts with vehicles or pedestrians.

(K) Interior signs. Signs designed primarily to be viewed from a sidewalk or street when maintained inside a building, including, but not limited to, signs attached to or painted on the window.

(L) Machine signs. Signs on coin-operated vending machines, gasoline pumps, and telephone booths and not exceeding the dimensions of said machines.

(M) Mural. Graphics that do not advertise any business, commercial product or service; provided, however, graphics covering more than 32 square feet of a building facade shall be subject to review by the Planning Commission.

(N) Seasonal decorations. Seasonal decorations shall be permitted for annual and/or special community events, including but not limited to the carnival, rodeo and Christmas season activities. These decorations may be on public or private property, providing the decorations are safely maintained. When on public property, approval of the City Manager or its designate is required, along with the appropriate public body owning the property.

(O) Seasonal signs. Seasonal signs shall be permitted for Christmas tree sales lots during the period from December 1 to January 1 and for fireworks sales during the period from June 24 to July 6, provided the sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in surface area.

(P) Off-premises. Commercial advertising signs located within recreational athletic fields, parks, arenas, and other public property operated by public or nonprofit civic organizations; provided, however, that the signs face inward toward the respective athletic fields and do not extend above any of the perimeter fences. These signs shall be nonilluminated, and shall not have any flashing or animated components.

(Q) Emergency. Any sign placed during an emergency operation as declared by the City Manager or designee or by any city, state or federal law enforcement or public safety official. Such signage shall be specifically for the direction and management of emergency personnel, victim’s assistance, and/or directions for the general public.

(R) Wind activated or attention attracting devices. Such as balloons, inflatables, streamers and the like shall be regulated on a case-by-case basis by the City Manager or designee, appealable to City Council, to mitigate a nuisance or abuse of the exemption law.

(’91 Code, § 8-5.3.010) (Ord. 824, passed 11-27-79; Am. Ord. 1171, passed 4-27-10. Formerly 152.07)


152.21 TEMPORARY SIGNS (NO PERMIT REQUIRED).

The following signs are allowed according to the terms specified herein:

(A) Construction signs. Signs which identify the architects, engineers, contractors and other individuals or firms involved with the construction or renovation of a building. Said signs shall be located on the site of construction, shall not exceed 32 square feet in area and shall be removed within 14 days of the beginning of the intended use of the project.

(B) Real estate. Signs advertising the sale, rental or lease of the premises or part of the premises on which the signs are displayed up to a total area of 24 square feet, except for such signs in a residential zone which shall not exceed a total of six square feet. Such signs shall not be located in such a manner as to cause a public safety hazard and shall be removed within 14 days of the sale, rental or lease.

(C) Off-premises real estate. Signs for the purpose of directing the public to the sale of multiple residential properties only with written permission of the property owner to include the city for signs erected in the public right-of-way and limited to:

(1) A maximum of five off-premises signs.

(2) Eight square feet in area except one of the five permitted signs may be allowed up to 16 square feet if on an arterial road.

(3) Up to one year after final phase is constructed.

(4) Signs in public right-of-way (not street) shall not block vehicle or pedestrian ways, or clear vision areas and shall be placed to meet ADA standards and minimize any other possible conflicts with vehicles or pedestrians.

(D) Public street banners. Banners advertising public entertainment or an event. Such banners and their location shall be approved by the City Manager or designate. Street banners may be displayed for 14 days before and seven days after the event.

(E) Land development. Signs pertaining to the sale, lease, rent or development of a subdivision, office complex, shopping center, industrial park or similar parcel are allowed up to one year after final phase is constructed. Size of signs shall be controlled by the following schedule:

	PROJECT SIZE	TOTAL # OF SIGNS	MAXIMUM AREA PER SIGN

	2 acres or less	1/street frontage	32 sq. ft.

	over 2 acres	2/street frontage	96 sq. ft.

(F) Promotional banners. Signs associated with a promotional event of a business. Such banners shall be in compliance with the following standards:

(1) A business may display a banner or banners 14 days prior and seven days after the event.

(2) Exceptions. The following shall be exempt from the restrictions listed above:

(a) Banners used as permanent signage that are approved through the regular sign review process under the condition that such banners are contained by a permanent frame.

(b) A business may utilize banners as its primary signage for the first 60 days of operation. The total area for these banners shall be within the signage area that would generally be allowed for permanent signage.

(c) Any banner placed or sponsored by a public or nonprofit civic organization for a charitable event.

(G) Reader boards. Portable reader boards only when associated with a promotional event of a business may be displayed for a maximum of 30 days in any calendar year.

(H) Political. Campaign signs on private property that pertain to a certain election date shall be removed within ten days after the election to which the signs pertain.

(I) Nonprofit. Signs identifying or advertising a nonprofit civic, charitable or benevolent event not exceeding 32 square feet may be erected on- or off-premises for the period not to exceed two weeks before the event advertised. All signs shall be removed by the sponsoring organization no later than seven days following the event.

(J) Garage sale. No signs may be placed on any utility pole or regulatory sign or post. No signs shall be placed in the street. Signs may be placed on private property with permission of the property owner. Each sign must have the name and address of the person conducting the garage sale advertised by the sign. All signs must be removed by 8:00 p.m. of the last day of the garage sale. Signs may not be displayed more than one day prior to the day the garage sale commences.

(K) Directional noncommercial. Signs used to direct people to personal events that are removed the following day such as weddings, funerals, birthdays, anniversaries, etc. These signs may be allowed in the public right-of-way (not street) provided they meet ADA accessibility standards and do not block vehicle or pedestrian ways, or clear vision areas and shall be placed to minimize any other possible conflicts with vehicles or pedestrians.

(L) No temporary sign, other than signs installed by a public agency, advertising a community event or specifically allowed by this chapter shall be allowed in or over the public right-of-way or attached to any public property, including street trees, light poles, and other utilities and/or structures unless specifically allowed by this chapter.

(Ord. 1171, passed 4-27-10)


152.22 PROHIBITED SIGNS.

The following signs are prohibited:

(A) Signs which bear or contain statements, words or pictures of an obscene, indecent or immoral character, such as will offend public morals or decency as determined on a case-by-case basis by City Council.

(B) Signs which purport to be, or are an imitation of, or resemble official traffic signs or signals, or which bear the words "stop," "go slow," "caution," "danger," "warning" or similar words.

(C) Signs which, by reason of size, location, movement, content, coloring or manner of illumination, may be confused with or construed as traffic control devices; or which hide from view any traffic or street sign or signal.

(D) Signs which are located so as to substantially obstruct the view of a sign on adjoining property.

(E) Signs which advertise or publicize an activity, business, product or service not conducted on the premises upon which the signs are maintained unless specifically allowed in this chapter.

(F) Signs that contain, include or are illuminated by any rapidly flashing, intermittent, revolving, rotating or moving lights or move or have any animated moving parts that are considered distracting to drivers evaluated on a case-by-case basis by the City Manager or designee appealable to City Council. Traffic control signs or signs providing public service information such as time, date, temperature, weather or similar information are not considered distracting.

(G) Signs that are placed on, affixed to or painted on a motor vehicle or trailer and placed on public or private property for the primary purpose of providing a sign not otherwise permitted by these standards. Signs on vehicles used in the normal course of business shall not be subject to this provision.

(H) Signs or sign structures that create a hazard by obstructing clear view of pedestrian and vehicular traffic.

(I) Any small sign, generally of a temporary nature, tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued, or otherwise attached to trees, poles, stakes, fences or buildings or other structures, where the information appearing thereon is not applicable to the present use of the premises upon which sign is located.

(J) Except as provided for in §§ 152.30 through 152.33, billboards and all other signs which advertise a commercial activity, business, product or service which are not provided, sold, manufactured or distributed on or from the premises on which the billboard or sign is located.

(K) Are not otherwise in conformance with the provisions of these standards.

(’91 Code, § 8-5.4.010) (Ord. 824, passed 11-27-79; Am. Ord. 1171, passed 4-27-10. Formerly 152.08)

SIGNS PERMITTED BY ZONES


152.30 SIGNS PERMITTED IN THE OPEN SPACE PARK RESERVE ZONE.

No signs shall be permitted in this zone except as provided in this section.

(A) Sign type and area. One wall or ground mounted sign shall be permitted, not to exceed 32 square feet in area and ten feet in height.

(B) Context. Signs in these zones shall be identity signs only, containing information directly pertaining to the permitted use.

(C) Location. Signs shall be erected no closer than five feet from a street right-of-way, shall be a minimum of 25 feet from an adjacent lot and shall be placed on the property upon which the use is located.

(D) Illumination. No sign permitted in this section shall be illuminated, with the exception of a public information reader board for community events and emergency information.

(E) Directional signs subject to the provisions of § 152.47.

(Ord. 1171, passed 4-27-10)


152.31 SIGNS IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES.

No signs shall be permitted in any residential zones except as provided in this section.

(A) Multiple-family dwellings. For multiple-family dwellings, one sign not to exceed 32 square feet in area shall be permitted per project. Such signs shall be a wall or ground mounted type.

(B) Subdivisions, PUDs and mobile home parks. For subdivisions, PUDs and mobile home parks, one ground mounted sign per entrance not to exceed 32 square feet in area shall be permitted.

(C) Commercial uses. A commercial use, in a residential zone, may have one wall or ground mounted sign not to exceed 32 square feet in area and may have a building directory sign provided in the area if such a sign does not exceed one square foot per use of the building.

(D) Illumination. Signs in a residential zone shall only be externally illuminated and shall not direct light into neighboring properties or right-of-way.

(E) Directional signs subject to the provisions of § 152.47.

(F) Awnings and canopies subject to the provisions of § 152.45.

(’91 Code, §§ 8-5.9.010 - 8-5.9.030) (Ord. 824, passed 11-27-79; Am. Ord. 1171, passed 4-27-10. Formerly 152.71 - 152.73)


152.32 SIGNS PERMITTED IN GENERAL COMMERCIAL ZONES.

This section shall apply to all signs in the Central Commercial C-1 Zone, General Commercial C-2 Zone, Professional Commercial C-3 Zone, Neighborhood Commercial C-4 Zone and Recreation Commercial C-5 Zone. No signs shall be permitted in these zones except as provided in this section.

(A) Wall signs, primary tenant or owner. The maximum sign area permitted per building facade or tenant facade shall be two square feet per one linear foot of storefront width, or 8% of the square footage of that facade, whichever is greater.

	(lineal feet x 2) = Max sq. ft.

(B) Roof sign. In lieu of a wall sign under subsection (A) of this section, a roof sign is subject to the provisions of § 152.41.

(C) Freestanding (pole signs) and ground mounted signs. In addition to the requirements of subsection (A) of this section, one freestanding or ground mounted sign per lot shall be permitted subject to the requirements of §§ 152.42 and 152.43 respectively. Any existing pole sign as of the approval of this chapter may remain until removed.

(D) Projecting sign. Signs subject to the provisions of § 152.44.

(E) Directional signs subject to the provisions of § 152.47.

(F) Awnings, canopy and marquee signs subject to the provisions of §§ 152.45 and 152.46 respectively.

(G) Alley sign. Limited to a wall sign of six square feet in area used to identify a business. Such sign shall be located at each entrance and shall not be located on the same fascia as any other sign except another alley sign.

(H) Building directory signs limited to three square feet per use.

(I) A business complex or shopping center may have one ground mounted sign or freestanding sign for each street frontage subject to the provisions of §§ 152.42 and 152.43 respectively. Such signs shall be used to identify the name of the complex or center and may also be used to identify the individual businesses that are located within the complex or center. Each separate building within the complex or shopping center may have one ground mounted or wall sign identifying the businesses located within that building subject to § 152.40 or 152.43.

(J) A business or building abutting a public right-of-way such as a sidewalk shall be permitted one projecting sign in addition to a wall sign subject to the requirements of § 152.44.

(’91 Code, §§ 8-5.9.040 - 8-5.9.080) (Ord. 824, passed 11-27-79; Am. Ord. 1171, passed 4-27-10. Formerly 152.74 - 152.78)


152.33 SIGNS PERMITTED IN INDUSTRIAL ZONES AND AIRPORT ZONES.

This section shall apply to all signs in the Limited (Light) Industrial M-1 Zone, General (Heavy) Industrial M-2 Zone and Industrial Park M-3 Zone. This section shall also apply to all airport zones unless specifically regulated by that zone. No signs shall be permitted in these zones except as provided in this section.

(A) Wall sign. For each permitted or conditional use in an industrial zone, the maximum permitted sign area on a building shall not exceed 10% of the area of the building facade or tenant facade on which the sign is placed; provided, however, in no case shall the maximum permitted signage exceed 350 square feet and in no case shall more than two wall signs be permitted per use.

(B) Ground mounted signs. In addition to the provisions of subsection (A) of this section, one ground mounted sign shall be permitted for each street frontage which provides direct vehicular access into the site, subject to the requirements of § 152.43.

(C) Freestanding signs. In lieu of ground mounted signs as permitted in subsection (B) of this section, an industrial property may have one freestanding sign subject to the requirements of § 152.42.

(D) Projecting sign. Signs subject to the provisions of § 152.44.

(E) Directional signs subject to the provisions of § 152.47.

(F) Awnings, canopy and marquee signs subject to the provisions of §§ 152.45 and 152.46 respectively.

(G) Building directory sign limited to three square feet per occupant.

(H) Billboards allowed under § 152.48 shall be permitted in the (M) Zones.

(I) Industrial business complex. An industrial business complex may have one ground mounted sign or freestanding sign for each street frontage subject to the provisions of §§ 152.42 and 152.43. Such signs shall be used to identify the name of the complex and may also be used to identify the individual businesses that are located within the complex. Each separate building within the complex may have one ground mounted sign identifying the businesses located within that building subject to the provisions of § 152.43 or a wall sign as permitted in subsection (A) of this section subject to § 152.40.

(’91 Code, §§ 8-5.9.090, 8-5.9.100) (Ord. 824, passed 11-27-79; Am. Ord. 1171, passed 4-27-10. Formerly 152.79, 152.80)

SIGNS REGULATED BY CLASS


152.40 WALL SIGNS.

A sign painted or otherwise affixed to the face of a building, marquee, or roof overhang parallel to such face and extending not more than 18 inches therefrom.

Unless otherwise specified in these standards, the following criteria shall be applicable for attached wall signs:

(A) Wall signs shall not project more than 18 inches from the wall to which they are attached. A wall sign located on an alley frontage may not project into the alley below a clearance of 14 feet, six inches.

(B) Wall signs shall not project more than three feet above the eave line or roof line.

(C) Wall signs attached to the face of a marquee shall not exceed a height of 30 inches. The lower edge of such sign shall not extend below the marquee.

(D) A wall sign shall not project beyond the ends of the wall to which it is attached.

(E) Wall signs shall be located on the building facade which is used to determine the allowed sign area for that facade.

(’91 Code, § 8-5.8.020) (Ord. 824, passed 11-27-79; Am. Ord. 1171, passed 4-27-10. Formerly 152.56)


152.41 ROOF SIGNS.

A sign extending vertically from the roof of any building, not including a false mansard roof or other fascia. No signage, symbols, or logos shall be placed, painted, or made part of the roof.

In lieu of a wall sign, one roof sign may be permitted for a single story building only; provided, that it extends vertically from the roof no more than six feet above the roof line or 25 feet above the curb line. A roof sign may not exceed 50 square feet in area. The supporting members of roof signs shall appear to be free of any extra bracing, angle iron, guy wires, etc. All supports shall appear to be an architectural and integral part of the building.

(’91 Code, § 8-5.8.040) (Ord. 824, passed 11-27-79; Am. Ord. 1171, passed 4-27-10; Am. Ord. 1229, passed 2-28-17. Formerly 152.58)


152.42 FREESTANDING (POLE) SIGNS.

A sign supported by one or more uprights or braces and not attached or incidentally attached to any building or structure and cannot be identified as a ground mounted sign.

Unless otherwise specified in these standards, the following criteria shall be applicable for all freestanding signs.

(A) Freestanding signs may not exceed 25 feet in height. Such signs may contain one square foot of sign area for each two lineal feet of street frontage, not to exceed a maximum area of 150 square feet.

	(lineal feet x 0.5) = Max sq. ft.

(B) Freestanding signs shall not be located in a side yard common to another lot or within a rear yard. A freestanding sign may extend to the street right-of-way within a front yard subject to a minimum clearance of eight feet. In the case of a double frontage lot where the building abuts two parallel streets, one freestanding sign may be located on each frontage. In the case of a corner lot where the building abuts two perpendicular streets, one freestanding sign shall be allowed. The street frontage where the sign is located shall be used to determine the size unless placed in the corner the larger of the two may be used.

(C) No freestanding sign shall project or extend into any clear vision area. One of two sign poles supporting a freestanding sign may be located within a clear vision area if it is necessary for the support of the sign, provided it does not exceed a width of 12 inches and provided no other portion of the sign is located within the clear vision area eight feet above grade.

(’91 Code, § 8-5.8.030) (Ord. 824, passed 11-27-79; Am. Ord. 1171, passed 4-27-10. Formerly 152.57)


152.43 GROUND MOUNTED OR MONUMENT SIGNS.

A sign which is not attached to any structure or building, and has a support which places the bottom thereof less than four feet from the ground.

The following criteria shall be applicable for a ground mounted or monument sign:

(A) A ground mounted or monument sign shall not be located within ten feet of any other sign, within any street right-of-way, or within any clear vision area.

(B) No more than one ground mounted sign shall be permitted for each street frontage. Unless otherwise specified in these standards, ground mounted signs shall have maximum overall dimensions and area not exceeding any of the following:

(1) A maximum height of 15 feet.

(2) May contain one square foot of sign area for each two lineal feet of street frontage, not to exceed a maximum area of 150 square feet.

	(lineal feet x 0.5) = Max sq. ft.

(’91 Code, § 8-5.8.030) (Ord. 824, passed 11-27-79; Am. Ord. 1171, passed 4-27-10. Formerly 152.57)


152.44 PROJECTING SIGNS.

A sign which extends perpendicular or nearly perpendicular from the building face more than 18 inches to which it is attached.

The following criteria shall be applicable for a projecting sign. Projecting signs shall be allowed according to the following provisions:

(A) The square footage must be deducted from the allowable wall sign area of the building from which the projecting sign will be attached.

(B) Only one face of a double-faced projecting sign with parallel and bearing identical copy shall be used in computing the area thereof.

(C) Projecting signs must clear sidewalks by at least eight feet, including any supports, and may project from the face of the building no more than eight feet. However, in no case shall a projecting sign extend past a distance that is 18 inches in from the outside of the curb.

(D) No projecting sign shall extend more than three feet above a parapet wall or the roof line of the supporting building.

(E) Such signs may be internally illuminated.

(F) The edge of such signs cannot be directly attached to the building without a suitable mounting device.



(G) Such signs for all ground floor activities or the overall name of the business complex may not extend above the second story.

(H) Projecting signs for businesses in the second story of a building are allowed only if the businesses have a separate street or public parking lot entrance and may be placed at the entrance only.

(I) No signs or sign structure shall project into any public alley below a height of 16 feet above grade, nor project more than 12 inches horizontally over the alley. A sign or sign structure may project not more than 36 inches horizontally over the public alley where the sign or sign structure is located more than 20 feet above grade.

(’91 Code, § 8-5.8.010) (Ord. 824, passed 11-27-79; Am. Ord. 1171, passed 4-27-10. Formerly 152.55)


152.45 AWNINGS AND CANOPY SIGNS.

A sign located on or attached to an awning or canopy.

The following shall be applicable for signs on awnings and canopies:

(A) Canopy or awning signs may be placed on the front or sides of a canopy or awning, including placement along the top or bottom of the canopy or awning front so long as the sign does not project more than three feet above or below the canopy or awning and is consistent with subsection (E) of this section.

(B) No advertising shall be placed on an awning or canopy, except the name or logo of the owner, business or industry conducted within the premises, address of the building or the building name.

(C) Canopy or awning signs are included as part of the allowed wall sign area.

(D) Posts or columns beyond the property line will not be permitted.

(E) The lowest point of the awning or canopy must be at least eight feet above the sidewalk and 14 feet, six inches above vehicle accesses.

(Ord. 1171, passed 4-27-10)


152.46 MARQUEE SIGNS.

A sign located under a marquee as defined below:

MARQUEE. A permanent roofed structure attached to or supported by a building, but does not mean a "canopy" as defined herein.

The following criteria shall be applicable for signs under marquees:

(A) Signs may be located under a marquee if a vertical clearance of eight feet is maintained between the bottom of the sign and the grade below.

(B) Vertical height of signs shall not exceed 18 inches and shall not exceed a sign area of eight square feet.

(C) The location of the signs shall be limited to business entrance ways only.

(D) Signs shall not project beyond the marquee.

(’91 Code, § 8-5.8.060) (Ord. 824, passed 11-27-79; Am. Ord. 1171, passed 4-27-10. Formerly 152.60)


152.47 DIRECTIONAL SIGNS.

An on-premises sign designed to be read by a person already on the premises and used only to identify and locate an office, entrance, exit, motor vehicle route, telephone or similar place, service or route.

(A) Signs, indicating traffic movement onto premises, or within a premises, not exceeding six square feet of surface area for each sign, and one sign per entrance to the premises. Directional signs on the surface of paved areas shall be exempt from the size standards indicated above. A directional sign of not more than 12 square feet of surface area, and not more than eight feet in height, used only to identify and locate a service entrance or service facility. The sign shall be a wall or projecting sign and cannot project more than four feet from the building.

(Ord. 1171, passed 4-27-10)


152.48 BILLBOARDS.

The following criteria shall be applicable for all the billboards allowed in the City of Prineville:

(A) Number allowed. At the time of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, there are seven existing billboards within the Prineville Urban Growth Boundary and city limits. Approved billboards are listed below.

The following tax lots had existing billboards on them as of the date the ordinance codified in this chapter was adopted:

	HWY 126:	15-15-12B000300

15-15-12B000500

15-15-110000300

	HWY 26 (Madras HWY):	14-15-360003200

14-15-360002906

14-15-360002501

	N. Main St.:	14-16-32CC09700

No additional billboards shall be permitted. However, billboards may be replaced at their existing size and location.

(Ord. 1171, passed 4-27-10)

MAINTENANCE, CONSTRUCTION AND SAFETY STANDARDS


152.50 MAINTENANCE.

All signs together with all of their supports, braces, guys and anchors shall be kept in good repair and be maintained in a safe condition. All signs and the site on which they are located shall be maintained in a neat, clean, and attractive condition. Signs shall be kept free from deterioration. The display surfaces, trims, frames and supports of all signs shall be kept neatly painted or otherwise neatly maintained, as applicable. No person shall scatter, daub or leave any paint, paste or glue or other substances used for painting or affixing a message to the display surface of any sign or throw or permit to be scattered or thrown any bills, waste matter, paper, cloth or materials of whatsoever kind removed from a sign on any public street, sidewalk or private property.

(’91 Code, § 8-5.6.010) (Ord. 824, passed 11-27-79; Am. Ord. 1171, passed 4-27-10. Formerly 152.35)


152.51 CONSTRUCTION AND SAFETY STANDARDS.

All signs shall conform to the Building Code including electrical standards as regulated and inspected by the Building Department.

(’91 Code, §§ 8-5.6.020, 8-5.6.040) (Ord. 824, passed 11-27-79; Am. Ord. 1171, passed 4-27-10. Formerly 152.36, 152.38)


152.52 CLEARANCE FROM HIGH VOLTAGE POWER LINES.

Signs shall be located not less than eight feet horizontally and 12 feet vertically from overhead electrical conductors which are energized in excess of standard service loads as determined by the utility company providing the service. The term OVERHEAD CONDUCTORS as used in this section means any electrical conductor, either bare or insulated, installed above the ground except such conductors as are enclosed in iron pipe or other material covering of equal strength.

(’91 Code, § 8-5.6.030) (Ord. 824, passed 11-27-79; Am. Ord. 1171, passed 4-27-10. Formerly 152.37(A))


152.53 CLEARANCE FROM FIRE ESCAPES, EXITS OR STANDPIPES.

No sign or sign structure shall be erected in such a manner that any portion of its surface or supports will interfere in any way with the free use of any fire escape, exit or standpipe. Signs erected within five feet of an exterior wall in which there are openings within the area of the sign shall be constructed of incombustible material or approved plastics.

(’91 Code, § 8-5.6.030) (Ord. 824, passed 11-27-79; Am. Ord. 1171, passed 4-27-10. Formerly 152.37(B))

PERMITTED MATERIALS/ILLUMINATION


152.60 PERMITTED MATERIALS.

All signs shall conform to the Building Code as regulated and inspected by the Building Department.

(’91 Code, § 8-5.6.050) (Ord. 824, passed 11-27-79; Am. Ord. 1171, passed 4-27-10. Formerly 152.39)


152.61 ILLUMINATION.

(A) Limit on sign illumination. No sign shall be erected or maintained which, by use of lights or illumination, creates an unduly distracting or hazardous condition to a motorist, pedestrian or to the general public. All illumination shall conform to the Building Code electrical standards as regulated and inspected by the Building Department. In addition:

(1) Signs illuminated by exterior illumination shall have the exterior lights so directed that the light does not shine directly into private property or common vehicular or pedestrian ways.

(2) No sign may be internally illuminated if the wall of the building on which the sign is displayed directly abuts a residential zone.

(3) No colored lights shall be used at any location or in any manner so as to be confused with or construed as traffic control devices.

(4) Signs that contain, include or are illuminated by any rapidly flashing, intermittent, revolving, rotating or moving lights or moves or has any animated moving parts shall only be allowed if the sign is consistent with OAR 734-060-0190.

(5) Any sign that is considered distracting to drivers shall be evaluated on a case-by-case basis by the City Manager or designee appealable to City Council. Traffic control signs or signs providing public service information such as time, date, temperature, weather or similar information are not considered distracting.

(’91 Code, §§ 8-5.7.010, 8-5.7.020) (Ord. 824, passed 11-27-79; Am. Ord. 1171, passed 4-27-10; Am. Ord. 1229, passed 2-28-17. Formerly 152.40)

VARIANCES


152.65 VARIANCE APPLICATION.

An applicant for a sign permit or an applicant owning or leasing a sign that is not in conformance with the provisions of this chapter may seek a variance to the provisions of this chapter. A variance request for sign location or for sign height or area may be allowed by the Planning Commission. The decision of the Commission may be appealed to the City Council. A variance may be granted upon a finding by the appropriate review body that all of the following criteria can be satisfied:

(A) There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or physical conditions such as narrowness, shallowness, shape or topography of the property that do not generally apply to other properties or uses in the same zoning district.

(B) The request will be the minimum variance necessary to alleviate the hardships or practical difficulties.

(C) In determining a variance, the Commission or the Hearings Officer may attach such conditions to granting all or a portion of any variance as necessary to achieve the purpose of these standards.

(Ord. 1171, passed 4-27-10)


152.66 TIME LIMIT ON A PERMIT FOR A VARIANCE.

Authorization of a variance shall be void if the work approved by such variance is not completed within six months of the date of approval.

(Ord. 1171, passed 4-27-10)

HISTORICAL SIGNS


152.70 APPLICATION.

Within six months of the effective date of the ordinance codified in these standards, either the Planning Director or an owner of a nonconforming sign in existence on the date of enactment of the ordinance codified in these standards may apply for a determination that the sign qualifies as an historical sign under the provisions of these standards.

(Ord. 1171, passed 4-27-10)


152.71 SITE AND DESIGN REVIEW.

An application for an historical sign designation shall be reviewed by the Prineville Planning Commission. The Commission may designate a sign as historical if it finds the following criteria have been met or can be met with conditions:

(A) The sign is essentially preserved, with sufficient original workmanship as when first constructed.

(B) Through public interest, sentiment, uniqueness or other factors, the sign has come to connote an historical period.

(C) Due to removal of similar objects or the uniqueness of this sign, the sign is singularly appropriate to represent an historical theme or period.

(D) The sign is associated with significant past trends in structure materials and design and in conformance with generally accepted principles of good design and architecture.

(E) The sign was constructed early in the relative scale of local history and is one of a few of its age remaining in the city.

(Ord. 1171, passed 4-27-10)

APPEALS


152.75 APPEALS.

Any decision of the City Manager, Planning Director or designee, or Planning Commission, may be appealed in accordance with the City of Prineville land use procedures.

(’91 Code, § 8-5.10.050) (Ord. 824, passed 11-27-79; Am. Ord. 1171, passed 4-27-10. Formerly 152.92)

NONCONFORMING AND ABANDONED SIGNS


152.80 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.

A nonconforming sign which is structurally altered, relocated or replaced shall immediately conform to the requirements of these standards except that:

(A) A sign may be removed from its sign structure for the purpose of repair, maintenance or a change of copy within the dimensions of the existing sign.

(B) Signs may be structurally altered where such alteration is necessary for public safety.

(C) Such signs may be reconstructed if they are moved for construction or repair of public works or public facilities and such reconstruction is completed within one year.

(D) Such signs may be reconstructed if they are damaged by the natural environment or an accident; provided, that such sign is reconstructed within 180 days of the date the sign is damaged.

(E) Replacement of a nonconforming sign that does not meet any of the criteria above shall conform to the standards of this chapter.

(’91 Code, § 8-5.10.030) (Ord. 824, passed 11-27-79; Am. Ord. 1171, passed 4-27-10. Formerly 152.91)


152.81 ABANDONED SIGNS.

A sign shall be removed within 30 days by the owner or lessee of the premises upon which the sign is located when the advertised business is no longer conducted on the premises; provided, however, a billboard allowed under these standards where a person has merely leased a contracted advertising space need not be removed in accordance with this section. Abandoned signs may be removed and costs may be collected as provided in §§ 152.85 through 152.86.

(’91 Code, § 8-5.10.010) (Ord. 824, passed 11-27-79; Am. Ord. 1171, passed 4-27-10. Formerly 152.90(C))

INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT


152.85 INSPECTION.

The City Manager or designee may inspect signs periodically to determine their conformance with these standards.

(Ord. 1171, passed 4-27-10)


152.86 ENFORCEMENT.

The City Manager or designee is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of these standards.

(A) The City Manager or designee may order the removal of any sign erected or maintained in violation of the provisions of these standards. Except as provided in subsection (B) or (C) of this section, the City Manager or designee shall give 30 days’ prior written notice to the owner of the sign or the owner of the building, structure or premises upon which the sign is located to remove the sign or bring it in compliance with the provisions of these standards. If the owner of the sign, building, structure or premises fails to comply or remove the sign, the City Manager or designee may order the removal of such sign at the expense of the owner of the sign, building, structure or premises on which the sign is located and such costs and expenses including but not limited to the notifications, transportation, may be a lien against the land or premises on which the sign is located and may be collected or foreclosed in the same manner as liens are entered in the lien docket of the city.

(B) If the City Manager or designee determines that the supports, braces, grip anchors, etc., are not kept in good repair or safe condition, or if the sign presents an immediate and serious danger to the public, or if the sign is in violation of this code and located in the public right-of-way, he may, without prior written notice, order its immediate removal. The City Manager or designee may also authorize the removal of signs in the event that the person responsible for such sign cannot be found, or after notification, such person fails to repair or remove it. The owner of the building, structure or premises upon which the sign is located is jointly and severally liable for the costs of its removal and/or repair.

(C) The City Manager or designee may order the immediate removal of any temporary sign erected or maintained in violation of the provisions of the temporary sign standards. The City Manager or designee shall give 48 hours’ notice, verbal or written, to the owner of the sign or the owner or representative of the building, structure or premises upon which the sign is located to remove the sign or bring it in compliance with the provisions of these standards.

(D) Any order for removal of signs by the City Manager or designee pursuant to the provisions of this section may be appealed to the City Council by filing written notice of appeal with the City Manager within 15 days of the order.

(’91 Code, § 8-5.10.010) (Ord. 824, passed 11-27-79; Am. Ord. 1171, passed 4-27-10. Formerly 152.90(A), (B))

SPECIAL PROVISIONS


152.90 FEES.

Fees for permits and applications shall be set by resolution of the Council. The developer or owner shall pay all fees required by the City of Prineville including, but not limited to, park dedication fees, construction fees and land use application fees, in full prior to the recording of the final plat or the issuance of a certificate of occupancy whichever is first in time.

(’91 Code, § 8-5.5.030) (Ord. 824, passed 11-27-79; Am. Ord. 1171, passed 4-27-10. Formerly 152.22)

Cross reference:

Building permit fees, see Ch. 150


152.91 SEVERABILITY.

If any part, section, subsection, sentence or phrase of these standards is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of these standards.

(Ord. 1171, passed 4-27-10)


152.92 PENALTIES.

Except as otherwise provided for by law or by a court of competent jurisdiction, a person violating a provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by fine of not more than $500. A violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate offense for each day the violation continues.

(’91 Code, § 8-5.10.040) (Ord. 824, passed 11-27-79; Am. Ord. 1171, passed 4-27-10. Formerly 152.99)


152.93 INTERPRETATION.

The provisions of this chapter shall be construed to effect the purposes and intent set forth in § 152.03. These provisions are declared to be the minimum requirements fulfilling the objectives. When conditions set forth herein are less restrictive than comparative conditions imposed by any other provision of this chapter, by provision of federal regulation, the more restrictive shall govern.

(’91 Code, § 8-5.1.050) (Ord. 824, passed 11-27-79; Am. Ord. 1171, passed 4-27-10. Formerly 152.05)


152.94 VIOLATION DECLARED A NUISANCE.

The location, erection, construction, maintenance, repair, alteration or use of a sign in violation of these standards is declared a nuisance and shall be abated in the same manner as all other nuisances.

(Ord. 1171, passed 4-27-10)


CHAPTER 153: LAND DEVELOPMENT

Section

General Provisions

153.001    Title

153.002    Purpose

153.003    Construction and terminology

153.004    Definitions

153.005    Compliance

153.006    Citing

153.007    Existing agreements and permits

153.008    Zoning/other development permit approval

153.009    Compliance with other rules and regulations

153.010    Applicability of current regulations

153.011    Interpretation

153.012    Consolidated permit procedure

153.013    Administration

153.014    General criteria

153.015    Authorization of similar uses

153.016    Municipal sewer and water required

153.017    Permit processing: Outright, Type I and II

Site and Building Design Review

153.020    Site plan and design review provisions

153.021    Special design requirements for buildings with a footprint over 40,000 square feet in commercial zones

Classification of Zones

153.030    Classification of zones

153.031    Location of zones

153.032    Zoning Map and amendments

153.033    Zone boundaries

153.034    Zoning of annexed areas

Zoning Tables

153.035    Residential use table

153.036    Residential dimensional standards

153.037    Commercial and industrial use table

153.038    Commercial and industrial dimensional standards

153.039    Airport use table

153.040    Airport dimensional standards

Specific Zone Requirements

153.045    Limited Residential R-1 Zone

153.046    General Residential R-2 Zone

153.047    Low Density Residential R-3 Zone

153.048    Residential Redevelopment R-4 Zone

153.049    High Density Residential R-5 Zone

153.050    Central Commercial C-1 Zone

153.051    General Commercial C-2 Zone

153.052    Professional Commercial C-3 Zone

153.053    Neighborhood Commercial C-4 Zone

153.054    Recreation Commercial C-5 Zone

153.060    Light Industrial M-1 Zone

153.061    Heavy Industrial M-2 Zone

153.062    Industrial Park IP Zone (formerly M‑3 Zone)

153.063    Mixed Use (MU) Zone

153.070    Airport zones general criteria

153.071    Airport specific zones

153.075    Open Space-Park Reserve PR Zone

153.076    Natural Features Overlay District (Chapter 155)

Supplementary Provisions

153.080    Accessory dwelling units and guest houses

153.081    Clear vision areas

153.082    On-site lighting

153.083    Standards for specific uses

153.084    Attached single-family housing, townhomes and duplex lots

153.085    Off-street parking and loading: provisions and requirements

153.086    Off-street parking and loading: design/improvement standards

153.087    Landscaping requirements

153.088    Riparian habitat, scenic protections, and slope hazard

153.089    Cutting and filling

153.090    Fences

153.091    Decks

153.092    Storage - unused vehicles/junk/debris

153.093    Outdoor merchandising

153.094    Cluster development

153.095    Manufactured dwellings and RVs

153.096    Livestock

153.097    Repealed

Nonconforming Uses and Exceptions

153.115    Nonconforming uses

153.116    Exceptions to lot size requirements

153.117    Exceptions to yard-setback requirements

153.118    Exceptions to building heights

153.119    Exception - Zone boundaries

153.120    Exception - Minor repair/rehabilitation

153.121    Exception - Public street/highway improvement

153.122    Exception - Public facilities improvement

Conditional Uses

153.135    Authorization to grant or deny

153.136    Specific conditions

153.137    Application for conditional use

153.138    Time limit on a conditional use permit

Subdivisions, Partitionings, Lot Consolidations and Replats

153.155    Purpose

153.156    Applicability

153.157    Subdivisions - Applications

153.158    Planned unit development (PUD)

153.159    Subdivision and PUD review

153.160    Land partitioning

153.161    Lot consolidations

153.162    Replats

153.163    Boundary line adjustment and final map recordation

153.164    Final plat for subdivisions, partitions, lot consolidations and replats

Dedication of Streets Not Part of Development

153.175    Application

153.176    Minimum design standards

153.177    Procedures

Design and Improvement Standards/Requirements

153.190    Compliance required

153.191    Lots and blocks

153.192    Easements

153.193    Land for public purposes

153.194    Streets and other public facilities

153.195    Access management

153.196    Improvement procedures

153.197    Completion or assurance of improvements

153.198    Building and occupancy permits

153.199    Maintenance surety bond

153.200    Engineering/special services for review

Variances

153.210    Authorization to grant or deny

153.211    Circumstances for granting a major variance

153.212    Minor variance

153.213    Application for a variance

153.214    Procedures for action on variances

153.215    Time limit for variances

Amendments

153.230    Authorization to initiate amendments

153.231    Application for amendments

153.232    Public hearings on amendments

153.233    Public notice requirements

153.234    Records of amendments

153.235    Limitations on reapplications



153.236    Adoption of an amendment

Administration and Enforcement

153.250    Introduction and definitions

153.250.010    Introduction and application

153.250.020    Definitions

153.251    General provisions

153.251.005    Pre-application conference

153.251.010    Application requirements

153.251.015    Development Review Committee

153.251.020    Acceptance of application

153.251.030    Incomplete applications

153.251.040    Withdrawal of application

153.251.050    Time computation

153.251.060    Submission of documents

153.252    Legislative procedures

153.252.010    Hearing required

153.252.020    Notice

153.252.030    Initiation of legislative changes

153.252.040    Hearings Body

153.252.050    Final decision

153.253    Development action procedures

153.253.010    Review of development action applications

153.253.020    Decision

153.254    Review of land use action applications

153.254.010    Effect of determinations made outside of established processes

153.254.020    Action on land use action applications

153.254.030    Administrative land use decisions with prior notice

153.254.040    Administrative decision without prior notice

153.254.050    Final action in land use actions

153.254.060    Supplementation of application within first 30 days of submittal

153.254.070    Modification of application

153.255    Land use action hearings

153.255.010    Filing of staff report for hearing

153.255.020    Hearings Body

153.255.030    Notice of hearing or administrative action

153.255.040    Contents of notice

153.255.050    Burden of proof

153.255.060    Standing

153.255.070    Disclosure of ex parte contacts

153.255.080    Disclosure of personal knowledge

153.255.090    Challenge for bias, prejudgment or personal interest

153.255.100    Hearings procedure

153.255.110    Setting the hearing

153.255.120    Close of the record

153.255.130    Continuances or record extensions

153.255.140    Reopening the record

153.256    Land use action decisions

153.256.010    Decision

153.256.020    Notice of decision

153.256.030    Decision on plan amendments and zone changes

153.256.040    Reapplication limited

153.256.050    Review by Council

153.256.060    Correction of clerical errors

153.257    Reconsideration

153.257.010    Reconsideration

153.257.020    Procedure

153.257.030    Limitation on reconsideration

153.258    Appeals

153.258.010    Who may appeal

153.258.020    Filing appeals

153.258.030    Notice of appeal

153.258.040    Transcript requirement

153.258.050    Consolidation of multiple appeals

153.258.060    Scope of review

153.258.070    Hearing on appeal

153.258.080    Declining review

153.258.090    Development action appeals

153.258.100    Withdrawal of an appeal

153.259    Limitations on approvals

153.259.010    Expiration of approval

153.259.020    Initiation of use

153.259.030    Modification of approval

153.259.040    Transfer of permit

153.259.050    Revocation of approvals

153.260    Declaratory ruling

153.260.010    Availability of declaratory ruling

153.260.020    Persons who may apply

153.260.030    Procedures

153.260.040    Effect of declaratory ruling

153.260.050    Interpretation

153.261    Enforcement and remedies

153.261.010    Enforcement

153.261.020    Remedies

Cross-reference:

Property owners claim for compensation, see Ch. 41

GENERAL PROVISIONS


153.001 TITLE.

This chapter shall be known as the Zoning, Subdivision, Partitioning and Land Development Ordinance of 2011 for the City of Prineville, Oregon.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.002 PURPOSE.

The overall general purposes of this chapter are as follows: to implement applicable provisions of ORS Chapters 92, 197, 215, 227 and other related statutes; to implement the applicable provisions of certain OARs, statewide planning goals 1 through 14 as applicable, and applicable provisions from state agency plans, programs, policies and regulations; and to implement Prineville’s Urban Area Comprehensive Plan. Relative thereto, the intent of this chapter is as follows: to encourage the most appropriate use of land, taking into account the various characteristics of different areas of the city; to determine the suitability of various areas for certain land uses; to conserve and stabilize the value of property by establishing objective development standards; to recognize the needs for economic enterprises in order to maintain a healthy and balanced economy; to facilitate the redevelopment and rehabilitation of certain areas; to aid in the provision of urban services, facilities and utilities such as water, sewer, solid waste disposal, schools, parks, fire and police protection; to lessen congestion by providing adequate transportation facilities for all modes of travel; to provide for adequate light and air by establishing reasonable setback requirements; to recognize the values of certain natural resources; to provide for the protection and preservation of significant open space, and other natural resources and features; to encourage the orderly growth of the city and provide an adequate supply of buildable land areas for residential, commercial, industrial and other land uses while maintaining the quality of life environment currently evident and desired; to maintain and to provide for the coordination of land use review actions among all affected parties; and, in general, to promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the city, and the residents therein.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.003 CONSTRUCTION AND TERMINOLOGY.

(A) Construction. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular; the word "may" is permissive, and the word "shall" is mandatory; and the masculine shall include the feminine and neuter.

(B) Terminology.

(1) The word "city" shall mean the City of Prineville, Oregon. The words "City Council" and "Council" shall mean the City Council of Prineville. The words "City Planning Commission" and "City Commission" shall mean the City Planning Commission for Prineville as duly appointed by the City Council. The words "City Recorder," "City Manager," "City Planning Official or Director," "Fire Chief," "City Legal Counsel, City Counsel or City Attorney" and "City Public Works or Street Superintendent" shall mean the respective positions for the City of Prineville as applicable.

(2) The word "county" shall mean the County of Crook, Oregon. The words "County Court" and "Court" shall mean the County Court of Crook County. The words "County Planning Commission" and "County Commission" shall mean the County Planning Commission for the county as duly appointed by the County Court. The words "County Clerk," "County Assessor," "County Planning Official or Director," "County Legal Counsel, County Counsel or County Attorney," "County Roadmaster or Roadmaster" and "County Survey" shall mean the respective positions for Crook County as applicable.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.004 DEFINITIONS.

As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases, unless the context of this chapter requires or provides otherwise, shall have the meaning set forth herein. Words and phrases not defined herein shall have the meaning set forth in state statutes, state administrative rules, state planning goals, policies and other relevant local, state and/or federal regulations. Note: ORSs or OARs set forth herein in parentheses "( )" are for reference information relative to the basis and/or source of the definition.

ABUT. Contiguous to; for example, two lots with a common property line, or two buildings with a common or immediately adjacent wall. For the purposes of this chapter, ABUT does not apply to buildings, uses, lots or parcels separated by a public right-of-way, river, stream channel or canal. It shall include the terms adjacent, adjoining and contiguous.

ACCESS. The right to cross between public and private property, allowing pedestrians, bicycles and vehicles to enter and leave property.

ACCESS EASEMENT. An easement recorded for the purpose of providing access from a public street to a lot across intervening property under separate ownership from the lot being provided access.

ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT. See DWELLING.

ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE. A use or structure, or a portion of a structure, the use of which is incidental and subordinate to the primary use of the property or structure and located on the same lot or parcel as the primary use and/or structure.

ADULT DAY CARE CENTER. See RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY.

ADULT FOSTER HOME. See RESIDENTIAL CARE HOME.

AIRPORT or AIRCRAFT LANDING FACILITY. Any strip of land, landing area, runway, landing pad or other facility designed, used or intended to be used in connection with the landing or taking off of aircraft, including helicopters, and including all necessary taxiways, hangars and other necessary buildings and open spaces; also includes, but is not limited to, land used for existing commercial and recreational airport uses and activities and activities as described in OAR 660-013-0100; for example, emergency medical flight services; law enforcement and firefighting activities; search and rescue operations; flight instruction and ground training; aircraft maintenance, refueling, rental, service and sales; aeronautic skills training; aeronautic recreational and sporting activities; construction and maintenance of airport facilities; crop dusting activities; agricultural and forestry activities; and activities, facilities and accessory structures provided and accessory to any of the foregoing uses and activities.

ALLEY. A street or right-of-way which affords only a secondary means of access to property, primarily to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.

ALTERATION. A change in construction or a change in occupancy. Where the term ALTERATION is applied to a change in construction, it is intended to apply to any change, addition or modification. Where the term is used in connection with a change in occupancy, it is intended to apply to changes in occupancy from one use to another.

ALTERATION, STRUCTURAL. A change or repair which would tend to prolong the life of the supporting members of a building or structure, such as alteration of bearing walls, foundation, columns, beams or girders. A change in the external dimensions of a building shall also be considered a structural alteration.

ARENA, INDOOR/OUTDOOR. A facility intended to support spectator sporting events in an enclosed or open air facility.

AUTO DETAILING. A use designed for cleaning the inside and outside of autos, not including automated car wash.

AUTO REPAIR. Major automotive repairs that are not performed at an automotive service station.

AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION. A retail place of business engaged primarily in the sale of motor fuels, but also supplying goods and services required in the operation and maintenance of automotive vehicles; this may include petroleum products, tires, batteries, automotive accessories and replacement parts and items, washing and lubrication services, the performance of minor automotive maintenance and repair and the supplying of other incidental customer services and products.

AUTOMOBILE AND/OR TRAILER SALES AREA. An open area, other than a street, used for the display, sale or rental of new and/or used automobiles or trailers, and where no repair work is done except minor incidental repair of units to be displayed, sold or rented on the premises.

AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD. A premises used for the storage and/or sale of used automobile or truck parts, and/or for the storage, dismantling or abandonment of junk, obsolete automobiles, trailers, trucks, machinery or parts thereof.

BASEMENT. A story partly underground. A basement shall be counted as a story in building height measurement when the floor level directly above is more than six feet above the average level of the adjoining ground.

BED AND BREAKFAST FACILITY. Any establishment located in a structure designed for a single-family residence, where the owner of the establishment resides in the structure, which has more than two rooms for rent on a daily basis to the public; offers a breakfast meal as a part of the cost of the room; and serves one breakfast meal a day to guests, staff and owners only. BREAKFAST MEAL is the meal served to guests during the a.m. or morning hours each day (OAR 333-17).

BOARDING OR ROOMING HOUSE. A building or portion thereof, other than a motel, restaurant or hotel, where meals or lodging or both are provided for compensation for more than five but not more than ten persons.

BUILDABLE AREA. The portion of a property that can be used to construct a building. BUILDABLE AREA is the area excluding yard setbacks, easements, and other legal or physical prohibitions to construction.

BUILDING CODE. Current codes adopted by the State of Oregon Building Codes Division.

BUILDING FOOTPRINT. The area of a building as measured around its foundation or the perimeter of the first story exterior walls or support structures.


[IMAGE]


BUILDING OFFICIAL. That person or official who is responsible for the enforcement of the building codes, ordinances and regulations within the city and within the unincorporated area of the City’s Urban Growth Boundary (UGB) area.

CALENDAR YEAR. A period of 12 months from January through December.

CANOPY. A permanent roofed structure which may be freestanding or partially attached to a building for the purpose of providing shelter to patrons in automobiles, and patrons on foot, but shall not mean a completely enclosed structure.

CARPORT. A stationary structure consisting of a roof with its supports and not more than two walls, built to match the existing dwelling in color and architecture and used for sheltering motor vehicles, recreational vehicles or boats.

CEMETERY. Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes.

CHILD CARE CENTER (COMMERCIAL). Any registered child care facility which is not a child care home.

CHILD CARE HOME (RESIDENTIAL). Any registered child care facility or certified group child care home where child care is offered in the home of the provider to fewer than 13 children, including children of the provider, regardless of full-time or part-time status. (ORS Chapter 657A)

CLINIC. A place where professional services are provided, including, but not limited to, medical, dental, chiropractic, counseling, optometry and other medical and social type services, and including single and/or multiple offices.

CLINIC, ANIMAL. A business establishment in which veterinary services are rendered for domestic pets and/or livestock on an outpatient basis. The facilities may be further classified as "small animal" (those limited to domestic pets), or "large animal" (those limited to domestic livestock).

COMMERCIAL RECREATION. A private facility or structure intended for recreational purpose.

(1) INDOOR. A room or rooms within an enclosed building including uses ranging from skating rinks and bowling alleys to pool halls and arcades.

(2) OUTDOOR. A facility or structure not enclosed by a building including uses such as batting cages, bumper cars, mini golf, tennis courts and basketball courts.

COMMUNITY SEWAGE SYSTEM. A sewage disposal system, which serves more than ten single residences or other users for the purpose of disposing of household liquid wastes, but is neither a municipal nor a public utility sewage disposal system, and must be approved by the appropriate government agency and must have legal financial provisions for long-term operation and maintenance.

COMMUNITY WATER SYSTEM. A domestic water supply source or distribution system which serves more than three single residences or other users for the purpose of supplying water for household uses, but is neither a municipal water supply system nor a public utility water supply system, and must have legal financial provisions for long-term operation and maintenance.

CONDOMINIUM. A multiple-family dwelling, duplex or single unit in which the dwelling units are individually owned, with each owner having a recordable deed enabling the unit to be sold, mortgaged or exchanged independently, under the provisions of applicable ORSs.

CONTIGUOUS or CONTIGUOUS LAND. Two or more parcels or units of land under a single ownership which are not separated by an intervening parcel of land under separate ownership, including limited access right-of-way which would deny access between the two parcels under single ownership, or parcels of land under a single ownership which are not separated by a river, public road, street or other public right-of-way.

COTTAGE INDUSTRY. See HOME OCCUPATION.

CUSTOM SLAUGHTERING or SLAUGHTER HOUSE. A mobile or stationary establishment wherein meat animals, caused to be delivered by the owners thereof, are slaughtered for compensation, payment or remuneration of any kind, and are thereafter returned to the owner thereof or to the order of the owner. (ORS 603.010(2)).

DATA CENTER. Data storage and processing facilities, electronic products - manufacture, storage and assembly, together with all related and supporting uses and facilities.

DAY CARE. See CHILD CARE.

DENSITY, NET. The number of dwelling units per unit of land expressed as the number of square feet of land per dwelling unit. Minimum lot areas by dwelling type are listed in the residential dimensional tables by zone. The net density for a land division creating any lot or parcel is computed by dividing the net square footage of the lot or parcel by the minimum lot area required for a single-family dwelling in its specific zone. The net square footage is determined by subtracting from the total square footage of the lot or parcel that which is deemed necessary for street dedication and that area used for private streets and common driveways, if any.

DEVELOPER. Any person, corporation, partnership or other legal entity that creates or proposes to create a land development, subdivision, partitioning or other development including residential, commercial or industrial developments.

DEVELOPMENT. Means all human caused change to improved or unimproved real estate including but not limited to: buildings, fences, decks, placement or replacement of manufactured or other structures, subdividing or partitioning property, parking and loading areas, landscaping, roadways, paved or graveled areas, grading, excavation or drilling operations and areas devoted to storage of equipment and materials.

DIKE. A structure designed and built to prevent inundation of a parcel of land by water.

DWELLING.

(1) ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (ADU). A secondary living unit containing cooking facilities, including manufactured homes but excluding recreational vehicles (RVs) and shall only be used in conjunction with a single-family home on the same lot or parcel (see § 153.080). Accessory dwellings shall meet the dimensional and other requirements of the zoning district in which it is located. See ACCESSORY STRUCTURE for buildings not containing cooking facilities.

(2) SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING. A detached building containing one dwelling unit designed for occupancy by one family or one household only.

(3) DUPLEX. A detached building containing two dwelling units on a single lot or duplex lot and designed for occupancy by two families or households living independently of each other where neither is a guest house or accessory dwelling.

(4) MULTIFAMILY DWELLING. A detached building containing three or four dwelling units on a single lot or parcel and designed for occupancy by three or four families or households living independently of each other (triplex or fourplex). Multifamily dwellings built on adjacent lots or parcels shall be considered a multifamily complex if it is functioning as a complex or if it appears a development is purposely trying to subvert the multifamily complex code.

(5) MULTIFAMILY COMPLEX. A single lot containing five or more dwelling units.

(6) TOWNHOME (HOUSE). A single-family dwelling with a private entrance, which is part of a structure whose dwelling units are attached horizontally in a linear arrangement with each unit on its own separate lot and having a totally exposed front and rear wall to be used for access, light and ventilation. Also referred to as single-family attached housing or row homes.

DWELLING UNIT. A building, or portion thereof, consisting of one or more rooms including a bathroom, living, eating, sleeping and kitchen facilities, which are arranged, designed or used as living quarters for one family or one household.

EASEMENT. A grant of the right to use a parcel of land, or portion thereof, for specific purposes where ownership of the land or portion thereof is not transferred.

FAMILY or HOUSEHOLD. An individual or two or more persons related by blood, marriage, legal adoption or guardianship, living together as one housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit using one kitchen, and providing meals, board and/or lodging to not more than three unrelated persons, living together as one housekeeping unit using one kitchen, excluding servants; or a group of not more than five persons who need not be related by blood, marriage, legal adoption or guardianship living in a dwelling unit.

FAMILY DAY CARE CENTER. See CHILD CARE HOME (RESIDENTIAL).

FARMING or FARM USE. As defined by ORS 215.203(2)(a), to include the use of land for the purpose of raising, harvesting or selling crops, for the feeding, breeding, management and sale of, or the produce of, livestock, poultry, fur-bearing animals, honeybees or dairying and the sale of dairy products, or for any other agricultural or horticultural use, animal husbandry, timber propagation or harvest, or any combination thereof, including the preparation, processing and storage of products raised on the land, but not including the construction or use of dwellings and other buildings customarily provided in conjunction therewith.

FENCE. A protective or confining barrier constructed of wood, plastic, masonry or wire mesh. FENCE does not include hedges or other plantings.

FENCE, SIGHT-OBSCURING. A fence constructed, arranged and maintained in a manner as to obscure vision.

FRONTAGE. All property fronting on one side of a street and measured along the street line, between intersecting and intercepting streets, or between a street and a right-of-way, waterway, end of dead-end street, alley, city or district boundary.

GARAGE, PRIVATE. An accessory building or portion of a main building used for the parking or temporary storage of vehicles owned or used by occupants of the main building.

GARAGE, REPAIR. A building used for the care and repair of motor vehicles, including major and minor work such as body and fender work or engine and transmission overhaul, and incidental storage or parking of vehicles.

GRADE. The average level of the finished surfaces of the ground adjacent to the exterior of a building.

(1) EXISTING GRADE. The surface of the ground or infrastructure at a stated location as it exists prior to disturbance in preparation for a project or as officially established by city authority.

(2) FINISHED GRADE. The final elevation of the ground surface after manmade alterations, such as grading, grubbing, filling, or excavating, have been made on the ground surface.

(3) GROUND LEVEL GRADE. The average of the finished ground elevation along the perimeter walls of a building. In case walls are parallel to and within five feet of a sidewalk, alley or other public way, the above-ground level should be measured at the elevation of the sidewalk, alley or public way.

(4) NATURAL GRADE. The existing grade or elevation of the ground surface that exists or existed prior to manmade alterations, such as grading, grubbing, filling, or excavating.

(5) ENGINEERED GRADING. Any filling of land that is intended to provide support for structures and/or infrastructure.

GRADING. Any leveling, stripping, cutting, filling or stockpiling of earth or land, including the land in its cut or filled condition to create new grades.

GUEST HOUSE. See ACCESSORY DWELLING.

HABITABLE FLOOR AREA. Any floor area usable for living purposes, which includes working, sleeping, eating, cooking or recreation, or any combination thereof. A floor area used only for storage purposes is not a HABITABLE FLOOR AREA.

HEIGHT OF BUILDING. With natural grade of up to and including 10%, HEIGHT OF BUILDING is the vertical distance measured between the elevation of the curb or street serving the property, and the highest point of the roof including mechanical equipment such as HVAC systems. For sites having a natural grade greater than 10%, HEIGHT OF BUILDING is measured from the average finished grade to the highest point of the roof including mechanical equipment such as HVAC systems. Introduced fill or excessive grading beyond that which is necessary shall not be used to circumvent this standard by artificially elevating a structure above the height limit.


[IMAGE]


Natural Grade 10% or Less.

Height determined by measurement from the curb or street.




[IMAGE]


Natural Grade greater than 10%.

Height determined by the average of Heights 1 and 2.

HISTORICAL, GEOLOGICAL AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL BUILDINGS AND SITES. Land, buildings and/or other natural or manmade features which have a special historical, geological or archaeological interest, represent one or more periods of time in the history of the city and adjoining areas, and have at least local significance.

HOME OCCUPATION. A small business activity which may involve the provision of services or manufacture and sale of products, carried on by a resident or resident family living on the premises as an accessory use within the same dwelling, or in an accessory building on the same property, that is not detrimental to the overall character of the neighborhood.

HOSPITAL. An establishment, publicly or privately operated, which provides sleeping and eating facilities to two or more nonrelated persons receiving medical, obstetrical or surgical care, and other healing, curing and/or nursing services over a period exceeding 24 hours.

HOTEL or MOTEL (TRAVELERS’ ACCOMMODATIONS). A building or portion thereof, designed and/or used for occupancy of transient individuals who are lodged with or without meals. (ORS 446.310)

INDOOR COMMERCIAL RECREATION. A room or rooms within an enclosed building which is designated and used for recreational purposes by the general public.

INTEREST. Includes a lot or parcel, and a share, undivided interest or membership which includes the right to occupy the land overnight, and lessee’s interest in land for more than three years or less than three years of the interest may be renewed under the terms of the lease for a total period more than three years. Does not include any interest in a condominium or any security interest under a land sales contract, trust deed or mortgage, and does not include divisions of land created by lien foreclosure or foreclosures of recorded contracts for the sale of real property.

JUNK. Means old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber, debris, waste or junked, dismantled, wrecked, scrapped or ruined motor vehicles or appliances, or motor vehicle parts, iron, steel or other old or scrap ferrous, or nonferrous material, metal or nonmetal materials. (ORS 377.605(5))

JUNK OR WRECKING YARD. Any property or establishment where a person(s) is engaged in breaking up, dismantling, sorting, storing, distributing, buying or selling scrap or waste materials, or any establishment or place of business where there is accumulated on the premises eight or more motor vehicles or an equivalent volume of junk, that is maintained, operated or used for storing, keeping, buying or selling of junk, and the term includes automobile graveyards, garbage dumps and scrap metal processing facilities. (ORS 377.605(6))

KENNEL. A lot, building or premises in or on which four or more dogs, cats or other animals at least four months of age are kept commercially for board, propagation, training or sale.

LANDSCAPING. The total ground area of a lot not covered by permanent structures, except areas which may be covered by projections from buildings, that include a combination of any of the following materials: living plant material such as trees, shrubs, ground cover, flowers and lawn, including native vegetation; and nonliving materials such as benches, walkways and courtyards, consisting of brick, decorative rock or other decorative materials. Does not include areas surfaced solely for the purpose of off-street parking and loading.

LIVESTOCK. Domestic animals of types customarily raised or kept on farms for profit or other purposes, and include horses, mules, asses, cattle, sheep, swine, goats, llamas and poultry, including turkeys, of any age or sex. (ORS 599.205) Does not include exotic animals as defined by ORS 609.305; for example, any lion, tiger, leopard, cheetah, ocelot or any other cat not indigenous to Oregon, except the species Felis catus (domestic cat); any monkey, ape, gorilla or other nonhuman primate; any wolf or any canine not indigenous to Oregon, except the species Canis familiaris (domestic dog); and any bear, except the black bear.

LIVESTOCK AUCTION MARKET or SALES YARD. Any place of business to which the public may consign livestock for sale by auction open to public bidding or sold on a commission basis, but specifically does not include breed or livestock associations operating subject to and in compliance with the provisions of the Oregon Nonprofit Corporation Law (ORS 61.005 to 61.215), FFA and 4H groups, auction sales conducted in conjunction with the County Fair or other fairgrounds approved events or private fairs or auctions by or for a person on the premises of the person. (ORS 599.205(6))

LIVESTOCK FEEDING YARD. An enclosure designed or used for the purpose of the concentrated feeding or fattening of livestock for marketing.

LOADING SPACE. An off-street space within a building or on the same lot with a building, for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle or truck while loading or unloading merchandise or materials, and which space has direct access to a street or alley.

LOT. Means a single unit of land that is created by a subdivision of land. (ORS 92.010). The term LOT within this code and all referenced codes and regulations shall always refer to a "lot of record" based on the context of the property being discussed.

(1) CORNER LOT. A lot abutting on two or more streets, other than alleys, at their intersection; provided the angle of intersection of the abutting streets does not exceed 135 degrees.

(2) DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOT. A lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets other than alleys.

(3) DUPLEX LOT. A lot containing one dwelling unit of a duplex dwelling structure.

(4) FLAG LOT. A lot shall be considered a FLAG LOT if the pole of the flag has a continuous width of at least 20 feet up to but not including 50 feet of street frontage.


[IMAGE]


(5) INTERIOR LOT. A lot other than a corner lot.

(6) IRREGULAR LOT. A lot of such a shape or configuration that technically meets the area, frontage and width requirements of these standards but does so by incorporating unusual elongations, angles, curvilinear lines unrelated to topography or other natural land features.

(7) NONCONFORMING LOT. A lot that lawfully existed prior to the enactment of the requirements of these standards, but does not meet the minimum lot size or street frontage requirements.

LOT AREA. The total horizontal net area within the lot lines of a lot to mean that square footage of a lot that is free from public and private road rights-of-way.

LOT CONSOLIDATION. The consolidation of lot lines resulting in fewer lots.

LOT COVERAGE. The percentage of the total lot area covered by the footprint of a building or buildings, including covered parking areas; but excluding covered patios, porches and decks that are not enclosed and have no living space above them. For the purposes of this definition, ENCLOSED shall mean anything other than typical roof supports and common railing.
[IMAGE]


LOT DEPTH. The average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.

LOT LINE. The property line bounding a lot.

(1) FRONT LOT LINE. The lot line separating a lot from a street other than an alley, and in the case of a corner lot, the shortest lot line. In the case of a flag lot, the line that is part of the flag nearest the street.

(2) REAR LOT LINE. The lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line.

(3) SIDE LOT LINE. Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line bounding a lot. The left and right sides shall be determined by facing the front lot line.

(4) IRREGULAR OR ODD SHAPED. The front lot line will first be determined by the reviewing authority based on location, orientation and shape to establish the side and rear lot lines.

LOT OF RECORD. Any unit of land created as follows:

(1) A lot in an existing, duly recorded subdivision;

(2) A parcel in an existing, duly recorded major or minor land partition;

(3) An existing unit of land (tract) for which a survey has been duly filed which conformed to all applicable regulations at the time of filing; or

(4) Any unit of land created by deed description or metes and bounds; provided, however, contiguous units of land created by deed description or metes and bounds under the same ownership and not conforming to the minimum parcel size of these standards shall be considered one lot of record.

LOT WIDTH. The average horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the front and rear lot lines.

MAINTAIN. To allow to exist. (ORS 377.605(7))

MANUFACTURED DWELLING. Except as may be additionally defined for the purposes of this chapter, MANUFACTURED DWELLING means the following:

(1) RESIDENTIAL TRAILER. A structure constructed for movement on the public highways that has sleeping, cooking and plumbing facilities, that is intended for human occupancy, that is being used for residential purposes and that was constructed before January 1, 1962.

(2) MOBILE HOME. A structure constructed for movement on the public highways that has sleeping, cooking and plumbing facilities, that is intended for human occupancy, that is being used for residential purposes and that was constructed between January 1, 1962, and June 15, 1976, and met the construction requirements of Oregon mobile home law in effect at the time of construction.

(3) MANUFACTURED HOME. A prefabricated or factory constructed dwelling constructed off site as a single unit or multiple sections for assembly as a permanent residential structure, constructed for movement on the public highways, that has sleeping, cooking and plumbing facilities, that is intended for human occupancy, that is being used for residential purposes and that was constructed in accordance with federal, state or local manufactured housing construction and safety standards and regulations in effect at the time of construction. (O.R.S. 446.003(26)(a))

(4) Does not mean any building or structure subject to structural specialty code adopted pursuant to ORS 455.100 to 455.450 or any unit identified as a recreational vehicle by the manufacturer.

(5) For the purposes of this chapter, it shall be immaterial whether the units or components thereof are placed upon property for a temporary, semi-permanent or permanent residence, or that the wheels are removed and the unit or component(s) are supported upon footings or a foundation.

(6) This definition does not include travel trailers, camping trailers, motorized homes or campers, pickup coaches or other recreational type vehicles.

MANUFACTURED DWELLING PARK. Any place where four or more manufactured dwellings are located within 500 feet of one another on a lot, tract or parcel of land under the same ownership, the primary purpose of which is to rent or lease space or keep space for rent or lease to any person for a charge or fee to be paid for rental or lease or use of facilities or to offer space free in connection with securing the trade or patronage of the person(s). MANUFACTURED DWELLING PARK does not include a lot or lots located within a subdivision being rented or leased for occupancy by no more than one manufactured dwelling per lot if the subdivision was approved as a subdivision permitting manufactured dwellings at the time of platting and approved by the city pursuant to provisions adopted pursuant to O.R.S. 92.010 to 92.190, or if an amendment to the approval of the subdivision for manufactured dwelling use is subsequently granted by the city.

MANUFACTURED DWELLING SUBDIVISION. A subdivision intended to be occupied primarily or exclusively by manufactured dwellings and so approved at the time of platting.

MANUFACTURING.

(1) COMMERCIAL. Light assembly as a support use to the primary commercial use (i.e., furniture assembly, electronic repair/assembly).

(2) LIGHT INDUSTRIAL. Fully enclosed; manufacturing of items permitted in the respective zone; does not use chemicals or materials which may be toxic or otherwise detectable visually or by odor from neighboring properties.

(3) HEAVY INDUSTRIAL. Industrially related manufacturing; typified by the use of larger machinery or chemicals; not generally associated with commercial sales other than as a secondary use to the primary industrial use.

MODULAR OR PREFABRICATED HOME. A dwelling unit constructed of multiple sections or components for assembly on site, on a permanent foundation as a permanent residential structure, and when completed is essentially indistinguishable from a conventional site built home and conforms to the local building code and the current edition of the State of Oregon One and Two Family Dwelling Code.

MOTEL. A building, or group of buildings, on the same lot or parcel containing motel rental units for rental to transients and consisting of individual sleeping quarters with or without cooking facilities which are designed, intended or used primarily for the accommodation of transients and travelers, and shall include hotels and inns.

MUNICIPAL WATER SYSTEM. A domestic water supply source and distribution system owned and operated by a city or a county; or owned and operated by a special district or other public corporation which has independent tax-levying powers to support the system and which supplies water to a total of 1,000 or more households.

MUSEUM. Includes any collection of archaeological specimens, artifacts, pioneer relics, articles, documents and other things of historical, scientific or artistic import that are assembled, displayed, preserved and protected for the benefit of the public, for educational and scientific purposes or to commemorate the occupation and development of the area or the Pacific Northwest region, and the structure or structures housing the collection(s). (ORS 358.310(2))

NATURAL AREA. Includes land and water that has substantially retained its natural character and land and water that, although altered in character, is important as habitats for plant, animal or marine life, for the study of its natural, historical, scientific or paleontological features, or for the appreciation of its natural features, and is so designated by the Comprehensive Plan either by Plan policy or Map designation.

NATURAL HAZARD AREA. An area that is subject to natural events that are known to result in death or endanger the works of man, such as stream flooding, ground water, flash flooding, erosion and deposition, landslides, earthquakes, weak foundation soils and other hazards unique to a local or regional area, and are so designated or identified by Plan policies or Map designations.

NATURAL RESOURCES. Air, land and water and the elements thereof which are valued for their existing and potential usefulness to man.

NEW CONSTRUCTION. Any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

NONCONFORMING USE OR STRUCTURE. A lawful existing use or structure at the time the ordinance codified in this chapter or any amendments hereto become effective which does not conform to the requirements of this chapter as amended or to the zone in which it is located.

NURSING OR CONVALESCENT HOME. Any home, institution or other structure maintained or operating for the nursing and care of four or more ill or infirm adults not requiring hospitalization.

OFFICE. A room, suite of rooms, or portion of a building used for the practice of a profession or for conducting the affairs of a business.

OPEN SPACE. Consists of lands used for agricultural or forest uses, and any land area that would if preserved and continued in its present use conserve and enhance natural or scenic resources; protect air or streams or water supply and promote conservation of soils, wetlands or marshes. It also consists of landscaped areas such as parks, open recreation areas, golf courses and similar areas that reduce pollution and enhance the value of abutting or neighboring property; enhance the value to the public of abutting or neighboring parks, forests, wildlife preserves, natural reservations or other open space; enhance recreation opportunities; preserve historic, geological and archaeological sites; promote orderly urban development; minimize land use conflicts; and maintain quality living conditions.

OUTDOOR MERCHANDISING. The sale or display for sale of merchandise outside of an enclosed building space; including sales which are transacted through an open window or door; does not include incidental, infrequent garage, patio or yard sales.

OWNER. The owner of the title to real property or the authorized agent thereof, or the contract purchaser of real property of record as shown on the last available complete county tax assessment roll, County Clerk’s records and/or City Recorder’s records.

PARCEL. Means a single unit of land that is created by a partition of land.

PARK MODEL. A park model is a small, single-wide dwelling that resembles a manufactured home but is classified as a recreational vehicle and built to recreational vehicle standards. Due to the designation as a recreational vehicle, a park model is limited in size and not intended for use as a permanent residence. Park models are designed for placement in manufactured home parks, RV parks or campgrounds.

PARKING AREA, PRIVATE OR PUBLIC. Privately or publicly owned property, other than streets and alleys, on which parking spaces are defined, designated or otherwise identified; in the case of a private parking area for use by the tenants, employees or owners of the property for which the parking area is required by this chapter and not open space for use by the general public; and, in the case of a public parking area, for use by the general public, either free or for remuneration, and may include parking lots which may be required by this chapter for retail customers, patrons and clients.

PARKING SPACE. A clear, off-street area for the temporary parking or storage of one automobile, having an all-weather surface and a width of not less than eight and one-half feet when within a building or structure; with an area of not less than 190 square feet in area; deviations are allowed when in compliance with applicable provisions set forth in § 153.080 et seq. Parking spaces shall have easy access to a street or alley by a driveway having an all-weather surface.

PERSON. Every natural person, firm, partnership, association, social or fraternal organization, corporation, trust, estate, receiver, syndicate, branch of government or any group or combination acting as a unit.

PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT or PLANNED COMMUNITY. The development of an area of land as a single entity for a number of dwelling units or a number of uses, according to a plan which does not necessarily correspond in lot size, bulk or type of dwelling, density, lot coverage or required open space to the standard regulations otherwise required by this chapter. A PLANNED COMMUNITY means any subdivision which results in a pattern of ownership of real property and all the buildings, improvements and rights located on or belonging to the real property in which there is a homeowners association responsible for the maintenance, operation, insurance and taxes, relating to any common property of the planned community and/or for the exterior maintenance of any property that is individually owned; and owners of individual lots, by virtue of their ownership, automatically are members of the homeowners association and assume liability for membership fees. (ORS 94.550)

PLAT. A final map, diagram, drawing, replat or other writing containing all the descriptions, locations, specifications, dedications, provisions and information concerning a subdivision.



PRIMARY, PRINCIPAL OR MAIN USE. The first use to which property is or may be devoted, and that use to which all other uses on the premises are derived as accessory or secondary uses. As used relative to dwelling units, the primary dwelling shall be the first dwelling unit to be located on a specific lot or parcel.

PRINTING and PUBLISHING, RETAIL. Service commercial use providing printing services available to the general public.

PRINTING, WHOLESALE. Printing intended to serve retail or other wholesale uses rather than the general public.

PROJECTION, ARCHITECTURAL. Features such as cornices, eaves, sunshades, gutters, chimneys, flues, steps, terraces, platforms, patios, decks and porches having no roof covering.

PUBLIC FACILITIES OR SERVICES. A facility or service including irrigation provided by a public, governmental or nonprofit organization or district.

PUBLIC NEED. An identifiable and measurable public benefit which accrues to the community as a whole.

PUBLIC OR SEMI-PUBLIC USE. A use owned and operated by a public, governmental or nonprofit organization for the benefit of the public in general. This does not include landfill sites, solid waste disposal sites, garbage dumps, recycling facilities, quarry sites or utility facilities.

PUBLIC UTILITY WATER SYSTEM. A domestic water supply source and distribution system supplying water for household uses, owned and operated by a person subject to regulation by the Public Utility Commissioner of Oregon and supplying water to a total of 500 or more households.

PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM. A water system for the provision to the public of piped water for human consumption, if the system has at least 15 service connections or regularly serves at least 25 individuals.

RECREATION CAMP, RESORT or PARK. An area devoted to facilities and equipment for recreational purposes, including swimming pools, tennis, basketball and volleyball courts, sports fields, playgrounds, picnicking areas and other similar uses, whether the use of the area is limited to private membership or whether open to the public upon payment of a fee, or an area designated by the landowner for picnicking or overnight camping and offered to the general public, whether or not a fee or charge is made for the accommodations.

RECREATION FACILITY (PUBLIC). Indoor and/or outdoor structures built for public recreation such as aquatic centers, basketball courts, tennis courts, mini-golf and skate parks.

RECREATION VEHICLE. Boats, ATVs and vacation trailers or other units with or without motive power, which are designed for human occupancy and intended to be used temporarily for recreation, vacation, seasonal or emergency purposes, but not for residential purposes, includes camping trailers, camping vehicles, motor homes, park trailers, bus conversions, van conversions, tent trailers, travel trailers, truck campers and any other vehicle converted for use as a recreational vehicle. (ORS 446.003(36))

RECREATION VEHICLE PARK, RECREATION PARK or CAMPGROUND. Any area designated by the person or party establishing, operating, managing or maintaining the same for picnicking or overnight camping by the general public or any segment of the public. Includes, but is not limited to, areas open to use free of charge or through payment of a tax or fee, or by virtue of rental, lease, license, membership, association or common ownership, and further includes, but is not limited to, those areas divided into two or more lots, parcels, units, spaces or other interests or designations for purposes of the use. Includes the facilities and spaces for tents, tent vehicles, camping vehicles or recreation vehicles of any type.

RESIDENTIAL CARE. Services such as supervision; protection; assistance while bathing, dressing, grooming or eating; management of money; transportation; recreation; and the providing of room and board.

RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY. A residential care, residential training or residential treatment facility licensed or registered by or under the authority of the Department of Land Conservation and Development, as defined in ORS 443.400, under ORS 443.400 to 443.460 or licensed by the State Office for Services to Children and Families, under ORS 418.205 to 418.327 which provides residential care alone or in conjunction with treatment or training or a combination thereof for six or more individuals who need not be related. Staff persons required to meet licensing requirements shall not be counted in the number of facility residents, and need not be related to each other or to any resident of the residential facility. (ORS 197.660). Does not include a residential school, state or local correctional facilities, a nursing home, a hospital, a place primarily engaged in recreational activities, a foster home, a place providing care and treatment on less than a 24-hour basis, or a child-caring agency or residential school or other organization certified or licensed by the Children’s Services Division under ORS 418.205 to 418.327.

RESIDENTIAL CARE HOME. A residential treatment or training or an adult foster home, licensed by or under the authority of the State Mental Health and Development Disability Services Division or the Senior and Disabled Services Division or the office of Alcohol and Drug Abuse Programs, as appropriate, under ORS 443.400 to 443.825, a residential facility registered under ORS 443.480 to 443.500 or an adult foster home licensed under ORS 443.705 to 443.825 which provides residential care alone or in conjunction with treatment or training or a combination thereof for five or fewer individuals who need not be related. Staff persons required to meet licensing requirements shall not be counted in the number of facility residents, and need not be related to each other or to any resident of the residential home. (ORS 197.660).

RESIDENTIAL USE. A structure or use for occupancy as a human dwelling or lodging place such as single-family, two-family and multifamily dwellings; duplexes; apartments; boarding, lodging or rooming houses; mobile homes and mobile home parks; and labor camps.

RESOURCE CAPABILITY OR CAPACITY. A use or activity that is consistent with the resource capabilities or capacities of the area when either the impacts of the use on wildlife species and habitats, riparian habitats, waterways, wetlands, biological productivity and water quality are not significant, or that the resources of the area are able to assimilate the use and activity and their effects and continue to function in a manner which conserves long-term renewable resources, natural biological productivity, recreation and aesthetic values.

RESTAURANT. Any establishment where food or drink is prepared for consumption by the public or any establishment where the public obtains food or drink so prepared in form or quantity consumable then and there, whether or not it is consumed within the confines of the premises where prepared, and also includes establishments that prepare food or drink in consumable form for service outside the premises where prepared, but does not include railroad dining cars, bed and breakfast facilities or temporary restaurants as defined in subsection (2) of this definition.

(1) LIMITED SERVICE RESTAURANT. A restaurant serving only pre-wrapped sandwiches or a single dish or food product and nonperishable beverages.

(2) TEMPORARY RESTAURANT. Any establishment operating temporarily in connection with any fair, carnival, circus or similar public gathering or entertainment, food product promotion or any other event where food is prepared or served for consumption by the public. TEMPORARY RESTAURANT does not include the following:

(a) An establishment where food is prepared and served by a fraternal, social or religious organization only to its own members and guests;

(b) An approved school lunchroom where food is prepared and served for school and community activities, where the preparation and service are under the direction of the school lunchroom supervisor; and

(c) A food product promotion where only samples of a food or foods are offered to demonstrate the characteristics of the food product (for the purposes of this subsection, a "sample" shall not include a meal, an individual hot dish or a whole sandwich).

RESTORATION. Revitalizing, returning or replacing original attributes and amenities, such as natural biological productivity, aesthetic and cultural resources, that have been diminished or lost by past alterations, activities or catastrophic events.

RETIREMENT CENTER. A building or group of buildings containing separate dwelling units designed for and occupied principally (at least one occupant of each dwelling unit) by persons over the age of 60 years; excluding convalescent and nursing care as a function of the center.

RIGHT-OF-WAY. That area between the boundary lines of a street, road or other easement.

RIPARIAN. Of, or pertaining to, or situated on the edge of the bank of a river, stream or other body of water (Webster). As defined by ORS 308.792 (regarding lands eligible for special tax assessments), DESIGNATED RIPARIAN LAND means the beds of streams, the adjacent vegetation communities and the land thereunder, which are predominantly influenced by their association with water, not to extend more than 100 feet landward of the line of nonaquatic vegetation; however, only the lands zoned as forest or agricultural lands outside of Urban Growth Boundaries (UGBs) shall qualify for special tax assessment. (ORS 308.795(2)(a))

ROAD or STREET. A public or private way that is created to provide ingress or egress for persons to one or more lots, parcels, areas or tracts of land, excluding a private way that is created to provide ingress or egress to the land in conjunction with the use of the land for forestry, mining or agricultural purposes. (ORS 92.010(13))

(1) ALLEY. A narrow street through a block primarily for vehicular service access to the back or side of properties abutting on another street.

(2) ARTERIAL. A street, referring to “major” and “minor” classifications unless specifically stated, of considerable continuity which is primarily a traffic artery for transportation among large areas, and so designated by the Transportation Systems Plan as may be amended.

(3) BICYCLE ROUTE. A right-of-way for bicycle traffic.

(4) COLLECTOR. A street, referring to “major” and “minor” classifications unless specifically stated, supplementary to the arterial street system and a means of transportation between this system and small areas; used to some extent for through traffic and to some extent for access to abutting properties and so designated by the Transportation Systems Plan as may be amended.

(5) CUL-DE-SAC. A short street having only one end open to traffic and being terminated by a vehicle turnaround.

(6) HALF STREET. A portion of the width of a street usually along the edge of a subdivision, where the remaining portion of the street could or is planned to be provided for in another subdivision adjacent thereto.

(7) LOCAL STREET. A street intended primarily for access to abutting properties.

(8) MARGINAL ACCESS STREET. A minor street parallel and adjacent to a major arterial street providing access to abutting properties, but protected from through traffic.

(9) STUBBED STREET. A street having only one outlet for vehicular traffic and which is intended to be extended or continued to serve future subdivisions or development on adjacent lands.

(10) ROADWAY. That portion of a street or road right-of-way developed for vehicular traffic.

ROOF LINE. The line which marks the highest point of the vertical front of a building in the case of a false front, or the line where the roof is joined to the vertical front wall of the building in other cases.

SCALE. The relationship in size between one building or use and another.

SCENIC AREA OR RESOURCE. Land or other natural features that are valued for their scenic and aesthetic values and appearance, and are designated as a scenic resource by the Comprehensive Plan.

SCHOOL. Includes kindergarten, primary, elementary, junior or high school and college. Includes public, private or parochial schools of all grade levels, including higher and vocational education and training, but not a nursery or day nursery school.

SECONDHAND STORE. Retail use that vends secondhand (used) items including clothing and furniture as the primary use. The selling of secondhand items as a secondary use in the same store with no community drop off area is not considered a secondhand store, see PRIMARY USE.

SETBACK (YARD). An open space on a lot which is unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise provided in this chapter.

(1) FRONT SETBACK. A setback between side lot lines and measured horizontally at right angles to the front lot line from the front lot line to the nearest point of a building.

(2) REAR SETBACK. A yard between side lot lines and measured horizontally at right angles to the rear lot line from the rear lot line to the nearest point of a building.

(3) SIDE SETBACK. A setback between the front and rear yards measured horizontally at right angles from the side lot line to the nearest point of a building.

(4) STREET SIDE. A setback adjacent to a street between the front setback and rear lot line measured horizontally and at right angles from the side lot line to the nearest point of a building.

SIGN. An identification, description, illustration or device which is affixed to or represented, directly or indirectly, upon a building, structure or land, and which directs attention to a product, place, activity, person, institution, business or service, excluding house numbers. Each display surface of a sign other than two surfaces parallel and back to back on the same structure shall be considered a sign.

SIGN, ADVERTISING. A sign which directs attention to a business, product, activity or service which is not necessarily conducted, sold or offered upon the premises where the sign is located.

SITE BUILT HOME. Also referred to as "stick built," a dwelling that is constructed entirely or largely on site (excludes engineered items like trusses) and is intended to be occupied at its location upon completion. This term is used to differentiate between manufactured or modular dwellings that are largely factory built. Site built homes conform to the local building code and current edition of the State of Oregon One and Two Family Dwelling Code.

STABLE, PRIVATE. A detached accessory building for the keeping of horses owned only by the occupants of the premises and which are not kept for remuneration or profit.

STABLE, PRIVATE COMMERCIAL. A private stable which is maintained by the property owner, lessee or renter, and which is available for the keeping of horses not owned solely by the occupants of the premises whether or not for remuneration or profit.

STABLE, PUBLIC. A stable other than a private stable that is maintained by a public, semi-public or nonprofit organization.

START OF CONSTRUCTION. The first placement of permanent construction of a structure (other than a manufactured dwelling) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings or any work beyond the initial site preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; also does not include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations, or the erection of temporary forms; also does not include the installation on the property of accessory buildings such as garages, sheds or similar buildings or structures not occupied as dwelling units or not a part of the main structure. For a structure (other than a manufactured dwelling) without a basement or poured footings, the START OF CONSTRUCTION includes the first permanent framing or assembly of the structure or any part thereof on its piling or foundation. For manufactured dwellings not within a manufactured dwelling subdivision or manufactured dwelling/mobile home park, the START OF CONSTRUCTION means the date on which construction of facilities for servicing the site on which the manufactured dwelling is to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the construction of streets, either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, and installation of utilities) is completed.

STORY. That portion of a building included between a floor and the ceiling above it which is six feet or more above the grade.

STORY, HALF. A story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than two feet above the floor of the story.

STRUCTURE. That which is built or constructed. An edifice or building of any kind or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner and which requires location on the ground or which is attached to something having a ground location.

SUBDIVIDED LAND or SUBDIVISION. Improved or unimproved land or lands divided, or created into interests or sold under an agreement to be subsequently divided or created, immediate or future, into 11 or more undivided interests or four or more lots, parcels or other interests within a calendar year when the area or tract of land exists as a unit or contiguous units of land under a single ownership at the beginning of the year. Does not include the sale of a lot in a recorded subdivision or an approved partition even though the seller may have owned other contiguous lots or property prior to the sale; the lot or lots, however, must be sold as platted and recorded.

TIMESHARE CONDOMINIUM or TIMESHARE ESTATE. A condominium and/or other development in which units are individually owned by a family or group of persons for a variable amount of time during the year, and in which part or all of the units may be available to transients or travelers for rent or on an exchange basis. For the purposes of this chapter, a TIMESHARE CONDOMINIUM OR ESTATE unit shall be considered as a motel and/or subdivision, and shall also be subject to approval in accordance with ORS 94.803.

TOTALLY ENCLOSED. Surrounded by four solid walls and a solid roof.

TOWING/IMPOUND YARD. A lot or portion of a lot used for temporary storage of vehicles that have been towed by a licensed towing company. A towing/ impound yard shall not include any dismantling of vehicles or storage of vehicle parts (see WRECKING YARD). A towing/impound yard shall not include long term vehicle storage (over 60 days).

TRANSFER STATION. Shall be as defined pursuant to state law.

TRANSIENT MERCHANT, BUSINESS OR COMMERCIAL ENTERPRISE. A person, business or other enterprise that travels from place to place, either carrying their goods with them, selling and delivering at the same time, or not carrying goods but taking orders for future delivery, or purchasing goods for resale or processing off site. Includes those who occupy a temporary fixed location, selling and delivering from stock on hand, doing business in much the same manner as a permanent business does or might be expected to, with the principal difference being the temporary nature of the business location or type of activity.

TRAVELERS’ ACCOMMODATIONS. Any establishment having rooms or apartments rented or kept for rent on a daily or weekly basis to travelers or transients for a charge or fee paid or to be paid for rental or use of facilities.

UNIQUE RESOURCE. Land or buildings which have a special character or aesthetic interest, irrespective of age, including the type or method of construction or artistic value, and are so designated by the Comprehensive Plan.

URBAN SERVICES. Sanitary sewers, water, fire protection, parks, open space, recreation and streets, roads and mass transit.

USE. The purpose for which land or a structure is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.

UTILITY FACILITY.

(1) MAJOR. Utility facilities and similar facilities owned or operated by a public, private or cooperative electric, fuel, communication, sewage or water company or other private company for the generation, transmission, distribution or processing of its products or for the disposal of hazardous cooling water, waste or byproducts, and including cellular towers, power transmission lines including their poles or towers, above ground pipelines, power substations, dams, water towers, sewage lagoons, sanitary landfills and other similar facilities.

(2) MINOR. Utility facilities and similar facilities of a smaller scale such as self-generating facilities that will not adversely impact surrounding properties, including solar arrays, wind turbines and fuel cells within height limits, well houses, booster pump stations, disposal of nonhazardous cooling water, small communication towers within local height limit, utility equipment buildings and other similar facilities.

(3) EXEMPT. Utility facilities and similar facilities not considered to be a minor facility due to scale and impact to surrounding properties as determined by the Planning Director such as: streets approved in a master plan, any utility placed underground or on existing above ground poles, site specific power generation such as roof mounted solar panels not exceeding height limit or small ground mounted power generating facilities and other similar facilities.

UTILITY TOWERS. Facilities that cannot be defined as a minor utility facility and generally exceed the height limit of the zone, such as communication towers or power line towers.

VISIBLE. Capable of being seen without visual aid by a person of normal visual acuity.

VISION CLEARANCE AREA. A triangular area on a lot at the intersection of two streets or a street and a railroad, two sides of which are lot lines measured from the corner intersection of the lot lines to a distance specified in this chapter. The third side of the triangle is a line across the corner of the lot joining the ends of the other two sides. Where the lot lines at intersections have rounded corners, the lot lines will be extended in a straight line to a point of intersection.

WETLANDS. Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. (ORS 197.015.21)

WHOLESALE DISTRIBUTION. An establishment engaged in the bulk sales or storage of goods with distribution and storage facilities without direct public access. Includes "contractor supplies."

WHOLESALE RETAIL. An establishment engaged in the bulk sales of goods with direct public access.

WRECKING YARD. A lot or portion of a lot used for dismantling of vehicles and storage of vehicles, vehicle parts, fluids removed from vehicles and other related activities.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11; Am. Ord. 1186, passed 12-13-11; Am. Ord. 1208, passed 12-9-14; Am. Ord. 1229, passed 2-28-17)


153.005 COMPLIANCE.

A lot or parcel may only be used and a structure, or part of a structure, may only be constructed, reconstructed, altered, occupied or used as permitted by this chapter. No lot or parcel area, yard or other open space existing on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be reduced below the minimum required by the provisions set forth in this chapter.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)




153.006 CITING.

This chapter may be so cited, or may be cited as "this chapter" and shall have the same force and effect as any city ordinance, resolution or other regulation.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.007 EXISTING AGREEMENTS AND PERMITS.

This chapter does not repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions or permits such as preliminary subdivision plats and partitioning approvals, conditional use permits, nonconforming use permits, temporary use permits, special use permits, special exceptions or building permits issued or effective (and still valid) prior to the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.008 ZONING/OTHER DEVELOPMENT PERMIT APPROVAL.

Prior to the construction, alteration, reconstruction, expansion or change of use of any structure, lot or parcel for which a permit or other land development approval is required by this chapter, the permit or approval shall be obtained from the city or the designated official thereof prior to the construction, alteration, reconstruction, expansion or change of use.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.009 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER RULES AND REGULATIONS.

(A) Approval of any use or development proposal pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall require compliance with and consideration of all applicable city, county, state and federal rules and regulations.

(B) The compliance shall be evident prior to the final approval of any affected land use or development proposal; for example, the compliance may be set forth as a condition of final approval.

(C) Specific city, county, state and federal rules and regulations that may affect a specific land use or development for which compliance therewith is required if applicable include but are not necessarily limited to the following:

(1) Air quality standards administered by the State Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ) and/or the Federal Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).

(2) Noise pollution standards administered by DEQ and/or EPA.

(3) Water quality standards administered by DEQ, State Water Resources Department (WRD) and/or EPA.

(4) Sewage disposal regulations administered by DEQ, County Environmental Health and/or EPA.

(5) Solid waste disposal regulations administered by DEQ and/or EPA, including those applicable to hazardous wastes.

(6) Uniform Building Code administered by the City-County Building Department and State Building Codes Agency.

(7) Surface and ground water withdrawals regulated by WRD.

(8) Scenic area rules administered by the State Highway Division (OSHD), state parks and/or other state or federal agencies.

(9) Access control and management regulations administered by OSHD and/or the County Road Department.

(10) Surface mining regulations administered by the State Department of Geology and Mineral Industries (DOGAMI), DEQ and other state or federal agencies.

(11) Wild and scenic river regulations administered by the State Parks and Recreation Department (OPRD), the U.S. Bureau of Land Management (BLM) or other state and federal agencies.

(12) Cut and fill, and wetland regulations administered by the Division of State Lands (DSL).

(13) Fish and wildlife habitat protection rules administered by the State Department of Fish and Wildlife (ODFW) and/or the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Department (USFW).

(14) Applicable city and/or county ordinances, resolutions, agreements, regulating master plans or other land use decisions.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11; Am. Ord. 1208, passed 12-9-14. Formerly 153.097)


153.010 APPLICABILITY OF CURRENT REGULATIONS.

An application for any use or activity requiring a permit or approval by any city land use document, ordinance or regulation shall be processed and reviewed in accordance with the standards and criteria effective at the time the application was submitted providing that the initial application was complete or completion was accomplished in a timely manner.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.011 INTERPRETATION.

Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this chapter are less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provisions of this chapter, or by any other city ordinance, resolution, regulation, policy or document, the provisions which are more restrictive shall govern.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.012 CONSOLIDATED PERMIT PROCEDURE.

All applications or permit processes required by this chapter and other city planning ordinances, documents or regulations for a specific single land use development or use may be consolidated into a single permit processing procedure, including the public hearings, public notices and City and/or County Planning Commission(s) and/or City Council and/or County Court action requirements. For example, for a specific land use development proposal which may require a zone change (map or text amendment), a conditional use permit, a dimensional or area variance and a partitioning, all of these required permits and the respective hearing and notice requirements therefor may be consolidated into a single public hearing process, a single public notice and a single decision and order action record. Notice of the consolidated process option shall be given to the applicant, and upon request thereby, such a process shall be utilized.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.013 ADMINISTRATION.

The City Council shall have the power and the duty to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The City Council may appoint city officials or other agents to issue zoning and other land development permits, process applications and fulfill other administrative functions required in the implementation of this chapter.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.014 GENERAL CRITERIA.

In determining whether or not any application shall be approved or denied, it shall be determined that the following criteria are either met or can be met through compliance with specific conditions of approval:

(A) The proposal is compatible with the City Comprehensive Plan and applicable policies set forth thereby.

(B) The proposal is in compliance with the requirements set forth by the applicable primary zone, by any applicable combining or overlay zone, and other provisions set forth by this chapter that are determined applicable to the subject use.

(C) That, for a proposal requiring approvals or permits from other local, state and/or federal agencies, evidence of the approval or permit compliance is established or can be assured prior to final approval.

(D) The proposal is in compliance with specific standards, conditions and limitations set forth for the subject use in the applicable zone, this section and this chapter.

(E) That no approval be granted for any use which is or expected to be found to exceed resource or public facility carrying capacities.

(F) For any use which is found to require compliance with air, water, land, solid waste and/or noise pollution standards, that the compliance be a condition of approval and compliance therewith shall be a continuing condition.

(G) As applicable, a city business license shall be required, and if a requirement, the continual maintenance of the license shall be a continuing condition of approval and failure to maintain the compliance shall constitute grounds for permit revocation.

(H) Boats, trailers, travel trailers, pick-up campers, recreational vehicles, motor homes and similar recreational vehicles and equipment that is operational and licensed as required may be stored on a lot owned by the same person or family member, but shall not be used for permanent occupancy other than that permitted in §§ 153.095(D), (E) and (F).

(I) Requiring an emergency management and response plan approved by the Fire Marshal for projects larger than 20,000 square feet in residential, mixed use, industrial or commercial zones. The plan shall address the major concerns associated with the terrain, dry conditions and limited access. The plan shall verify that the district has the appropriate equipment, training and personnel to respond to fires. If the local fire department or district does not have adequate rescue capability, the applicant shall provide a plan for providing such in case of an emergency.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11; Am. Ord. 1208, passed 12-9-14; Am. Ord. 1229, passed 2-28-17)


153.015 AUTHORIZATION OF SIMILAR USES.

(A) The city may authorize a use that is not specifically listed in a specific zone if the use is of the same general type as other uses permitted in the subject zone, unless the city finds the following:

(1) The proposed use is specifically permitted in another zone; or

(2) The proposed use is more similar to uses provided for in another zone; and

(3) That the permitting of the proposed use in the zone requested would be detrimental to the intent and purpose of the zone and this chapter in general. The city shall consider the following factors:

(a) Size, scale, configuration, bulk, and other characteristics of the requested use.

(b) Physical and operational similarity of the use to uses now allowed in the zone.

(c) Potential on-site and off-site impacts of allowing the use (traffic, noise, odors, etc.) as compared to uses now allowed in the zone.

(B) The application for and processing procedure for a similar use approval shall be as required by the use it is similar to.

(C) Similar uses that do not violate the nonconforming use criteria (§ 153.115) and are of equal or lesser impact with regard to water, sewer and traffic as determined by the Planning Director and City Engineer do not require a planning application. Sign off on a certificate of occupancy from the Building Department or a city business license may be required. See § 153.135 for transferability of a conditional use.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11; Am. Ord. 1208, passed 12-9-14)


153.016 MUNICIPAL SEWER AND WATER REQUIRED.

(A) Commercial and industrial development within the city limits requiring water and sewer service shall connect to the municipal water and sewer systems.

(B) Existing structures within the city limits shall connect to the municipal water and sewer services when made necessary by well and/or septic failure that is not recoverable and within the distance described by the state or the city’s sewer and water ordinances. A land division shall also require existing structures to connect when the size of a lot is reduced to a point where well and septic are not feasible or allowed by law.

(C) Approval of subdivisions and land partitions shall require municipal sewer and water service to each lot in accordance with the City’s Standards and Specifications unless specifically allowed by another section in this chapter. 

(D) Existing residences, replacement residences or single-family home construction on existing lots may use existing wells and septic fields. New wells and septic systems may be constructed if services are not within the distance described by state or the city’s sewer and water ordinances.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11; Am. Ord. 1208, passed 12-9-14)


153.017 PERMIT PROCESSING: OUTRIGHT, TYPE I AND II.

Uses set forth by this chapter may be classified as an outright use or a Type I or II conditional use. If the classification is not set forth and the use is not classified as a similar use by the Planning Director, all such uses shall be processed in accordance with the Type II processing requirements set forth hereinafter. Per § 153.254.020 any land use action may be referred to the Planning Commission by the Planning Director.

(A) Outright. Uses marked by an “O” in the city’s use tables. Outright uses are processed in four different ways as follows:

(1) Similar use. Outright uses that comply with similar use criteria in § 153.015.

(2) Counter review and sign off. The Planning Director has discretion on how to process outright uses that are considered inconsequential. The Director may choose to provide an over the counter review and sign off on a building permit with no application. A planning number shall be assigned with plans attached. A sign off worksheet may be developed for implementation. Developments considered inconsequential include, but are not limited to, the following:

(a) Small structures such as breeze ways, architectural projections, solar panels or covered patios and similar structures well within setback and lot coverage standards.

(b) Small structures considered insignificant to the use as a whole, such as small storage or utility buildings on large manufacturing sites. 

(3) Application without notice. As defined in § 153.250.020 the following uses when identified as outright in a zone are considered development actions and, therefore, not subject to the notice requirements: sign permits, single-family homes, duplexes, residential additions and accessory structures, boundary line adjustments, lot consolidations and similar applications. 

(4) Application with notice. The City Planning Official shall, within five working days of the receipt of a completed application for an outright use, provide individual written notice of the application in accordance with the administrative notice requirements of § 153.255. 

(B) Type I conditional use. Uses marked by a “T1” in the city’s use tables. The City Planning Official shall, within five working days of the receipt of a completed application for a Type I conditional use, provide individual written notice of the application in accordance with the administrative notice requirements of § 153.255. If no objection is received within the response period the Planning Official may take action on the subject proposal for approval, approval with amendments, modifications and/or conditions for denial or may refer the subject application to the Planning Commission for public hearing. If one or more objections are received within the response period, the subject application shall be referred to the Commission for public hearing. The applicant shall be required to pay any additional hearing fees prior to scheduling the public hearing.

(C) Type II conditional use. Uses marked by a “T2” in the city’s use tables. An application for a Type II conditional use shall be subject to review by the Planning Commission in accordance with the public hearing requirements of § 153.255. 

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11; Am. Ord. 1208, passed 12-9-14. Formerly 153.138)

Statutory reference:

Application for permit or zone change, see ORS 227.175

SITE AND BUILDING DESIGN REVIEW


153.020 SITE PLAN AND DESIGN REVIEW PROVISIONS.

(A) Purpose.

(1) The purpose of the design review provisions of this chapter is to ensure that development within the city complies with standards and limitations set forth within the applicable zoning regulations, other city standards and requirements, and with applicable county, state and federal regulations. It is also the intent of these provisions that some level of review be exercised regarding the aesthetics of developments for the goal of maintaining the desirable character and living quality of the community or of specific areas within the community. The overall community character and living quality is defined by the following: keeping buildings in scale; honoring the beauty and ecology of the city’s natural setting; and recognizing that historical and natural features are an integral part of the community’s overall character.

(2) This broad purpose is furthered by the following specific purposes of design review:

(a) To implement the goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan.

(b) To foster development that is designed, arranged and constructed in a manner that provides a safe, efficient and aesthetically pleasing community asset.

(c) To encourage originality and creativity in site design, architecture and landscape design.

(d) To ensure required public and site improvements and ensure that the arrangement of all functions, uses and improvements of a development reflect the natural amenities, capabilities and limitations of its site and adjacent areas.

(e) To encourage development where the various structures, use areas and site elements are integrated in a manner that is visually harmonious within the development and the surrounding area.

(f) To encourage development and landscape design that complements the natural landscape and setting, improves the general appearance of the community and enhances specific elements of the manmade environment, both presently and historically.

(B) Applicability. The following uses and developments shall be subject to the provisions of this section:

(1) All new development and changes of use. A building permit shall not be issued prior to approval by the city. Site clearance activities such as grading, excavation or filling shall not be permitted unless specifically allowed by the city prior to approval.

(C) Exemptions. The following are exempt from the site and building design review process:

(1) Single-family and two-family/duplex dwellings and their accessory structures.

(2) Outright uses existing on or before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

(3) Exterior remodeling and/or expansion of a use up to and not exceeding 25% of the total square footage (including upper floors) of all structures on a specific lot or parcel under unit ownership; however, it shall meet the site design evaluation criteria in subsection (G)(2) of this section.

(4) Changes of uses that occupy an existing building or site that is either similar to the previous use or of equal or lesser impact to the site with regard to water, sewer and traffic as determined by the Planning Director and City Engineer. A change of use application may be required to make this determination (converting a residence to a commercial use is always considered a greater impact). Conditional use procedures still apply for those applications that require it. As a conditional use, improvements may be required that are exempted in this section.

(5) Painting, replacement of roofing and siding, and other normal maintenance and upkeep requirements which are not subject to regulation under the provisions of this chapter or any other applicable city, county, state and/or federal regulations.

(6) Activities that are determined to comply with § 153.120, Exception - Minor repair/rehabilitation).

(D) Improvements required. Uses requiring a design review application shall be subject to public improvements and/or site improvements. Improvement requirements and standards are found in § 153.194 and the City’s Standards and Specifications. Public improvements and site improvements include but are not limited to the following:

(1) Streets. Right-of-way dedication, street extensions, sidewalks, access management. Double frontage lots may require improvements on both frontages.

(2) Utilities. Connection to municipal water and sewer and other utilities as necessary.

(3) Landscaping. Per standards set forth in § 153.087.

(4) Paved parking including access and maneuvering areas as set forth in §§ 153.085 and 153.086.

(5) Storm water drainage. Per the City’s Standards and Specifications.

(E) Design review authority. The authority for design review is set forth as follows:

(1) For those uses subject to design review and classified as outright or Type I conditional uses, the City Planning Official and/or the City Manager, and the City Superintendents of Streets and Public Works, the City Fire Chief and the City Police Chief shall be responsible for the design review thereof. As deemed necessary, the County’s Environmental Health Officer, as well as other agency and/or organizational representatives, may be requested to participate in the design review of specific use and/or development proposals. Any outright or Type I conditional use may be referred to the City Planning Commission based on neighbor concerns, or potential significant impact on the community as determined by the Planning Director in accordance with § 153.017 (permit processing).

(2) The City Planning Commission shall be responsible for the design review of all uses classified as Type II conditional uses as well as any outright use or Type I conditional use that is referred to the City Planning Commission by the Planning Director.

(F) Design review procedure. The following procedure shall be used in reviewing site and building design plans:

(1) Pre-application conference. Prior to applying for design review plan approval, applicants are encouraged to meet with the City Planning Official, City Engineer, and Superintendents of Streets and Public Works, or designees thereof, and present a preliminary plan which shall contain, in an approximate manner, the information required on a design review plan application.

(a) The purpose of the preliminary site plan review is to enable the applicant to obtain advice from the city as to the intent, standards, criteria and provisions of this section, this chapter, other city ordinances, standards and regulations, and state and federal rules and regulations which may be pertinent to the proposal.

(b) Information presented for preliminary discussion shall be considered confidential if so requested by the applicant.

(2) Consolidation of land use actions. Where a proposed use or development requires a variance, conditional use, partitioning, subdivision or other action which requires site plan or Planning Commission approval, the design review and applicable land use action by the respective reviewing authority may be combined into a single process.

(3) Application. A property owner or authorized representative thereof may initiate a request for design review plan approval by filing an application with the city using forms prescribed by the city together with the required filing fee. In addition to the application form, the applicant shall submit the following information:

(a) Requirements for information submitted. Information provided on the design review plan shall conform to the following:

1. Drawings depicting the proposal shall be presented on sheets not larger than 24 inches by 36 inches in the number of copies directed by the city, but in no case less than five.

2. To facilitate public reviews and notice, at least one copy of the proposal shall be provided on a sheet of paper not larger than 11 inches by 17 inches.

3. Drawings shall be at a scale sufficiently large enough to enable all features of the design to be clearly discerned.

4. The city may require that a digital copy of the drawing, development plan or other information be provided to the city in a format adaptable to the city’s computer systems.

(b) Site analysis diagram. If required by the reviewing authority, this element of the design review plan, which may be in schematic or free hand form to scale, shall indicate the following site characteristics:

1. Location and species of existing trees greater than six inches in diameter when measured four feet above the natural grade, and an indication of which trees are proposed to be removed.

2. On sites that contain steep slopes, potential geological hazards or unique natural features that may affect the proposed development, the city may require contours mapped at five-foot intervals.

3. Natural drainage ways, depths of any ground water tables less than 12 feet, any areas of surface water accumulations and any other significant natural features.

4. All buildings, roads, retaining walls, curb cuts and other manmade features, both existing and proposed.

5. Natural features, including trees, riparian habitat and stream channels and structures on site or on adjoining properties that have or may have a visual impact or other significant relationship with the site and the proposed development thereon.

(c) Site photographs. Photographs depicting the site and its relationship to adjoining sites and the general area may be required if deemed necessary by the reviewing authority.

(d) Site development plan. This element of the design review plan shall indicate the following:

1. Legal description of the property.

2. Boundary dimensions and site area.

3. Location of all existing and proposed structures, including distances from the property lines.

4. Area and percent of the site to be covered by structures, existing and proposed.

5. All external dimensions of existing and proposed buildings and structures.

6. Location of building entrances and exits.

7. Parking and circulation areas, including their dimensions.

8. Service areas, for such uses as the loading and delivery of goods.

9. Locations, descriptions and dimensions of any easements.

10. Grading and plans, including spot elevations and contours at five-foot intervals.

11. Location of areas to be landscaped, including existing trees and natural landscaping to be retained.

12. Outdoor recreation and/or play areas.

13. Pedestrian and bicycle circulation and amenities.

14. Location of mechanical equipment not enclosed within a building, garbage disposal areas, utility appurtenances and similar structures.

15. Exterior lighting.

16. Location, size and method of illumination of signs.

17. Provisions for ADA compliance.

18. Other site elements which will assist in the evaluation of site development.

19. Location, names, surface and right-of-way widths and improvement standards of all existing and proposed streets within or adjacent to the proposed development.

(e) Accompanying written summary. In addition to the foregoing site development plan requirements, a written summary of the proposal shall be required showing the following (unless such is shown on the site development plan):

1. Commercial and nonresidential development.

a. The square footage contained in the site area to be developed.

b. The percentage of the area to be covered by structures when developed.

c. The percentage of the area to be covered by parking areas and the total number of parking spaces.

d. The total square footage of all landscaped areas, including the percentage consisting of natural materials and the percentage of hard surfaced areas such as courtyards.

2. Residential development.

a. The total square footage of the lot or parcel.

b. The total square footage of all structures in the development.

c. The number of dwelling units in the development.

d. Percentage of lot coverage by structures, parking/driveway areas, recreation areas and landscaping.

(f) Landscape plan. A landscape plan shall be submitted and shall indicate the following:

1. The size, species and locations of plant materials to be retained or placed on site.

2. The layout of irrigation facilities.

3. Location and design details of walkways, plazas, courtyards and similar areas.

4. Location, type and intensity of outdoor lighting.

5. Location and design details of proposed fencing, retaining walls and trash collection areas.

(g) Architectural drawings. This element of the design review plan, if required by the reviewing authority, shall indicate the following:

1. A plan specifying the building footprint and dimensions, including all points of access. Floor plans of interior spaces to the extent required to clarify access functions and the relationship of the spaces to decks, porches, balconies and stairs or other features shown on the building elevations. The floor plans shall be provided for all building floors and shall include appropriate dimensions.

2. Exterior elevations showing building heights, windows, doors, exterior light fixtures, stairways, balconies, decks and other architectural details. These elevations shall be provided for every exterior wall surface, including those which are completely or partially concealed from view by overlapping portions of the structure. Existing and finished grades at the center of all walls shall be shown with elevations of floors indicated and a dimension showing compliance with height limitations.

3. For any building proposed in any of the airport zones (AA, AO, AD, AC, AM and AR), exterior elevations shall include a description of the color and texture of finish materials and shall specifically identify any proposed reflective materials. Samples of the materials and color ranges of siding, roofing and trim may be required if deemed necessary by the Planning Director in order to review any potential safety hazards related to the airport operations. Any use within any airport zone shall be subject to review and approval of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).

4. Location and type of exterior light fixtures, including the lamp types and the levels of illumination that they provide.

5. Location, size and method of illumination of all exterior signs.

(h) Property survey. A survey of the property by a licensed land surveyor shall be required and shall clearly delineate property boundaries and show the location of the corners of proposed buildings and other significant features proposed for the site. The requirement for a survey of the exterior boundaries of a site may be waived where it is found that there is a recent survey that can be used to clearly establish the applicant’s property boundaries.

(4) Complete application. Upon receipt of an application for design review, the city shall review the application to ensure that it is complete. If the application is found to be incomplete, the applicant shall be provided with a description of the items required to complete it. The city shall not begin processing the application until found to be complete.

(5) Investigation and reports. As applicable, the City Planning Official, or a designee thereof, shall prepare a report to the applicable review authority on the conformance of the application with the pertinent zoning requirements. The report shall be available to the applicant at no cost and to the public, at a reasonable cost, seven days prior to the date set for the public hearing or review authority review.

(G) Design review criteria. To ensure that the stated purposes of the design review process are met the reviewing authority shall be governed by the following criteria as it evaluates and renders a decision on a proposal:

(1) Statement of intent.

(a) The design review criteria are intended to provide a frame of reference for the applicant in the development of a site, building and landscape plans, as well as providing the city with a means of reviewing proposed plans.

(b) These criteria are not intended to be inflexible requirements, nor are they intended to discourage creativity. The specification of one or more architectural styles is not intended by these criteria.

(c) The reviewing authority is not authorized as a part of the design review process to approve projects which exceed specific development standards set forth by the applicable zone unless the exceptions are approved in accordance with specific variance or other provisions set forth in this chapter.

(2) Site design evaluation criteria. A development shall make the most effective use possible of the site topography, existing landscaping and building placement so as to preserve existing trees and natural features, preserve vistas and other views from public ways, minimize visibility of parking, loading and storage areas from public ways and neighboring residential uses and to minimize intrusion into the character of existing developments and land uses in the immediate area. The following are additional criteria that shall be used in evaluating site development plans:

(a) The arrangement of all functions, uses and improvements has been designed so as to reflect and harmonize with the natural characteristics and limitations of the site and adjacent sites.

(b) In terms of setback from streets or sidewalks, the design creates a visually interesting and compatible relationship between the proposed structures and/or adjacent structures.

(c) The design incorporates existing features, such as streams, rocks, slopes, vegetation and the like (for example, making use of a small stream rather than placing it in a culvert).

(d) Where appropriate, the design relates or integrates the proposed landscaping/open space to the adjoining landscape/open space in order to create a pedestrian/bike pathway and/or open system that connects several properties or uses.

(e) The arrangement of the improvements on the site does not unreasonably degrade the scenic values of the community and the surrounding area in particular.

(f) Where appropriate, the design includes a parking and circulation system that encourages pedestrian and bicycle traffic.

(g) The design shall screen all storage, mechanical equipment, utilities and/or waste collection facilities from view, both from within and from outside the site.

(h) Any proposed building with a footprint over 40,000 square feet located in a commercial zone or a building with over 40,000 square feet of retail area in an industrial zone shall comply with the special requirements as specified in § 153.021.

(3) Landscape design evaluation criteria. The following criteria shall be used in evaluating landscape plans:

(a) The overall design substantially complements the natural environment of the city and the character of the site and the surrounding area.

(b) The design acknowledges the growing conditions for this climatic zone, and the unique requirements that its specific site location makes upon plant selection.

(c) Provision has been made for the survival and continuous maintenance of the landscape and its vegetation.

(d) The design contributes to the stabilization of slopes and the protection of other natural features and resources where applicable.

(e) The design delineates and separates use areas, where it is desirable to do so.

(H) Revision of plans. Construction documents (plans, drawings and specifications, etc.) shall conform to all aspects of the approved design review plan. Where circumstances, unknown or unforeseen at the time the plans are approved, make it undesirable or unfeasible to comply with some particular aspect of the approved plan, the applicant shall request in writing that the city review proposed modifications. The reviewing authority that originally approved the plans shall review the proposed modifications to determine whether they constitute a major or minor revision of the approved plans.

(1) Major modifications.

(a) Major modifications are those which result in a significant change in the initial plans. The following are examples of major modifications: changes in the siting of a building; modification of areas to be landscaped; and modifications to a plan element that was the subject of a design reviewing authority condition of approval.

(b) If the reviewing authority determines that the proposed change is a major modification, the proposed alteration shall be reviewed and processed in the same manner as the original application and as a new application.

(c) The fee shall be in accordance with the city’s fee schedule.

(2) Minor modifications.

(a) Minor modifications are those which result in an insignificant change in the initial plans. Examples are: limited dimensional or locational changes to building elements such as windows or doors; changes in building materials where only a limited area is affected; and substitution of landscape materials which does not affect the overall landscape design.

(b) If the city determines that the proposed change is a minor modification, the reviewing authority may proceed with the review of the plans; however, if the reviewing authority is different than the original reviewing authority, the original reviewing authority shall be notified of the proposed change and given an opportunity to comment relative thereto prior to final approval of such change.

(c) The fee shall be in accordance with minor modifications on the city’s fee schedule.

(I) Development in accordance with permit approval. Development, including any site grading or landscape removal activities, shall not commence until:

(1) The applicant has received all of the appropriate land use and development approvals (i.e., site development review approval), grading permits and building permits.

(2) The applicant has entered into an improvement agreement with the city (e.g., for phased developments and developments with required off-site public improvements), and required bonding or other assurances of site improvements have been submitted to the city.

(J) Phased development. Phasing of development plans may be requested at the time of application for site and building design review, subject to the following standards and procedures:

(1) Any phased development shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission.

(2) A proposed phasing plan shall be submitted with the site and building design review application. The Planning Commission may approve a time schedule for developing a site in phases, but in no case shall the total time for all phases be greater than five years without obtaining additional Planning Commission approval. In no case may the total time for all phases be greater than ten years without submitting a new application. The first phase of the project shall begin no later than 12 months from the date of city approval for site and building design review.

(3) Approval of a phased site development proposal requires satisfaction of the following criteria:

(a) The public facilities required to serve each phase are constructed in conjunction with or before each phase, or bonded at the discretion of the City Engineer.

(b) The phased development shall not result in requiring the city or other property owners to construct public facilities that are necessary to support the development proposal.

(c) An application for phasing may be approved after site and building design review approval as a modification to the approved plan, in accordance with § 153.259.030.

(d) Requests for phasing periods longer than five years shall include supportable analysis showing why such an extension is warranted.

(K) Bonding, assurances and occupancy. The city may require a bond or other assurance of required improvements pursuant to § 153.197. These improvements shall include all required public and private site improvements including required off-site improvements. An occupancy permit shall not be issued unless improvements are completed pursuant to § 153.198. Exceptions to occupancy may only be granted for circumstances necessitating delay of paving or landscape installation. If such an exception is granted, a bond or other assurance of improvement pursuant to § 153.197 shall apply.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11; Am. Ord. 1208, passed 12-9-14)


153.021 SPECIAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDINGS WITH A FOOTPRINT OVER 40,000 SQUARE FEET IN COMMERCIAL ZONES.

(A) Purpose. Improving the function and appearance of the community’s commercial areas is an important goal of the Prineville Comprehensive Plan. Programs, policies, and implementation strategies outlined in the Plan focus on the ways and means to improve the built environment in the key commercial areas like the downtown core, highway commercial areas and other commercial nodes throughout the city. Large buildings, defined in this section as those with footprints over 40,000 square feet, particularly have the potential to affect the character of the community. Specific goals of applying special design requirements to development of large buildings in commercial zones include the following:

(1) Implement development patterns that promote quality design, support economic development, and promote the plan of the City Council and its Comprehensive Plan policies in an efficient and effective manner.

(2) Encourage originality and creativity in site layout, architecture and landscape design.

(3) Encourage development that complements the surrounding natural and built environment, enhances the pedestrian environment, and improves the general appearance of the community.

(4) Encourage efficient use of land resources, mixed uses and human-scaled design while protecting public health, safety, and general welfare of the community.

(B) Applicability. Any development of a building with a footprint of over 40,000 square feet which is located in one of the city’s commercial zones or a building with over 40,000 square feet of retail sales area in one of the city’s industrial zones shall be processed as a Type II conditional use and shall be subject to conditional use criteria as well as the following special design requirements:

(1) A building or buildings with abutting walls constructed at one time that cover multiple lots shall be considered a single building for the purposes of this section.

(2) Separate buildings with abutting walls constructed independently of one another at different times shall not be considered a single building as long as each building is under separate ownership, each is on its own lot and there are no internal access points between buildings.

(3) Any proposed addition to a building which is already in excess of 40,000 square feet or would become so with the addition shall be subject to these standards if it is visible from a public street. Any such addition which is visible from a public street and represents 25% or more of the original square footage of the building shall require the entire building to be improved to these standards.

(4) In the case where an addition is proposed to a building that has an abutting wall with a building on another legal lot under separate ownership, the building shall be treated as a stand-alone building for the purposes of applying design review standards.

(5) If it appears that an applicant is trying to avoid the design review criteria in this section by constructing abutting buildings under separate applications, the Planning Commission may review the proposals and determine whether the proposed buildings should be treated as separate developments or as a single development in applying the standards of this section.

(C) Exceptions. Buildings that are listed in the Inventory of Historic Sites within the Prineville Comprehensive Plan, or buildings designated on the Historic National Landmarks register are exempt from these special design requirements. Buildings located within the Crook County Fairground site shall also be exempt from these special design requirements. The Planning Commission may waive any specific requirement of this section based on the finding that a proposal meets the intent of the criteria.

(D) Special design requirements for buildings with a footprint of over 40,000 square feet.

(1) In regard to any wall visible from a public street, buildings shall incorporate a minimum of five types of architectural features from the list below or other features as approved by the reviewing authority. Such architectural features shall be incorporated, at a minimum, along 80% of the horizontal facade.

(a) Recesses.

(b) Projections.

(c) Columns.

(d) Bands.

(e) Wall insets.

(f) Balconies.

(g) Arcades.

(h) Awnings.

(i) Building projection.

(j) Window display areas.

(k) Landscape structures or planter boxes.

(l) Decorative light fixtures.

(2) In the C-2 and C-5 Zones, any exterior wall with a public entrance shall be designed with windows totaling a minimum 10% of the first floor wall area, unless restricted by the current Building or Energy Code. In the C-1, C-3 and C-5 Zones, any exterior wall facing a public street shall be designed with windows totaling a minimum of 35% of the first floor wall area. In the case of a single story building, the first floor shall be considered the wall area below the lowest point of the roof line or the area below 16 feet in height, whichever is less.

(3) Buildings shall incorporate clearly defined, highly visible customer entrances using features such as bay and transom windows, canopies, porticos, arcades, arches, wing walls, integral planters, and patio/seating areas.

(4) Buildings with exterior walls and/or roof lines greater than 35 feet in horizontal length shall be constructed utilizing a combination of architectural features and variety of building materials to break up the vertical and/or horizontal span(s). See subsection (D)(1) of this section for a list of architectural features.

(5) Architectural methods shall be used to conceal flat rooftops; however, a maximum of 30% of the building elevations visible from the adjacent right-of-way may include flat roof components.

(6) Building materials such as smooth-faced concrete block, undecorated tilt-up concrete panels, or pre-fabricated steel panels may only be used as accents and not dominate the building exterior of the structure unless the mass of the building is broken up into various facades with varied articulation. Metal roofs may be allowed only if compatible with the overall architectural design of the building or hidden by parapets.

(7) Fluorescent, neon, metallic and excessively bright or other high intensity paint colors shall be prohibited on any building subject to this section. Any proposed wall mural not included as approved signage is subject to review and approval by the Prineville City Council.

(8) The following landscape requirements shall be installed in accordance with the landscaping requirements set forth in § 153.087:

(a) A minimum of 15% of the total area shall be landscaped. Such landscaping shall consist of a mix of trees, shrubs and/or ground cover plants distributed throughout. At a minimum, one tree per ten parking spaces total shall be planted within the parking areas. All landscaped areas for trees shall have minimum dimensions of four feet by four feet to ensure adequate soil, water, and space for healthy tree growth.

(b) A minimum ten-foot landscaped buffer strip, not including right-of-way, shall be required along any adjacent right-of-way or adjacent residentially zoned property. The C-1 Downtown Zone is exempt from this buffer standard.

(c) A five-foot landscaped buffer strip shall be required along any other property line, with the exception of approved cross access points into adjacent properties.

(d) Buffer strips required in subsections (D)(8)(b) and (c) of this section shall incorporate at least one tree for every 25 feet of street frontage as well as shrubs and plantings to achieve a minimum of 50% vegetative coverage. All plant materials shall be installed in accordance with the landscaping requirements set forth in § 153.087.

(e) All loading/delivery areas shall be entirely screened from view from any adjacent public street or neighboring residentially zoned property.

(9) Pedestrian circulation shall be clearly defined by sidewalks, alternate raised materials, and/or painted crosswalks to ensure safe pedestrian circulation from all points of the parking area to the building entrance(s). Pedestrian access shall be provided from public sidewalks adjacent to the site to building entrances via the shortest, most direct route.

(10) The site shall be designed to ensure adequate visibility and lighting for safety and monitoring of the site. Access points and internal circulation shall be designed sufficiently to allow entrance onto and maneuvering within the site for emergency and delivery vehicles.

(11) All mechanical units, including those located on the roof of a structure, trash enclosures and outdoor storage areas shall be completely screened from public view. Screening materials shall be consistent with the primary architectural style of the building.

(12) All primary drive aisles for entering the site shall include designated bicycle lanes on each side of at least four feet in width. The site shall have at least one covered, securable bicycle parking facility with a minimum of one bicycle space for every 25 parking spaces.

(13) Special amenities required. Buildings with a footprint greater than 40,000 square feet shall provide at least three of the pedestrian amenities listed below. Additional amenities may be proposed by the applicant which may also satisfy these requirements, subject to approval of the review body.

(a) A plaza, courtyard, square, or extra-wide sidewalk with an unobstructed minimum width of eight feet next to the building entrance.

(b) Sitting space (i.e., dining area, benches or ledges) between the building entrance and sidewalk.

(c) Building canopy, awning, pergola, arcade, or similar weather protection with a minimum projection of five feet from the building over a sidewalk or other pedestrian space.

(d) Public art (e.g., fountain, sculpture, etc.) or wall decoration (e.g., wall mural, art display case/window, etc.).

(e) Other amenity as approved by the reviewing body.

(14) Signage. Monument or ground mounted signs and wall signs, including projecting signs, are permitted subject to the requirements of this section and City Sign Code regulations (Chapter 152), with the following restrictions:

(a) Pole signs are prohibited in all commercial zones. Existing pole signs may be utilized but may not be moved or replaced, nor may the existing sign area be increased.

(b) Flashing lights or flashing signage is not permitted unless using neutral tones of liquid crystal devices (LCDs) to express time, date and temperature. Such devices shall not exceed 20% of the allowable sign area, and in no circumstance shall they interfere with traffic control devices as determined by the City Engineer and/or Police Chief. Publicly owned community events signs and any signs erected in conjunction with an operation related to public safety are exempt from this restriction.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)

CLASSIFICATION OF ZONES


153.030 CLASSIFICATION OF ZONES.

For the purposes of this chapter, the City of Prineville and the applicable Urban Growth Boundary (UGB) area are divided into zones designated as follows:

	Section	Zone Title	Abbreviated Designation

	153.045	Limited Residential	R-1

	153.046	General Residential	R-2

	153.047	Low Density Residential	R-3

	153.048	Residential Redevelopment	R-4

	153.049	High Density Residential	R-5

	153.050	Central Commercial	C-1

	153.051	General Commercial	C-2

	153.052	Professional Commercial	C-3

	153.053	Neighborhood Commercial	C-4

	153.054	Recreation Commercial	C-5

	153.060	Light Industrial	M-1

	153.061	Heavy Industrial	M-2

	153.062	Industrial Park	IP

	153.063	Mixed Use	MU

	153.070	Airport General Criteria	 

	153.071	Airport Specific Zones	 

	153.075	Open Space-Park Reserve	PR

	153.076	Natural Features Overlay District (Chapter 155)	 

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.031 LOCATION OF ZONES.

(A) The boundaries of the zones established and classified by this chapter are as indicated and set forth on the map entitled "Zoning - City of Prineville" dated May 24, 2011, which is hereby adopted by reference as though set forth in full herein. The designations and boundaries of zones may be modified in accordance with Zoning Map amendments adopted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter which shall also be adopted by reference.

(B) The City of Prineville’s first Comprehensive Plan was adopted on April 10, 2007, by Ordinance 1143. The map entitled "Adopted City Comprehensive Plan 2007" is adopted by reference and was based on Crook County’s 1984 Comprehensive Plan Map as amended and expanded to meet the current UGB and zoning at that time. The designations and boundaries of zones may be modified in accordance with Comprehensive Plan Map amendments adopted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter which shall also be adopted by reference.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11; Am. Ord. 1229, passed 2-28-17)


153.032 ZONING MAP AND AMENDMENTS.

A Zoning Map or Zoning Map amendment adopted by § 153.230 et seq., or by an amendment thereto, shall be prepared by authority of the City Planning Commission and the City Council, or as may otherwise be provided for by the Urban Growth Management Agreement adopted by the city and the county. The Map or Map amendments shall be dated with the effective date of the adoption thereof by the jurisdiction designated by the UGM agreement, and shall be signed by the respective highest elected official and attested to by the respective planning official of the jurisdiction. The signed original, together with a copy thereof, shall be maintained on file in the offices of the City Planning Official, the City Recorder, the County Planning Official and the County Clerk.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.033 ZONE BOUNDARIES.

Unless otherwise specified, zone boundaries are section lines, subdivision lines, lot lines, centerlines of streets and other rights-of-way or utilities, watercourses, ridges or rimrocks, contour lines or such lines extended. Whenever uncertainty exists as to the exact boundary of a zone as shown on the Zoning Map(s) or amendments thereto, the following provisions shall control:

(A) Where a boundary line is indicated as following a street, alley, canal or railroad right-of-way, it shall be construed as following the centerline of the right-of-way.

(B) Where a boundary line follows or approximately coincides with a section line or division thereof, lot or property ownership line, public utility easement, watercourse, ridge or rimrock or contour line, it shall be construed as following the line.

(C) If a zone boundary, as shown on the Zoning Map, divides a lot or parcel between two zones, the entire lot or parcel may be determined to be in the zone in which the greater area of the lot or parcel lies unless there is a specific statement set forth by this chapter or on the applicable Zoning Map as to the exact location of the boundary line, and if the adjustment is in compliance with the Comprehensive Plan use designation for the area.

(D) Where a public street, alley, canal or railroad right-of-way is officially vacated, the zoning regulations applicable to the abutting property on each side of the centerline of the right-of-way shall apply up to the centerline of the right-of-way as such existed prior to vacation on each respective side hereof. If the right-of-way is vacated in total to one property owner, the zoning of that abutting property shall apply to the total vacated property.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.034 ZONING OF ANNEXED AREAS.

An area annexed to the city shall, upon annexation, assume the zoning classification determined by the city to be in compliance with the Comprehensive Plan and/or the City/County Urban Growth Management Agreement. The determination shall be made by the City Council upon receipt of a recommendation relative thereto from the City Planning Commission.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)

ZONING TABLES


153.035 RESIDENTIAL USE TABLE.

 

	Use Classifications	R-1	R-2	R-3	R-4	R-5	Comments:

	EXISTING USES

	Expansion of existing public use	O	O	O	O	O	 

	Replacement of an existing dwelling	O	O	O	O	O	 

	Expansion of an existing conditional use	T1	T1	T1	T1	T1	 

	RESIDENTIAL/ACCESSORY USES

	Child care home	O	O	O	O	O	 

	Single-family dwelling, excluding manufactured dwellings	O	O	O	O	O	 

	Single-family dwelling, including double and multi-sectional manufactured home with carport or garage	 	O	O	O	 	153.095

	Manufactured dwellings in an approved manufactured dwelling park including single-section manufactured homes	 	O	 	O	 	153.095

	Two-family dwelling or duplex	 	O	 	O	O	153.084

	Triplex or fourplex, including condominiums, apartments or townhouses	 	T1	 	O	O	153.084

	Townhouse multiplex	 	 	 	 	O	153.084

	Multifamily dwelling or complex of 5 to 10 units	 	T1	 	T1	O	153.083(H)

	Multifamily dwelling or complex, of more than 10 dwelling units	 	T2	 	T2	O	153.083(H)

	Accessory structure	O	O	O	O	O	See definition

	Guest house	T1	T1	T1	T1	O	 

	Accessory dwelling	T1	T1	T1	T1	O	153.080

	Manufactured dwelling park	 	T2	 	T2	 	153.083(F)

	Home occupation - Only employees of the immediate resident family, limited retail sales	T1	T1	T1	T1	T1	153.083(E)

	(RV) Recreational vehicle park, public or private	 	T2	 	 	 	153.083(J)

	PUBLIC/SEMI-PUBLIC/NONPROFIT USES

	Houses of worship, including buildings and accessory uses essential to the operation thereof	T2	T2	T2	T2	 	153.083(O)

	Public or private school, including buildings and other uses essential to the operation thereof	 	T2	T2	T2	 	 

	Publicly or privately owned kindergarten or preschool, provided the residential character of the area is maintained	T2	T1	 	T1	T1	 

	Park, public or private for less intensive uses including picnic area, playground, and grass covered play areas, not including a recreation facility	T1	T1	T1	T1	T1	 

	Recreation facility (nonprofit or publicly owned)	T2	T2	T2	T2	T2	 

	Other government structure or land use not limited to a public park, playground, recreation building, fire station, library or museum	T2	T2	T2	T2	T2	 

	Community building or use owned and operated by a public or nonprofit agency or organization	T2	T2	T2	T2	T2	 

	Bikeways, footpaths and recreation trails	O	O	O	O	O	 

	COMMERCIAL USES

	Child care center	T2	T1	 	T1	T1	 

	Residential home/adult foster home (care for 5 or fewer individuals)	O	O	O	O	O	153.083(A)

	Residential facility (6 - 15 individuals)	T2	T2	T1	T1	O	153.083(A)

	Bed and breakfast facility in an existing residence	 	T1	 	T1	T1	153.083(C)

	Nursing home, convalescent home, retirement home or elderly assisted living complex	T2	T2	T2	T1	T1	153.083(O)

	Hospital and other medical service facilities	T2	T2	T2	T2	T2	 

	Golf course and other open land recreational use, but excluding intensive commercial amusement uses such as automobile or motorcycle race tracks or amusement parks	 	 	T2	 	 	 

	Convenience store or neighborhood market of not more than 2,500 square feet of floor space	 	T2	T2	T2	T2	 

	Residentially oriented service businesses such as laundries, carpet/upholstery cleaning, home appliance repair, wellness activities, beauty and barber shops and similar uses of not more than 1,200 square feet each	 	T2	T2	T2	T2	 

	Any combination of the above uses up to a total floor area of 5,000 square feet	 	T2	T2	T2	T2	 

	Professional commercial uses, such as offices for accountants, bookkeepers, attorneys, engineers, architects, doctors, dentists, real estate and insurance and medical or dental clinics	 	T2	T2	T2	T2	153.083(S)

	Crop cultivation or farm and truck gardens, including plant nurseries and on-premises sales of farm products grown on site	 	T1	T1	 	 	 

	LAND DIVISION PROCESSES

	Land partition minor (no new roads)	O	O	O	O	O	153.160

	Land partition major (new road)	T1	T1	T1	T1	T1	153.160

	Subdivisions (4 or more lots)	T2	T2	T2	T2	T2	153.157

	Duplex lots (attached)	 	O	O	O	O	153.084(C)

	Townhouse lots (attached), 3 - 4 attached units	 	T1	 	O	O	153.084

	Townhouse lots (attached), 5 - 10 attached units	 	T2	 	T2	O	153.084

	Townhouse lots (attached), more than 10 attached units	 	T2	 	T2	O	153.084

	PUBLIC FACILITIES/UTILITIES

	Maintenance, replacement, improvement of existing public facilities or services	O	O	O	O	O	 

	Utility facility (major) see definition	T2	T2	T2	T2	T2	153.083(I) and (L)

	Utility facility (minor) see definition	T1	T1	T1	T1	T1	153.083(I) and (L)

	Utility facility (exempt) see definition	O	O	O	O	O	153.083(I) and (L)

	Utility towers	T2	T2	T2	T2	 	153.083(I) and (L)

	Utility towers (co-location)	O	O	O	O	O	153.083(I) and (L)

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11; Am. Ord. 1208, passed 12-9-14; Am. Ord. 1229, passed 2-28-17)


153.036 RESIDENTIAL DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS.

 

	 	R-1	R-2	R-3	R-4	R-5

	Limited	General	Low Density	Redevelopment	High Density

	Minimum lot area (public water and sewer required)1, 2

	Single-family dwelling	6,500 sf	5,000 sf	10,000 sf	4,000 sf	Zone standards

	Two-family dwelling	N/A	7,500 sf	N/A	6,500 sf	Zone standards

	Duplex lot (not for density purposes)	N/A	3,750 sf	N/A	3,250 sf	Zone standards

	Triplex	N/A	9,000 sf	N/A	8,000 sf	Zone standards

	Fourplex	N/A	10,500 sf	N/A	9,500 sf	Zone standards

	Additional area for each unit over 4	N/A	+1,500 sf	N/A	+1,250 sf	Zone standards

	Townhouse lot (not for density purposes)	N/A	3,000 sf	N/A	2,500 sf	Zone standards

	Townhouse multiplex lot (not for density purposes)	N/A	N/A	N/A	N/A	Zone standards

	Nonresidential uses	N/A	Based on requirements of use and preservation of residential character of neighborhood	N/A	Based on requirements of use and preservation of residential character of neighborhood	Zone standards

	Minimum net density for subdivision3	3/acre	4/acre	2/acre	6/acre	12/acre

	Maximum net density for land division	Calculated based on "net density" definition

	 

	Minimum lot area (no public water or sewer available)4

	Single-family dwelling	N/A	As required	As required	As required	N/A

	

	Minimum Setbacks (ft.): See § 153.117 for exceptions to setbacks.

	Front yard (local street)	10	10	10	10	0

	Front yard (collector or arterial)5	10	10	10	10	0

	Carport/garage entrance to public street/alley	20	20	20	20	20

	Carport/garage entrance to public sidewalk	25	25	25	25	25

	Side yard	5	5	5	5	0/5

	Side yard corner lot (street side)	10	10	10	10	0

	Side yard multi-story attached homes	10	10	10	10	0/5

	Rear yard	10	10	10	5	0/207

	Rear yard corner lot	5	5	5	5	0/207

	Rear yard adjacent to alley	10	5	5	5	0

	Accessory (no building permit)	3	3	3	3	3

	Projections into setback6	2	2	2	2	2

	 

	Minimum Street Frontage (ft.): See § 153.191(C) for exceptions.

	Standard street	50	50	100	40	Zone standards

	Cul-de-sac	35	35	50	35	Zone standards

	Duplex lot (each)	25	25	N/A	25	Zone standards

	Flag lot	N/A	20	N/A	20	20

	Townhouse lots	N/A	As approved	N/A	As approved	Zone standards

	 

	Maximum Building Coverage (%): Open air covered porches are excluded from lot coverage.

	All buildings (percentage of lot)8	30%	35%	30%	35% (40% replacing dilapidated structure)	Determined by parking, landscaping, drainage

	 

	Maximum Height (ft.): Measured to the highest point from the natural grade, grade is averaged on sloped properties.

	All buildings	30 ft.	35 ft.	35 ft.	35 ft.	Design approval above 35 ft.

	Multifamily/townhomes (side and rear setbacks)	N/A	Additional 1 ft. setback for every 1 ft. above 25 ft.	N/A	Additional 1 ft. setback for every 1 ft. above 25 ft.	Determined by adjacent use

	Exceptions to height limit	Hospitals, churches and public schools may be increased to 45 ft.	Hospitals, churches and public schools may be increased to 45 ft.	Hospitals, churches and public schools may be increased to 45 ft.	Hospitals, churches and public schools may be increased to 45 ft.	Adjacent to street or commercial zone 45 ft.

	Clear vision - street intersection (measured from curb)	25 ft.	25 ft.	25 ft.	25 ft.	25 ft.

	Clear vision - alley or pedestrian path (measured from curb or edge)	15 ft.	15 ft.	15 ft.	15 ft.	15 ft.

1    Must have public water and sewer in R-1, R-2, R-4 and R-5 Zones but may be community system(s) in R-3 Zone.

2    Unless classified as a multifamily dwelling complex, minimum lot area shall be calculated as the cumulative total square footage required for each type of building on the site.

3    The city may grant an exception to the minimum density standards based on site specific issues that make such density infeasible such as: steep slopes, floodplain, and wetlands.

4    As necessary to comply with approved sewage disposal system. (Existing lots only)

5    Plus that which is necessary to meet street and sidewalk right-of-way standards.

6    May project two feet into a setback provided the projection is not closer than three feet to a property line.

7    If the rear property line is adjacent to a residential zone, the setback is 20 feet.

8    The calculation for lot coverage excludes up to 500 square feet of a garage or attached carport.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11; Am. Ord. 1229, passed 2-28-17)


153.037 COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL USE TABLE.

 

	Storage codes	 

	No outdoor storage unless otherwise noted.	Staging for daily pickup and drop off of equipment and materials permitted.

	1 Screened outside storage:	Structural, sight-obscuring fence, or vegetation shall be required.

	2 Open outside storage:	Screening may be required during approval process.

	Use Classifications	C-1	C-2	C-3	C-4	C-5	M-1	M-2	IP	Comments:

	Existing Uses	Similar uses are allowed and processed as the similar use; unless specifically stated in another zone.

	Expansion of existing public use	O	O	O	O	O	O	O	O	 

	Replacement of an existing dwelling	O	O	O	O	O	O	O	O	 

	Expansion of an approved conditional use	T1	T1	T1	T1	T1	T1	T1	T1	 

	Residential Uses/Accessory Uses

	Bed and breakfast facility (in an existing dwelling)	O	O	T1	 	O	 	 	 	153.083(C)

	Boarding, lodging, rooming house or homeless shelter	T2	T2	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Child care home (in an existing dwelling)	O	O	O	O	O	O	O	O	 

	Nursing home (elderly assisted housing)	 	T2	 	 	 	 	 	 	153.083(O)

	Home occupation	O	O	O	O	O	O	O	 	153.083(E)

	Multifamily dwelling complexes of more than four units	T2	T2	 	 	 	 	 	 	153.083(H)

	Resumption or replacement of a residential use where the subject use has previously been conducted and the structure has not been removed for a period of more than one year	O	O	O	O	O	O	O	 	 

	Residential use above commercial ground floor	T1	T1	T1	T1	T1	 	 	 	 

	Residential use above commercial ground floor (with off-street parking)	O	O	O	O	O	 	 	 	 

	Residential use on ground floor < 30%	T1	T1	T1	T1	T1	 	 	 	Not in front of building, in conjunction with commercial use

	Residence, including a modular or manufactured home for a caretaker or night watchman on property with an existing industrial or commercial use permitted in this zone, or for the owner/operator of the use	 	T1	 	 	 	O	O	 	153.095

	Residential care facility	T2	T1	T1	 	 	 	 	 	153.083(A)

	Residential care home	T1	T1	 	 	 	 	 	 	153.083(A)

	(RV) Recreational vehicle park, public or private	 	T2	 	 	T2	 	 	 	153.083(J)

	Single-family dwelling, including double and multi-sectional manufactured home	T2	T2	T1	 	 	 	 	 	153.083(T) and 153.095

	Two-family dwelling units, triplexes and fourplexes	T2	T2	T1	 	 	 	 	 	153.083(T)

	Temporary manufactured home or RV during construction	O	O	O	O	O	O	O	O	153.095(D)

	Public and Semi-Public Uses

	Bikeways, footpaths, and recreation trails	O	O	O	O	O	O	O	O	 

	Houses of worship	T2	O	 	 	 	 	 	 	Including accessory buildings

	Convention center	 	T2	 	 	T2	 	 	 	153.083(R)

	Hospital	T2	T2	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Lodge, club, nonprofit, fraternal organization, senior center	T2	T2	 	 	T2	T1	 	 	 

	Park, public or private	T1	T1	T1	 	T1	T1	T1	T1	 

	Recreational facility, public	T2	T2	T2	T2	T2	T2	T2	T2	 

	Parking garage, public or private	T2	T2	T2	T2	T2	T2	T2	T2	 

	Public transportation station	T1	T2	T2	 	O	O	O	O	 

	Public or private parking facilities	T1	T2	T2	 	O	 	O	 	 

	Public or private freight depot	 	T2	 	 	 	 	O	 	 

	Preschool/kindergarten	T1	O	O	O	T1	 	 	 	 

	Schools, public or private	T2	T2	 	 	T2	 	 	 	Including accessory buildings

	Trade or technical school	T2	T2	 	 	T2	 	 	O	Including accessory buildings

	Government structures such as fire or other emergency service station, armories, maintenance or storage facilities and other uses not specifically listed in another section	T2	T2	T2	T2	T2	T2	T2	T2	Public offices, libraries, and museums permitted elsewhere

	Public office, library or museum	T2	T2	T2	 	T2	 	 	 	 

	Eating and Drinking

	Bakery (retail/sit-down)	O	O	 	O	O	 	 	 	Limited wholesale allowed in conjunction with retail use

	Bar, lounge, tavern, nightclub, brew pub - with restaurant	T2	T2	 	 	T2	 	 	 	 

	Bar, lounge, tavern, nightclub, brew pub	T2	T2	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Cafe, restaurant (sit-down), diner	O	O	 	O	O	 	 	 	Deli’s listed under retail

	Cafe, restaurant, espresso (drive-through)	 	O	 	T2	T1	 	 	 	 

	Cafeterias, employee lounge, dining rooms common to a permitted use	 	O	 	 	 	O	O	O	 

	Entertainment

	Amusement park	 	O	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Arena for sporting events (indoor)	 	T2	 	 	T2	 	 	 	153.083(R)

	Arena for sporting events (outdoor)	 	T2	 	 	T2	 	 	 	153.083(R)

	Driving range	 	 	 	 	O	 	 	 	 

	Fairgrounds	 	 	 	 	O	 	 	 	 

	Golf course	 	 	 	 	O	 	 	 	 

	Indoor commercial recreation	T1	O	 	 	O	 	 	 	 

	Outdoor commercial recreation	T2	T1	 	 	T1	 	 	 	 

	Movie theater/performing arts (walk-in)	O	O	 	 	T1	 	 	 	 



 

	Use Classifications	C-1	C-2	C-3	C-4	C-5	M-1	M-2	IP	Comments:

	Drive-in theater, outdoor amphitheater	 	 	 	 	T1	 	 	 	 

	Indoor and outdoor recreational facilities for employees accessory to the primary use	 	 	 	 	 	O	O	O	 

	Automobiles, Trucks, RVs

	Auto detailing	 	O1	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Auto painting, auto body work	 	T11	 	 	 	O1	O1	 	 

	Auto repair	 	O1	 	 	 	O1	O1	O1	Screened on-site auto storage.

	Auto rentals	 	O	 	 	O	 	 	 	 

	Auto sales (new and used)	 	O	 	 	 	O	O	T1	 

	Auto service station (may include accessory convenience store and car wash)	 	O	 	T1	T2	O	O	T1	Generally same day service, includes minor repairs.

	Car wash	 	T1	 	 	 	O	 	 	 

	Card lock gas station	 	 	 	 	 	 	O	T1	 

	Tire sales and service	 	O1	 	 	 	 	O1	O	 

	Truck stop (may include accessory convenience store, car wash and cafe)	 	 	 	 	 	O	O	T1	 

	Recreational vehicle sales, service, rental and repair	 	O1	 	 	T2	O1	O1	T1	 

	Recreational vehicle storage facility	 	T1, T21	 	 	 	O1	O1	O1	 

	Semi-truck parking and staging	 	O	 	 	 	 	O	 	 

	Vehicle storage	 	 	 	 	 	 	O1	 	 

	Vehicle towing/impound yard	 	T21	 	 	 	T21	O1	 	153.083(U)

	Industrial Related Uses

	Accessory use in support of primary industrial use	 	 	 	 	 	O	O	O	 

	Agricultural products storage and processing including fertilizer and chemical operations	 	 	 	 	 	T1, T21	T11	T21	 

	Aircraft service, maintenance	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Auto wrecking, auto recycling	 	T21	 	 	 	T11	T11	 	153.083(B)

	Bakery, wholesale distribution	 	 	 	 	 	O	O	O	 

	Batch plants (asphalt, concrete)	 	 	 	 	 	T21	T21	 	 

	Concrete and concrete products, stone cutting	 	 	 	 	 	T21	T11, T22	 	 

	Concrete and concrete products, stone cutting (no raw materials)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	T22	No processing of raw materials on site.

	Data center	 	 	 	 	 	O	T2	O	See 153.004, Definitions

	Dump, landfill	 	 	 	 	 	 	T21	 	153.083(P)

	Farming, commercial use associated with farming	 	 	 	 	 	O	O	 	 

	Junkyard	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	153.083(B)

	Landscape supply (bulk)	 	 	 	 	 	O1	O1	 	Outdoor storage of bulk landscaping material

	Laundry (industrial)	 	 	 	 	 	O	O1	O2	Not walk-in household laundry

	Laboratory for research (nonhazardous)	 	T2	 	 	 	O	O	O	 

	Livestock feed lot or sales yard	 	 	 	 	 	 	T11, T21	 	 

	Lumber mill	 	 	 	 	 	O1	O2	 	Manufacturing in enclosed building

	Manufacturing (commercial)	 	O1	 	 	 	 	 	O1	Light assembly support primary use

	Manufacturing (light industrial)	 	T1	 	 	 	O1	O1	O	Nontoxic, ex.: packaging, bottling, assembly, etc., subject to DEQ and area compatibility

	Manufacturing (heavy industrial)	 	 	 	 	 	 	O1	 	Large machinery, chemicals, raw materials, etc., subject to DEQ and area compatibility

	Chemicals including fertilizer, wet mix, acid	 	 	 	 	 	 	T2	 	 

	Cement, lime, gypsum plaster of paris	 	 	 	 	 	 	T2	 	 

	Explosives	 	 	 	 	 	 	T2	 	 

	Pulp and paper	 	 	 	 	 	 	T2	 	 

	Rendering plant and tannery	 	 	 	 	 	 	T2	 	 

	Machinery and heavy equipment sales and rental (including outside display)	 	T2	 	 	 	O1	O2	T1	 

	Machinery and heavy equipment service, repair	 	T2	 	 	 	O2	O2	T1	Equipment for delivery or pickup may have screened outside storage

	Machinery and heavy equipment storage	 	 	 	 	 	O2	O2	O	 

	Mining (surface or subsurface)	 	 	 	 	 	T21	T22	 	 

	Mining and processing of geothermal resources	 	 	 	 	 	T21	T22	 	 

	Fuel production, packaging, storage and distribution (including byproducts)	 	 	 	 	 	T21	T21	T21	 

	Precision machine shop	 	T1	 	 	 	O1	O1	O, T11	 

	Retail use in support of primary industrial use	 	 	 	 	 	O	O	O	 

	Recycling facility, transfer station	 	T21	 	 	 	T21	T11	T21	 

	Rock crushing/recycling	 	 	 	 	 	 	T12	 	 

	Slaughterhouse	 	 	 	 	 	 	T1, T21,2	 	 

	Taxidermy	 	O	 	 	 	O	T1	 	 

	Wholesale retail	 	O, T11	 	 	 	O1	O1	 	 

	Wholesale distribution and warehousing	 	 	 	 	 	O1	O1	O	 

	Wholesale printing, publishing and distribution	 	T1	 	 	 	O1	O2	O	 

	Wood product manufacturing and assembly	 	 	 	 	 	O1	O1	T1, T21,2	Manufacturing in enclosed building

	Office and Office Products

	Corporate or regional offices	O	O	 	 	 	 	 	O	 

	Office and office products	O	O	O	T2	 	 	 	 	Medical, attorney, real estate, etc.

	Office service and supply	O	O	O	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Offices related to or in support of permitted uses	 	 	 	 	 	O	O	O	 

	Office for real estate and insurance	O	O	O	T2	O	 	 	 	 

	Office for product design, packaging, sales and service	 	O	 	 	 	 	 	O	 

	Telemarketing, call center	 	 	 	 	 	O	 	T1	 

	Temporary mobile or RV during construction	O	O	O	O	O	O	O	O	No planning permit required

	Retail Uses

	Antique store	T1	O	 	 	 	 	 	 	Not general secondhand or pawn shop, no community drop off

	Bicycle sales and service	O	O	 	 	O	 	 	 	 

	Bulky retail (including furniture)	O	O, T11	 	 	 	O	 	O, T11	 

	Building supplies	 	O1	 	T1	 	O1	O2	O	 

	Convenience store	T2	O	 	O	O	 	 	 	 

	Delicatessen	O	O	 	O	O	 	 	 	 

	Drug store, pharmacy (excluding drive-through)	O	O	 	O	 	 	 	 	 

	Drug store, pharmacy (including drive-through)	 	O	 	O	 	 	 	 	 

	Equipment sales, service and rental	 	O1	 	 	 	O1	O1	 	Excludes heavy equipment

	Farm, feed or garden supply	 	O1	 	T11	O, T11	O1	O2	T11	 

	Florist (excluding nursery and greenhouse)	O	O	 	O	 	 	 	 	 

	Florist (including nursery and greenhouse)	 	T1	 	 	O	O	 	O	 

	Gallery studio	O	O	O	O	O	 	 	 	Art, photo, interior decorator

	General retail	O	O	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Gift/card shop	O	O	O	O	O	 	 	 	 

	Grocery store, market	O	O	 	O	O	 	 	 	 

	Hardware store	O	O	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Medical supplies (retail)	O	O	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Mobile/manufactured home sales, service and assembly	 	T2	 	 	 	O1	 	T11, T22	 

	Novelty, specialty, variety store	O	O	O	O	 	 	 	 	Including music, art supply, electronics, sporting goods

	Specialty store related to recreation and tourism industry	O	O	 	O	O	 	 	 	 

	Outdoor merchandise display	O	O	 	O	O	O	O	O	Non-storage related; for retail sales

	Pet shop	O	O	 	T1	O	 	 	 	 

	Plant nursery	 	 	 	T11	 	T11	O2	 	 

	Retail complex	T2	T2	 	 	 	 	 	 	3 or more uses

	Roadside sale of farm products	 	 	 	O	 	 	 	 	 

	Secondhand store, pawn shop	T1	T1, T21	 	 	 	T11	 	 	See definition

	Transient merchants	O	O	O	O	O	O	O	O	See Chapter 110

	Video/movie rental and sales	O	O	 	O	O	 	 	 	 

	Service Commercial Uses

	Appliance and computer repair	T1	O	 	T1	 	 	 	 	Includes electronic equipment and residential appliances

	Bank, financial institution (including drive-through)	T2	O	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Bank, financial institution (excluding drive-through)	O	O	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Beauty and barber shops and salons	O	O	O	O	O	 	 	 	 

	Contractor yard	 	 	 	 	 	O1	O2	O, T11	Including outdoor storage of equipment and building supplies

	Child care center	T1	O	 	O	T1	 	 	 	 

	Dry cleaner (drop off only)	T1	O	O	O	 	 	 	 	 

	Dry cleaner (full service)	T1	O	T1	T1	T1	 	 	 	 

	Dance school or music studio	O	O	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Gym, fitness center spa	O	O	 	O	O	 	 	 	 

	Kennel	 	T1	 	 	 	O1	O1	O, T11	153.083(D)

	Laundromat	O	O	 	O	O	 	 	 	 

	Mini storage	 	O	 	 	 	O	O	O	Totally enclosed

	Mortuary, funeral home	T1	T1	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Mortuary, funeral home (with crematorium)	 	T2	 	 	 	T1	T1	 	 

	Motel, hotel	T2	O	 	 	T2	 	 	 	153.083(R)

	Printing, publishing, copying, photo processing (retail)	O	O	 	 	 	 	 	O	For general public

	Travel agency	O	O	O	 	O	 	 	 	 

	Veterinarian (no kennels)	T1	O	 	T1	O	 	 	 	Kennels totally enclosed for medical purposes allowed

	Veterinarian (including kennels)	 	T1	 	 	T1	O1	O1	O, T11	Must be together. 153.083(D)

	Land Division Processes

	Land partition minor (no new roads)	O	O	O	O	O	O	O	O	153.160

	Land partition major (new road)	T1	T1	T1	T1	T1	T1	T1	T1	153.160

	Subdivisions (4 or more lots)	T2	T2	T2	T2	T2	T2	T2	T2	153.157

	Public Facilities/Utilities

	Maintenance, replacement, improvement of existing public facilities or services	O	O	O	O	O	O	O	O	 

	Utility facility (major) see definition2	T2	T2	 	 	T2	T2	T2	T2	153.083(L)(I)

	Utility facility (minor) see definition2	T1	T1	T1	T1	T1	O	O	T1	153.083(L)(I)

	Utility facility (exempt) see definition2	O	O	O	O	O	O	O	O	153.083(L)(I)

	Utility towers (exceeding height limit of zone)2	 	T2	 	 	T2	T2	T2	T2	153.083(I), (L)

	Utility co-location	O	O	O	O	O	O	O	O	153.083(I), (L)

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11; Am. Ord. 1186, passed 12-13-11; Am. Ord. 1229, passed 2-28-17; Am. Ord. 1249, passed 11-27-18)


153.038 COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS.

 

	 	C-1	C-2	C-3	C-4	C-5	M-1	M-2	IP

	 	Downtown	General	Professional	Neighbor	Recreational	Light	Heavy	Ind. Park

	Minimum Setbacks (ft.):	See § 153.117 for exceptions to setbacks

	Front	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Local street	0A	0A	10	10A	10A	20	20	25I

	Collector	0A	0A	10	10A	10A	20	20	25I

	Arterial	0A	0A	10	10A	10A	20	20	50I

	Internal circulation road	0	0	0	 	 	 	 	10

	Interior side	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Standard	0	0	0	0	0	5B	5B	10I

	Adjacent to R Zone	10	10	10	15	5	20	25	20

	Street side	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Local street	0A	0A	10	10A	 	20	20	25I

	Collector	0A	0A	10	10A	10A	20	20	25I

	Arterial	0A	0A	10	10A	10A	20	20	50I

	Internal circulation road	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	10

	Rear	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Interior	0	0	0	0	0	5B	5B	10I

	Local street	0A	0A	10	10A	10A	20	20	25I

	Collector	0A	0A	10	10A	10A	20	20	25I

	Arterial	0A	0A	10	10A	10A	20	20	50I

	Internal circulation road	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	10

	Adjacent to R Zone	10	10	10	15	10	20	25	 

	Adjacent to alleyC	0	0	10	0	0	0	0	0

	Clear Vision (ft.):	See § 153.081 for more details.

	Street intersection (measured from curb)	25D	25	25D	25	25	25	25	25

	Alley or ped. path (measured from curb or edge)	15	15	15	15	15	15	15	15

	Landscaping (%):	See § 153.087 for detailed requirements.

	MinimumF	0	10	10	10	10	0G	0G	10H

	Building Height (ft.):	See § 153.118 for exceptions to height limits.

	MaximumE	45	35	35	30	50	50	50	45

	Minimum Street Frontage (ft.):	See § 153.191(C) for exceptions.

	Standard street	20	50	50	50	50	50	50	50

	Cul-de-sac	20	35	35	35	35	35	35	35

	Maximum Lot Coverage:	 

	Impervious surface	Determined by the ability to maintain drainage on site.

	Buildings	Determined by the ability to meet parking, landscaping, clear vision, drainage, Public Works standards and other applicable dimensional standards.

	Minimum Lot Size (sq. ft.):	 

	Commercial/industrial	Minimum lot size shall be determined on the basis of compliance with off-street parking, landscaping, those standards administered by Public Works and other applicable dimensional standards.

	Residential use	R-2	R-2	R-2	Adj. Zone	R-2	R-2	R-2	R-2

	Permitted Residential	R-2 std.	R-2 std.	R-2 std.	N/A	R-2 std.	N/A	N/A	N/A

	*All dimensional standards subject to Building and Fire Department structural standards.

A    Except that which may be needed to meet street and sidewalk right-of-way standards.

B    Unless buildings are attached or constructed as one building.

C    Subject to approval by Public Works and Engineering.

D    Unless otherwise approved by the reviewing or jurisdictional authority.

E    Building heights greater than standard shall be approved as a Type II conditional use.

F    May require landscaping around buildings, in parking areas, outdoor recreation areas and screening and buffering purposes.

G    Minimum five-foot buffer along any adjoining public right-of-way of a major collector or arterial street.

H    Twenty-five percent of the area within 100 feet of an arterial or major collector street, five-foot minimum along street.

I    Setbacks shall increase one foot for every foot of structural height over 35 feet.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11; Am. Ord. 1208, passed 12-9-14)


153.039 AIRPORT USE TABLE.

 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	Comments:

	Use Classification	AA	AO	AD	AC	AM	BRL, OFA, RSA and RPZ Zone uses are listed in the AA Zone text

	Existing Uses

	Expansion of existing public use	O	O	O	O	O	 

	Expansion of an approved conditional use	T1	T1	T1	T1	T1	 

	Airport Layout

	Uses specifically set forth in the Airport Layout (Master) Plan.	O	O	O	O	O	 

	Uses or activities not specifically listed below which are found to be airport dependent or related as defined in the specific zone or as it relates to the zone’s purpose	T2	T2	T2	T2	T2	 



 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	Comments:

	Use Classification	AA	AO	AD	AC	AM	BRL, OFA, RSA and RPZ Zone uses are listed in the AA Zone text

	Airport Operations

	Uses and facilities essential for operations, including hangars, fuel storage, control tower, passenger and freight terminals, F.B.O. offices, and other similar airport operational uses	 	O	O	 	 	 

	Residential Uses/Accessory Uses

	Airport manager or caretaker residence	 	O	O	 	 	 

	Owner/operator residence	 	T1	T1	T1	T1	Only in conjunction with approved use owned by the business owner/operator

	Hotel, motel or other traveler accommodations	 	 	 	T2	 	 

	Public and Semi-Public Uses

	Bikeways, footpaths, and recreation trails	O	O	O	O	O	 

	Fire suppression activities	 	 	O	 	O	 

	Government buildings including armories, military facilities, maintenance, repair or storage facilities totally enclosed	 	 	T2	T2	T2	 

	Motor vehicle parking facility	O	O	O	O	 	Other than that related to the use

	Public park, playground, other open recreation use or building	T1	O	O	O	 	 

	Public or semi-public buildings, such as fire stations, emergency medical, heliports, pump stations, dispatch center, law enforcement office and the like	 	O	O	O	O	 

	Commercial Uses

	Agricultural spraying	 	 	O	 	O	 

	Aircraft hangars	 	O	O	O	O	 

	Aircraft sales, repair, service, storage and schools related to aircraft operations	 	T1	T1	O	O	 

	Aircraft or air transportation business	 	T1	O	 	O	 

	Air cargo, taxi, bus and air passenger terminals	 	O	O	 	O	 

	Air cargo warehousing and distribution facilities	 	 	T1	T1	O	 

	Aircraft, component manufacturing including research and testing	 	 	T1	 	O	 

	Aerial mapping and surveying business	 	O	O	O	O	 

	Auto rental agencies and other traveler services	 	 	T1	O	 	 

	Business or professional office found related or dependent upon location within the zone	 	 	T1	O	O	 

	Child care center	 	 	T1	T1	T1	Only as part of a business in the AM Zone

	Ice, cold storage or bottling plant totally enclosed within a building	 	 	 	 	T1	 

	Manufacturing found related or dependent upon location within the zone	 	 	 	 	O	 

	Office for aviation club or organization	 	O	O	 	 	 

	Retail sales and commercial services for air passengers or activities directly associated with airport operations	 	 	T1	O	O	 

	Snack shops, cafes, restaurants or other food service in support of the airport and clientele	 	 	T1	O	 	 

	Truck and freight terminals	 	 	T2	T2	O	 

	Wholesale distribution outlet, including warehousing, found to be dependent upon the airport, totally enclosed in a building	 	 	 	T2	T1	 

	Land Division Process

	Land partition (no new roads)	O	O	O	O	O	 

	Land partition (new road)	T1	T1	T1	T1	T1	 

	Subdivisions (4 or more lots)	T2	T2	T2	T2	T2	 

	Public Facilities/Utilities

	Commercial utility facility for generating power	 	 	T2	 	T2	 

	Emergency service communications equipment	O	O	O	O	O	 

	Maintenance, replacement, improvement of existing public facilities or services	O	O	O	O	O	 

	Utility facility (public or private)	T1	T1	T1	T1	T1	 

	Utility lines for public service	O	O	O	O	O	Utility lines located underground are not subject to review as long as they comply with adopted plans and city, county, state and federal rules

	Utility towers	 	T2	T2	T2	T2	 

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.040 AIRPORT DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS.

 

	 	AO	AD	AC	AM	AA

	 	Operations	Development	Commercial	Bus. - Ind.	Approach

	Minimum Setbacks (ft.):	See § 153.117 for exceptions to setbacks.

	Front	 	 	 	 	See Zone

	Local street	20	20	20	20

	Collector	20	20	20	30

	Arterial	20	20	20	50

	Internal circulation road	0	0	0	10

	Interior side	 	 	 	 

	Standard	5A	5A	5A	5A

	Adjacent to R Zone	15	15	15	15

	Street side	 	 	 	 

	Local street	10	10	10	10

	Collector	10	10	10	10

	Arterial	10	10	10	10

	Internal circulation road	0	0	0	0

	Rear	 	 	 	 

	Interior	5A	5A	10A	10A

	Local street	20	20	20	20

	Collector	20	20	20	30

	Arterial	20	20	20	50

	Internal circulation road	0	0	0	10

	Adjacent to R Zone	15	15	15	15

	Adjacent to alleyB	0	0	0	0

	Runway or Taxiway Setback:	Shall be in compliance with established rules or guidelines.

	Clear Vision (ft.):C	See § 153.081 for more details.	See Zone

	All uses	25	25	25	25

	Landscaping (%):	See § 153.087 for detailed requirements.

	Minimum	0E	5	5	5

	Building Height (ft.):D	See § 153.118 for exceptions to height limits.

	Maximum	35	35	35	35

	Minimum Street Frontage (ft.):	See § 153.191(C) for exceptions.

	Standard street	50	50	50	50

	Cul-de-sac	35	35	35	35

	Maximum Lot Coverage:	 

	Impervious surface	Determined by the ability to maintain drainage on site.

	Buildings	Determined by the ability to meet parking, landscaping, clear vision, drainage, Public Works standards and other applicable dimensional standards.

	Minimum Lot Size (sq. ft.):	 

	Commercial/industrial	Minimum lot size shall be determined on the basis of compliance with off-street parking, landscaping, those standards administered by Public Works and other applicable dimensional standards.

	Residential use	5,000	5,000	5,000	5,000

	*All dimensional standards subject to Building and Fire Department structural standards.

A    Unless buildings are attached or constructed as one building.

B    Subject to approval by Public Works and Engineering.

C    Unless otherwise approved by the reviewing or jurisdictional authority.

D    Greater heights may be approved by the reviewing authority in conjunction with airport management.

E    May require landscaping around buildings, parking areas, along streets and for screening and buffering purposes.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11; Am. Ord. 1208, passed 12-9-14)

SPECIFIC ZONE REQUIREMENTS


153.045 LIMITED RESIDENTIAL R-1 ZONE.

In an R-1 Zone, the following regulations shall apply:

(A) Purpose. The purpose of the R-1 Zone is to preserve the existing characteristics of certain residential areas within the city which are predominantly single-family, owner occupied, conventional type housing; for example, the Ochoco Heights and Northridge Areas.

(B) Specific conditions. Section 153.083 contains a list of uses with specific conditions that may apply to specific types of uses.

(C) Design review. Provisions set forth in § 153.020. Except single-family and two-family/duplex dwellings and their accessory structures.

(D) Off-street parking and loading. Provisions set forth in §§ 153.085 and 153.086.

(E) Minimum landscaping requirements. When design review is required, a minimum level of landscaping in accordance with § 153.087 shall be required.

(F) Streets and public facilities. When design review is required, streets and public facilities shall be required in accordance with § 153.194 and the City’s Standards and Specifications. These improvements include but are not limited to right-of-way dedication, streets, storm water management, sidewalks, water lines, sewer lines, access management and the like.

(G) Chapter 155, Natural Features Overlay District (NFOD) and Slope Hazard Requirements. This chapter contains provisions for the protection of riparian areas, wetlands, rimrock, Barnes Butte and construction on steep slopes.

(H) Minimum sidewalk requirements. Whether replacing or required by design review, sidewalks shall be constructed to City Standards and Specifications. The minimum sidewalk width in an R-1 Zone is five feet, unless otherwise approved under § 153.194(V)(1).

(I) Signs. In an R-1 Zone, signs are permitted in accordance with the provisions set forth in Chapter 152 as amended.

(J) Limitations on use. In an R-1 Zone, no structure or land shall be occupied or used for any purpose which creates or causes to be created any public nuisance, including but not limited to excessive odor, dust, noise, vibration, flashing light or any hazard to the general health, safety and welfare of the area. Domestic livestock are permitted, but only in compliance with those provisions set forth in § 153.096. No animal is permitted to run at large; animals shall be confined to an individual owner’s property. Any animals permitted to run at large are hereby declared a nuisance and may be abated as such.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.046 GENERAL RESIDENTIAL R-2 ZONE.

In an R-2 Zone, the following regulations shall apply:

(A) Purpose. It is the purpose of the R-2 Zone to provide for residential areas which permit a mixture of a variety of housing types at various densities in a more planned type of development design, including a minimum of nonresidential commercial convenience and service type uses in more accessible proximities for the purposes of providing for conveniences and services to the dominant intended residential users of the area.

(B) Specific conditions. Section 153.083 contains a list of uses with specific conditions that may apply to specific types of uses.

(C) Design review. Provisions set forth in § 153.020. Except single-family and two-family/duplex dwellings and their accessory structures.

(D) Off-street parking and loading. Provisions set forth in §§ 153.085 and 153.086.

(E) Minimum landscaping requirements. When design review is required, a minimum level of landscaping in accordance with § 153.087 shall be required.

(F) Streets and public facilities. When design review is required, streets and public facilities shall be required in accordance with § 153.194 and the City’s Standards and Specifications. These improvements include but are not limited to right-of-way dedication, streets, storm water management, sidewalks, water lines, sewer lines, access management and the like.

(G) Chapter 155, Natural Features Overlay District (NFOD) and Slope Hazard Requirements. This chapter contains provisions for the protection of riparian areas, wetlands, rimrock, Barnes Butte and construction on steep slopes.

(H) Minimum sidewalk requirements. Whether replacing or required by design review, sidewalks shall be constructed to City Standards and Specifications. The minimum sidewalk width in an R-2 Zone is five feet, unless otherwise approved under § 153.194(V)(1).

(I) Signs. In an R-2 Zone, signs are permitted in accordance with the provisions set forth in Chapter 152 as amended.

(J) Limitations on use. No structure or land shall be occupied or used for any purpose which creates or causes to be created any public nuisance, including but not limited to excessive odor, dust, noise, vibration, flashing light or any hazard to the general health, safety and welfare of the area. Domestic livestock are permitted, but only in compliance with those provisions set forth in § 153.096. No animal is permitted to run at large, animals shall be confined to an individual owner’s property. Any animals permitted to run at large are hereby declared a nuisance and may be abated as such.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.047 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL R-3 ZONE.

In an R-3 Zone, the following regulations shall apply:

(A) Purpose. It is the purpose of the R-3 Zone to provide for housing areas which are or may be of a more transitional character, and in areas for which both public water and sewer may not be reasonably available primarily due to economic or physical limitations. It is also the purpose of the R-3 Zone to preserve the more rural characteristics of existing developed areas and/or to provide areas for those future residents which desire or demand a more rural type setting in close proximity to urban uses and services. It is further the intent of the R-3 Zone to provide for zoning which corresponds to the existing County Suburban-Residential S-R Zone that is currently applicable within the subject Urban Growth Boundary (UGB) area, thereby providing minimal impacts when transitioning from county to city jurisdiction.

(B) Specific conditions. Section 153.083 contains a list of uses with specific conditions that may apply to specific types of uses.

(C) Design review. Provisions set forth in § 153.020. Except single-family dwellings and their accessory structures.

(D) Off-street parking and loading. Provisions set forth in §§ 153.085 and 153.086.

(E) Minimum landscaping requirements. When design review is required, a minimum level of landscaping in accordance with § 153.087 shall be required.

(F) Streets and public facilities. When design review is required, streets and public facilities shall be required in accordance with § 153.194 and the City’s Standards and Specifications. These improvements include but are not limited to right-of-way dedication, streets, storm water management, sidewalks, water lines, sewer lines, access management and the like.

(G) Chapter 155, Natural Features Overlay District (NFOD) and Slope Hazard Requirements. This chapter contains provisions for the protection of riparian areas, wetlands, rimrock, Barnes Butte and construction on steep slopes.

(H) Minimum sidewalk requirements. Whether replacing or required by design review, sidewalks shall be constructed to City Standards and Specifications. The minimum sidewalk width in an R-3 Zone is five feet, unless otherwise approved under § 153.194(V)(1).

(I) Signs. In an R-3 Zone, signs are permitted in accordance with the provisions set forth in Chapter 152 as amended.

(J) Limitations on use. No structure or land shall be occupied or used for any purpose which creates or causes to be created any public nuisance, including but not limited to excessive odor, dust, noise, vibration, flashing light or any hazard to the general health, safety and welfare of the area. Domestic livestock are permitted, but only in compliance with those provisions set forth in § 153.096. No animal is permitted to run at large, animals shall be confined to an individual owner’s property. Any animals permitted to run at large are hereby declared a nuisance and may be abated as such.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.048 RESIDENTIAL REDEVELOPMENT R-4 ZONE.

In an R-4 Zone, the following regulations shall apply:

(A) Purpose. The purpose of the R-4 Zone is to encourage redevelopment and rehabilitation of existing housing characterized by older, deteriorating housing needing replacement by permitting higher densities, increased lot coverages, decreased setbacks and other incentives for redevelopment efforts.

(B) Specific conditions. Section 153.083 contains a list of uses with specific conditions that may apply to specific types of uses.

(C) Design review. Provisions set forth in § 153.020. Except single-family and two-family/duplex dwellings and their accessory structures.

(D) Off-street parking and loading. Provisions set forth in §§ 153.085 and 153.086.

(E) Minimum landscaping requirements. When design review is required, a minimum level of landscaping in accordance with § 153.087 shall be required.

(F) Streets and public facilities. When design review is required, streets and public facilities shall be required in accordance with § 153.194 and the City’s Standards and Specifications. These improvements include but are not limited to right-of-way dedication, streets, storm water management, sidewalks, water lines, sewer lines, access management and the like.

(G) Chapter 155, Natural Features Overlay District (NFOD) and Slope Hazard Requirements. This chapter contains provisions for the protection of riparian areas, wetlands, rimrock, Barnes Butte and construction on steep slopes.

(H) Minimum sidewalk requirements. Whether replacing or required by design review, sidewalks shall be constructed to City Standards and Specifications. The minimum sidewalk width in an R-4 Zone is five feet, unless otherwise approved under § 153.194(V)(1).

(I) Signs. In an R-4 Zone, signs are permitted in accordance with the provisions set forth in Chapter 152 as amended.

(J) Limitations on use. No structure or land shall be occupied or used for any purpose which creates or causes to be created any public nuisance, including but not limited to excessive odor, dust, noise, vibration, flashing light or any hazard to the general health, safety and welfare of the area. Domestic livestock are permitted, but only in compliance with those provisions set forth in § 153.096. No animal is permitted to run at large, animals shall be confined to an individual owner’s property. Any animals permitted to run at large are hereby declared a nuisance and may be abated as such.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.049 HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL R-5 ZONE.

In an R-5 Zone, the following regulations shall apply:

(A) Purpose. The purpose of the R-5 Zone is to provide for residential areas which permit a high density of housing in proximity to necessary services including shopping, employment, outdoor recreation and public transit. When considering the designation of a property or properties for R-5 zoning, the following criteria shall be considered:

(1) The site must be adjacent to property that is zoned for commercial or mixed uses;

(2) The site must have frontage along a street designated as a major collector or arterial or directly access a minor collector that intersects with the nearest major collector or arterial at a signalized intersection;

(3) The site must be located within 1,320 feet (one-fourth mile) of a public park of a minimum of one acre that includes a playground;

(4) The site may be required to install a public transit stop within 1,320 feet (one-fourth mile) if deemed appropriate by the local or regional transit authority;

(5) The site must encompass the full length of a city block or combine with other commercial and multifamily uses to encompass the full length of the city block;

(6) At least 50% of the uses on the opposite side of the adjacent street or streets must be zoned or developed with commercial and/or multifamily uses;

(7) If any of the above criteria cannot be met, the applicant/owner may propose to make improvements to meet the criteria as a condition of the zone change.

(B) Specific conditions. Section 153.083 contains a list of uses with specific conditions that may apply to specific types of uses.

(C) Design review. All development is subject to the design review provisions set forth in § 153.020 in addition to the following requirements:

(1) Section 153.084 attached housing standards as applicable;

(2) Articulation. In order to break up both horizontal and vertical expanses of buildings, wall and roof lines shall include offsets and other architectural methods to provide variation (i.e., pillars, entryway features, awnings, etc.);

(3) Variation of materials. In order to break up vast expanses of single-element building elevations and to provide differentiation between adjacent attached structures and floor levels, building design shall include a combination of architectural elements, features and materials;

(4) Multiple stories. All new structures shall be at least two stories;

(5) Upper-floor setbacks. Any floor above the second floor shall be set back from public right-of-way by a minimum of 15 feet. Any floor above the second floor shall be set back from the property line of an adjacent residential use (not including other uses in the R-5 Zone) by a minimum of 20 feet. Uncovered porches and balconies may be allowed within this setback area;

(6) Weather protection. Awnings and canopies are intended to protect pedestrians from the weather and to add to the architectural interest of buildings. New buildings in the R-5 Zone shall provide a weather-protected area over and/or adjacent to sidewalks and plazas;

(7) Mechanical equipment and trash receptacles. All mechanical equipment (including equipment located on the roof) and trash receptacles shall be screened with building materials consistent with the architecture of the building;

(8) Parking structures. Any parking structures shall be designed to include commercial uses along any portion of the first floor of the structure abutting a street, open space or other public or common area. Upper floors may utilize a combination of residential and commercial uses and false fronts to mask the appearance of the parking structure in order to provide consistency with the architecture of surrounding buildings;

(9) Covered bicycle parking. Each building shall have access to a covered bicycle parking facility within 100 feet of the doorway.

(D) Off-street parking. In an R-5 Zone, off-street parking facilities shall meet the applicable requirements set forth in §§ 153.085 and 153.086; however, 50% of the adjacent on-street parking spaces shall be counted to meet the parking needs as well as any off-site parking spaces owned or leased specifically for the subject development.

(E) Minimum landscaping requirements. When design review is required, a minimum level of landscaping in accordance with § 153.087 shall be required.

(F) Streets and public facilities. When design review is required, streets and public facilities shall be required in accordance with § 153.194 and the City’s Standards and Specifications. These improvements include but are not limited to right-of-way dedication, streets, storm water management, sidewalks, water lines, sewer lines, access management and the like.

(G) Chapter 155, Natural Features Overlay District (NFOD) and Slope Hazard Requirements. This chapter contains provisions for the protection of riparian areas, wetlands, rimrock, Barnes Butte and construction on steep slopes.

(H) Minimum sidewalk requirements. Whether replacing or required by design review, sidewalks shall be constructed to City Standards and Specifications. The minimum sidewalk width in an R-5 Zone shall be compatible with the development design and surrounding area.

(I) Signs. In an R-5 Zone, signs are permitted in accordance with the provisions set forth in Chapter 152 as amended.

(J) Limitations on uses. No new single story buildings are permitted in the R-5 Zone. No structure or land shall be occupied or used for any purpose which creates or causes to be created any public nuisance, including but not limited to excessive odor, dust, noise, vibration, flashing light or any hazard to the general health, safety and welfare of the area. Domestic livestock are permitted, but only in compliance with those provisions set forth in § 153.096. No animal is permitted to run at large, animals shall be confined to an individual owner’s property. Any animals permitted to run at large are hereby declared a nuisance and may be abated as such.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11; Am. Ord. 1208, passed 12-9-14)


153.050 CENTRAL COMMERCIAL C-1 ZONE.

In a C-1 Zone, the following regulations shall apply:

(A) Purpose. The purpose of the C-1 Zone is to preserve and enhance the dominant characteristics of that area of the city identified as the Downtown Core Commercial area with emphasis on pedestrian shopper convenience and safety, the enhancement of historic features, downtown improvement needs and designs and to enhance the area’s economic importance as a commercial center of the community.

(B) Specific conditions. Section 153.083 contains a list of uses with specific conditions that may apply to specific types of uses.

(C) Design review. Provisions set forth in §§ 153.020 and 153.021 as applicable.

(D) Off-street parking and loading. Provided in accordance with the provisions set forth in §§ 153.085 and 153.086.

(E) Minimum landscaping requirements. When design review is required, a minimum level of landscaping in accordance with § 153.087 and the provisions set forth in the currently adopted Downtown Improvement Plan which shall be periodically updated by the City Council may be required.

(F) Streets and public facilities. When design review is required, streets and public facilities shall be required in accordance with § 153.194 and the City’s Standards and Specifications. These improvements include but are not limited to right-of-way dedication, streets, storm water management, sidewalks, water lines, sewer lines, access management and the like.

(G) Chapter 155, Natural Features Overlay District (NFOD) and Slope Hazard Requirements. This chapter contains provisions for the protection of riparian areas, wetlands, rimrock, Barnes Butte and construction on steep slopes.

(H) Minimum sidewalk requirements. Whether replacing or required by design review, sidewalks shall be required to be constructed in accordance with the currently adopted Downtown Improvement Plan which shall be periodically updated by the City Council. The minimum sidewalk width in a C-1 Zone shall be ten feet and comply with the City’s Standards and Specifications. Greater widths may be required; the following is guidance for certain situations:

(1) When replacing existing sidewalks greater than ten feet, they shall be replaced at the greater width. Unless approved otherwise under design review incorporating landscaping against an existing building.

(2) When replacing sidewalks less than ten feet wide the sidewalk shall be widened.

(3) Sidewalks shall not be less than existing sidewalks to which the new or replacement sidewalk is connected. If the general pattern of the street has sidewalks greater than ten feet, then the larger shall be required.

(I) Outdoor merchandising. Outdoor merchandising shall only be permitted as set forth in § 153.093, or as otherwise approved by the city.

(J) Signs. In a C-1 Zone, signs are permitted in accordance with the provisions set forth in Chapter 152 as amended.

(K) Use limitations. In a C-1 Zone, permitted uses shall be subject to the following limitations and standards:

(1) All business, service, repair, processing, storage or merchandise display shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building, except for drive-in windows as may be approved by the Planning Commission. Display of merchandise along the outside wall of the building shall not in any case impede parking or preclude pedestrian use of walkways, sidewalks and the like; these limitations do not apply to the outside display of merchandise during a merchants’ or community sponsored promotional sale.

(2) All building frontages or primary entrances shall be constructed to the sidewalk of the primary or higher order street. In the case of a corner lot where a building has no entrances on the side street, landscaping shall be provided as a buffer to the sidewalk. Exemptions to this rule include extensions to the streetscape that include outdoor seating for restaurants, cafes, bakeries, etc., or plazas open to the public.

(3) All nonresidential uses permitted in this zone shall be screened from abutting properties in a residential zone by a sight-obscuring fence except as otherwise approved by the city.

(4) Nuisance. No structure or land shall be occupied or used for any purpose which creates or causes to be created any public nuisance, including but not limited to excessive odor, dust, noise, vibration, flashing light or any hazard to the general health, safety and welfare of the area.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.051 GENERAL COMMERCIAL C-2 ZONE.

In a C-2 Zone, the following regulations shall apply:

(A) Purpose. The purpose of the C-2 Zone is to provide for those commercial uses which are considered more desirable to be located in an area outside of the Downtown Commercial Core area, that are more dependent upon and create the highest volumes of vehicular traffic, are considered the heaviest or most intensive type of commercial uses, which actually involve a combination of heavy commercial and light industrial type uses, which commonly involve expansive areas of outside storage and displays of products and are more traveler oriented.

(B) Specific conditions. Section 153.083 contains a list of uses with specific conditions that may apply to specific types of uses.

(C) Design review. Provisions set forth in §§ 153.020 and 153.021 as applicable.

(D) Off-street parking and loading. Provided in accordance with the provisions set forth in §§ 153.085 and 153.086.

(E) Minimum landscaping requirements. When design review is required, a minimum level of landscaping in accordance with § 153.087 shall be required.

(F) Streets and public facilities. When design review is required, streets and public facilities shall be required in accordance with § 153.194 and the City’s Standards and Specifications. These improvements include but are not limited to right-of-way dedication, streets, storm water management, sidewalks, water lines, sewer lines, access management and the like.

(G) Chapter 155, Natural Features Overlay District (NFOD) and Slope Hazard Requirements. This chapter contains provisions for the protection of riparian areas, wetlands, rimrock, Barnes Butte and construction on steep slopes.

(H) Minimum sidewalk requirements. Whether replacing or required by design review, sidewalks shall be constructed to City Standards and Specifications. The minimum sidewalk width in a C-2 Zone is eight feet. Greater widths may be required; the following is guidance for certain situations:

(1) When replacing existing sidewalks greater than eight feet they shall be replaced at the greater width. Unless approved otherwise under design review incorporating landscaping against an existing building.

(2) When replacing sidewalks less than eight feet wide the sidewalk shall be widened.

(3) Sidewalks shall not be less than existing sidewalks to which the new or replacement sidewalk is connected. If the general pattern of the street has sidewalks greater than eight feet then the larger shall be required.

(I) Outdoor merchandising. Outdoor merchandising is permitted only as set forth in this section and in § 153.093.

(J) Signs. In a C-2 Zone, signs are permitted in accordance with the provisions set forth in Chapter 152 as amended.

(K) Use limitations. In a C-2 Zone, permitted uses shall be subject to the following limitations and standards:

(1) Except for drive-in service windows and/or as approved otherwise by the city, all business, service, repair, processing, storage or merchandise display shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building. Display of merchandise along the outside wall of the building shall only be permitted on private property, and shall not in any case preclude pedestrian use of walkways, sidewalks or other pedestrian facilities; these limitations do not apply to the outside display of merchandise during a merchants’ or community sponsored promotional sale, or to the outside display of merchandise confined to an area or facility designed for such purpose and approved by the city.

(2) All nonresidential uses permitted in this zone shall be screened from abutting residential uses by a sight-obscuring fence except as otherwise approved by the city.

(3) Nuisance. No structure or land shall be occupied or used for any purpose which creates or causes to be created any public nuisance, including but not limited to excessive odor, dust, noise, vibration, flashing light or any hazard to the general health, safety and welfare of the area.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.052 PROFESSIONAL COMMERCIAL C-3 ZONE.

In a C-3 Zone, the following regulations shall apply:

(A) Purpose. It is the purpose of the C-3 Zone to provide for a transitional area between the dominant commercial areas of the city that occur along major transportation routes and dominant residential areas by providing for a commercial area that is limited to uses which are most compatible with residential uses and which also complement the commercial uses to which the zone is adjacent.

(B) Specific conditions. Section 153.083 contains a list of uses with specific conditions that may apply to specific types of uses.

(C) Design review. Provisions set forth in §§ 153.020 and 153.021 as applicable.

(D) Off-street parking and loading. Provided in accordance with the provisions set forth in §§ 153.085 and 153.086.

(E) Minimum landscaping requirements. When design review is required, a minimum level of landscaping in accordance with § 153.087 shall be required.

(F) Streets and public facilities. When design review is required, streets and public facilities shall be required in accordance with § 153.194 and the City’s Standards and Specifications. These improvements include but are not limited to right-of-way dedication, streets, storm water management, sidewalks, water lines, sewer lines, access management and the like.

(G) Chapter 155, Natural Features Overlay District (NFOD) and Slope Hazard Requirements. This chapter contains provisions for the protection of riparian areas, wetlands, rimrock, Barnes Butte and construction on steep slopes.

(H) Minimum sidewalk requirements. Whether replacing or required by design review, sidewalks shall be constructed to City Standards and Specifications. The minimum sidewalk width in a C-3 Zone is eight feet.

(I) Outdoor merchandising. Permitted only as set forth in this section and in § 153.093.

(J) Signs. In a C-3 Zone, signs are permitted in accordance with the provisions set forth in Chapter 152 as amended.

(K) Use limitations. In a C-3 Zone, the following use limitations shall apply to all uses permitted under this section:

(1) Nonresidential uses permitted by this section shall be screened from abutting residential uses by densely planted trees and shrubs or a sight-obscuring fence unless otherwise approved by the city.

(2) Nuisance. No structure or land shall be occupied or used for any purpose which creates or causes to be created any public nuisance, including but not limited to excessive odor, dust, noise, vibration, flashing light or any hazard to the general health, safety and welfare of the area.

(L) Additional standards and requirements. In approving a multifamily residential or nonresidential use in a C-3 Zone, the city may require additional standards and requirements considered necessary to protect the best interests of the surrounding and adjacent area. Such may include, but are not limited to, the following:

(1) Additional lot size or setback requirements.

(2) Limitations on the placement of structures and the heights thereof.

(3) Limitations on vehicular parking areas and ingress and egress.

(4) Limitations on the placement and type of signs.

(5) Require additional landscaping and screening.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.053 NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL C-4 ZONE.

In a C-4 Zone, the following regulations shall apply:

(A) Purpose. The purpose of a Neighborhood Commercial C-4 Zone is to provide for limited commercial services in areas that are in close proximity to or within neighborhood residential areas. The purpose relative thereto is to provide opportunities for basic residential household needs without excessive vehicular travel.

(B) Specific conditions. Section 153.083 contains a list of uses with specific conditions that may apply to specific types of uses.

(C) Design review. Provisions set forth in §§ 153.020 and 153.021 as applicable.

(D) Off-street parking and loading. Provided in accordance with the provisions set forth in §§ 153.085 and 153.086.

(E) Minimum landscaping requirements. When design review is required, a minimum level of landscaping in accordance with § 153.087 shall be required.

(F) Streets and public facilities. When design review is required, streets and public facilities shall be required in accordance with § 153.194 and the City’s Standards and Specifications. These improvements include but are not limited to right-of-way dedication, streets, storm water management, sidewalks, water lines, sewer lines, access management and the like.

(G) Chapter 155, Natural Features Overlay District (NFOD) and Slope Hazard Requirements. This chapter contains provisions for the protection of riparian areas, wetlands, rimrock, Barnes Butte and construction on steep slopes.

(H) Minimum sidewalk requirements. Whether replacing or required by design review, sidewalks shall be constructed to City Standards and Specifications. The minimum sidewalk width in a C-4 Zone is eight feet.

(I) Outdoor merchandising. Permitted only as set forth in this section and in § 153.093.

(J) Signs. In a C-4 Zone, signs are permitted in accordance with the provisions set forth in Chapter 152 as amended.

(K) Use limitations. In a C-4 Zone, the following use limitations shall apply to all uses permitted under this section:

(1) Nuisance. No structure or land shall be occupied or used for any purpose which creates or causes to be created any public nuisance, including but not limited to excessive odor, dust, noise, vibration, flashing light or any hazard to the general health, safety and welfare of the area.

(L) Additional standards and requirements. In approving a nonresidential use in a C-4 Zone, the city may require additional standards and requirements considered necessary to protect the best interests of the surrounding and adjacent area. Such may include, but is not limited to, the following:

(1) Additional lot size or setback requirements.

(2) Limitations on the placement of structures and the heights thereof.

(3) Limitations on vehicular parking areas and ingress and egress.

(4) Limitations on the placement and type of signs.

(5) Require additional landscaping and screening.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.054 RECREATION COMMERCIAL C-5 ZONE.

In a C-5 Zone, the following regulations shall apply:

(A) Purpose. The purpose of the Recreation Commercial C-5 Zone is to provide for those commercial uses which are most closely related to the recreation tourism resources of the area in which the zone is located. The recreation tourism resources of the one area to which this zone is initially designated include the County Fairgrounds, the Crooked River, the Crooked River-Les Schwab Fields complex and Highway 27 providing access to the Prineville Reservoir and the Crooked River Back Country Area which includes significant geological features such as Chimney Rock and the Palisades. Uses permitted in this zone are to be limited in retail floor space in order to minimize the competitive level with the Downtown Core Commercial area of the city.

(B) Specific conditions. Section 153.083 contains a list of uses with specific conditions that may apply to specific types of uses.

(C) Design review. Provisions set forth in §§ 153.020 and 153.021 as applicable.

(D) Off-street parking and loading. Provided in accordance with the provisions set forth in §§ 153.085 and 153.086.

(E) Minimum landscaping requirements. When design review is required, a minimum level of landscaping in accordance with § 153.087 shall be required.

(F) Streets and public facilities. When design review is required, streets and public facilities shall be required in accordance with § 153.194 and the City’s Standards and Specifications. These improvements include but are not limited to right-of-way dedication, streets, storm water management, sidewalks, water lines, sewer lines, access management and the like.

(G) Chapter 155, Natural Features Overlay District (NFOD) and Slope Hazard Requirements. This chapter contains provisions for the protection of riparian areas, wetlands, rimrock, Barnes Butte and construction on steep slopes.

(H) Minimum sidewalk requirements. Whether replacing or required by design review, sidewalks shall be constructed to City Standards and Specifications. The minimum sidewalk width in a C-5 Zone is eight feet.

(I) Outdoor merchandising. Outdoor merchandising is permitted only as set forth in this section and in § 153.093.

(J) Signs. In a C-5 Zone, signs are permitted in accordance with the provisions set forth in Chapter 152 as amended.

(K) Use limitations. In a C-5 Zone, permitted uses shall be subject to the following limitations and standards:

(1) Except as approved otherwise by the city, particularly as such is common to a specific use type, all business, service, repair, processing, storage or merchandise display shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building or other approved enclosure, except for drive-in windows. Display of merchandise along the outside wall of the building shall not extend more than three feet from the wall, and be on private property only, except during a city approved merchants’, community, fairgrounds, parks or other nonprofit organizational sponsored promotional sale or event; the sales and/or events occurring on a regular annual basis need not be approved annually, but may be approved by the city on an ongoing basis as annual events.

(2) All nonresidential uses permitted in this zone shall be screened from abutting properties in a residential zone by a sight-obscuring fence except as otherwise approved by the city.

(3) Nuisance. No structure or land shall be occupied or used for any purpose which creates or causes to be created any public nuisance, including but not limited to excessive odor, dust, noise, vibration, flashing light or any hazard to the general health, safety and welfare of the area.

(L) Use criteria. In addition to the standards and regulations set forth by this section relative to a permitted use under this section, and in addition to standards and regulations that may be set forth by § 153.135 et seq. or other sections of this chapter relative to a specific use, the following criteria shall be considered by the city in approving or denying an application for a use permitted under this section:

(1) An application for a use permitted by this section may be denied if, in the findings of the city, the proposed use is not related to or beneficial to the recreation-tourism resources or industry, or the overall economic and social amenities of the community, the city and the county.

(2) An application for a use permitted by this section may be denied if the applicant fails to demonstrate that the proposed location is beneficial relative to the recreation-tourism sector and/or the overall economic and social amenities to be served, and to the benefit of the general public relative to the full development of the recreation-tourism resources of the community, the city and the county.

(M) Additional standards and requirements. In approving a nonresidential use in a C-5 Zone, the city may require additional standards and requirements considered necessary to protect the best interests of the surrounding and adjacent area. Such may include, but is not limited to, the following:

(1) Additional lot size or setback requirements.

(2) Limitations on the placement of structures and the heights thereof.

(3) Limitations on vehicular parking areas and ingress and egress.

(4) Limitations on the placement and type of signs.

(5) Require additional landscaping and screening.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.060 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL M-1 ZONE.

In an M-1 Zone, the following regulations shall apply:

(A) Purpose. The purpose of the Light Industrial M-1 Zone is to provide for a wide range of industrial uses, but limiting or excluding those industrial uses which are generally not considered compatible with adjoining commercial or residential areas and which, in many cases, involve industrial uses which involve hazardous or nuisance creating conditions.

(B) Specific conditions. Section 153.083 contains a list of uses with specific conditions that may apply to specific types of uses.

(C) Design review. Provisions set forth in §§ 153.020 and 153.021 as applicable.

(D) Off-street parking and loading. Provided in accordance with the provisions set forth in §§ 153.085 and 153.086.

(E) Minimum landscaping requirements. When design review is required, a minimum level of landscaping in accordance with § 153.087 shall be required.

(F) Streets and public facilities. When design review is required, streets and public facilities shall be required in accordance with § 153.194 and the City’s Standards and Specifications. These improvements include but are not limited to right-of-way dedication, streets, storm water management, sidewalks, water lines, sewer lines, access management and the like.

(G) Chapter 155, Natural Features Overlay District (NFOD) and Slope Hazard Requirements. This chapter contains provisions for the protection of riparian areas, wetlands, rimrock, Barnes Butte and construction on steep slopes.

(H) Minimum sidewalk requirements. Whether replacing or required by design review, sidewalks shall be constructed to City Standards and Specifications. The minimum sidewalk width in an M-1 Zone is five feet, unless otherwise approved under § 153.194(V)(1).

(I) Outdoor merchandising. Outdoor merchandising is permitted only as set forth in this section and in § 153.093.

(J) Signs. In an M-2 Zone, signs are permitted in accordance with the provisions set forth in Chapter 152 as amended.

(K) Use limitations. In an M-1 Zone, permitted uses shall be subject to the following limitations and standards:

(1) No use shall be permitted which has been declared a nuisance by action of the city, county, state, or federal government, or by a court of competent jurisdiction.

(2) No use is permitted which is reasonably expected to create a nuisance because of noise, smoke, odor, dust or gas.

(3) For uses requiring pollution or contaminant discharge permits by an agency other than the city, final approval for the use shall not be issued by the city prior to review and approval by the applicable permit reviewing authority(ies).

(4) Materials shall be stored and grounds maintained in a manner as to prevent the attraction of or aid in the propagation of insects or rodents, or in a manner as to not otherwise create a public health hazard or attractive nuisance hazard.

(5) Points of access from a public right-of-way to properties and uses in this zone shall be so located, constructed, maintained and controlled as to minimize traffic congestion, noise and dust pollution, and shall avoid directing traffic onto residential streets or onto streets passing directly through residential, school, hospital or other noise sensitive use areas and safety zones.

(6) All uses permitted in this zone may be required to be screened from abutting residential zones.

(7) Building entrances or other openings adjacent to or across the street from a residential zone shall be prohibited if they cause glare, excessive noise or otherwise adversely affect land uses in the affected residential zone.

(8) Except as approved otherwise by the city in accordance with applicable access management provisions, there shall not be more than one ingress and one egress from properties accommodating uses permitted by this section. To minimize the number of the accesses within any given street section, permitted uses may be required to provide for shared ingress and egress or provide frontage roads.

(L) Use criteria. In the consideration of an application for a proposed use in an M-1 Zone, the city shall take into account the impact of the proposed use on nearby residential and commercial uses, on resource carrying capacities, on the capacity of transportation and other public facilities and services and on the appearance of the proposal. In the approval of an application, the city shall find that any identified measurable adverse social, economic, physical or environmental impacts are minimized or reasonably mitigated.

(M) Additional requirements. As a condition of approval of any use proposed within an M-1 Zone, the city may require the following:

(1) An increase in required setbacks.

(2) Additional off-street parking and loading facilities.

(3) Limitations on signs or lighting, time of operations and points of ingress and egress.

(4) Additional landscaping, screening and other improvements.

(5) Any other conditions considered necessary to achieve compliance with the intent and purposes of this chapter and policies of the Comprehensive Plan.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.061 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL M-2 ZONE.

In an M-2 Zone, the following provisions shall apply:

(A) Purpose. The purpose of the Heavy Industrial M-2 Zone is to provide for a wide range of industrial uses, which are generally not considered compatible with adjoining commercial or residential areas and which, in many cases, involve industrial uses which involve hazardous or nuisance creating conditions.

(B) Specific conditions. Section 153.083 contains a list of uses with specific conditions that may apply to specific types of uses.

(C) Design review. Provisions set forth in §§ 153.020 and 153.021 as applicable.

(D) Off-street parking and loading. Provided in accordance with the provisions set forth in §§ 153.085 and 153.086.

(E) Minimum landscaping requirements. When design review is required, a minimum level of landscaping in accordance with § 153.087 shall be required.

(F) Streets and public facilities. When design review is required, streets and public facilities shall be required in accordance with § 153.194 and the City’s Standards and Specifications. These improvements include but are not limited to right-of-way dedication, streets, storm water management, sidewalks, water lines, sewer lines, access management and the like.

(G) Chapter 155, Natural Features Overlay District (NFOD) and Slope Hazard Requirements. This chapter contains provisions for the protection of riparian areas, wetlands, rimrock, Barnes Butte and construction on steep slopes.

(H) Minimum sidewalk requirements. Whether replacing or required by design review, sidewalks shall be constructed to City Standards and Specifications. The minimum sidewalk width in an M-2 Zone is five feet, unless otherwise approved under § 153.194(V)(1).

(I) Outdoor merchandising. Outdoor merchandising is permitted only as set forth in this section and in § 153.093.

(J) Signs. In an M-2 Zone, signs are permitted in accordance with the provisions set forth in Chapter 152 as amended.

(K) Use limitations. In an M-2 Zone, permitted uses shall be subject to the following limitations and standards:

(1) No use shall be permitted which has been declared a nuisance by action of the city, county, state, or federal government or by a court of competent jurisdiction.

(2) No use is permitted which is expected to create a nuisance because of noise, smoke, odor, dust or gas.

(3) For uses requiring pollution or contaminant discharge permits by an agency other than the city, final approval for the use shall not be issued by the city prior to review and approval by the applicable permit reviewing authority(ies).

(4) Materials shall be stored and grounds maintained in a manner as to prevent the attraction of or aid in the propagation of insects or rodents, or in a manner as to not otherwise create a public health hazard or attractive nuisance hazard.

(5) Points of access from a public right-of-way to properties and uses in this zone shall be so located, constructed, maintained and controlled as to minimize traffic congestion, noise and dust pollution, and shall avoid directing traffic onto residential streets or onto streets passing directly through residential, school, hospital or other noise sensitive use areas and safety zones.

(6) All uses permitted in this zone shall be screened from abutting residential zones by a sight-obscuring fence, except for those uses permitted outright existing on or before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter or as otherwise approved by the city.

(7) Building entrances or other openings adjacent to or across the street from a residential zone shall be prohibited if they cause glare, excessive noise or otherwise adversely affect land uses in the affected residential zone.

(8) Except as otherwise approved or required by the city or the Oregon Department of Transportation in accordance with applicable access management provisions, there shall not be more than one ingress and one egress from properties accommodating uses permitted by this section. To minimize the number of the accesses within any given street section, permitted uses may be required to provide for shared ingress and egress, or provide frontage roads.

(L) Use criteria. In the consideration of an application for a proposed use in an M-2 Zone, the city shall take into account the impact of the proposed use on nearby residential and commercial uses, on resource carrying capacities, on the capacity of transportation and other public facilities and services and on the appearance of the proposal. In the approval of an application, the city shall find that any identified measurable adverse social, economic, physical or environmental impacts are minimized or reasonably mitigated.

(M) Additional requirements. As a condition of approval of any use proposed within an M-2 Zone, the city may require the following:

(1) An increase in required setbacks.

(2) Additional off-street parking and loading facilities.

(3) Limitations on signs or lighting, time of operations and points of ingress and egress.

(4) Additional landscaping, screening and other improvements.

(5) Any other conditions considered necessary to achieve compliance with the intent and purposes of this chapter and the applicable policies of the Comprehensive Plan.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.062 INDUSTRIAL PARK IP ZONE (FORMERLY M-3 ZONE).

In an IP Zone, the following regulations shall apply:

(A) Purpose. The purpose of the Industrial Park IP Zone is to provide for a variety of commercial, wholesale, trade and distribution, bulk retailing and industrial uses in a park or planned unit development type setting where visual appearance is a prime consideration. Uses permitted in this zone should require little or no outdoor storage of products, materials or equipment except as may otherwise be permitted in approved landscaped display areas. In many cases, such will require the limiting or exclusion of those commercial and industrial uses which commonly involve open, outside storage and outside operations that are not aesthetically attractive, that are commonly found in more intensive type industrial settings and/or involve hazardous or nuisance creating conditions, real or potential. Relative thereto, the provisions of this section are intended to do as follows:

(1) Provide a mix of clean and attractive industries and commercial uses which have no on-site or off-site impacts in terms of noise, odor, glare, lights, smoke, dust or visual types of impacts.

(2) Provide for combining building materials and appearances, parking, landscaping and other design features which physically enhance the overall attractiveness of the area.

(3) Establish and maintain high aesthetic standards and preserve and enhance the natural features of the area.

(4) Encourage originality, flexibility and innovation in site planning and development, including architecture, landscaping and graphic design.

(B) Specific conditions. Section 153.083 contains a list of uses with specific conditions that may apply to specific types of uses.

(C) Design review. Provisions set forth in §§ 153.020 and 153.021 as applicable.

(D) Off-street parking and loading. Provided in accordance with the provisions set forth in §§ 153.085 and 153.086.

(E) Minimum landscaping requirements. When design review is required, a minimum level of landscaping in accordance with § 153.087 and subsection (K) of this section shall be required.

(F) Streets and public facilities. When design review is required, streets and public facilities shall be required in accordance with § 153.194 and the City’s Standards and Specifications. These improvements include but are not limited to right-of-way dedication, streets, storm water management, sidewalks, water lines, sewer lines, access management and the like.

(G) Chapter 155, Natural Features Overlay District (NFOD) and Slope Hazard Requirements. This chapter contains provisions for the protection of riparian areas, wetlands, rimrock, Barnes Butte and construction on steep slopes.

(H) Minimum sidewalk requirements. Whether replacing or required by design review, sidewalks shall be constructed to City Standards and Specifications. The minimum sidewalk width in an M-3 Zone is five feet, unless otherwise approved under § 153.194(V)(1).

(I) Performance design standards. In an IP Zone, structures, circulation, parking, loading and landscaping shall be designed to do the following:

(1) Avoid undue disturbance of significant vegetation, slopes, drainage ways and other natural features.

(2) Incorporate and use significant natural features to enhance the quality of the development and preserve the visual character of the site and the area.

(3) Project a positive image as viewed from both inside and outside the site.

(4) Minimize the impact of truck loading and maneuvering, and outside display areas.

(5) Minimize hazards and conflicts with airport operations.

(J) Building types and designs. Building types and designs permitted in the IP Zone shall be designed and constructed to comply with the following provisions:

(1) Are designed for the specific site to accomplish the objectives set forth in subsections (I)(1) through (5) of this section.

(2) Buildings that provide for natural light penetrations into work areas using windows, skylights, atriums, courtyards and the like are preferred.

(3) Should have distinctive public entrances into the building.

(4) Use color, materials and architectural design to visually reduce the scale and impact of large buildings.

(5) Use high image and durable exterior materials and finishes, such as masonry, architecturally treated tilt-up concrete, glass, wood or stucco or combinations thereof; metal siding materials are permitted; provided, that not less than 15% of the exterior surfaces are accented by the use of the foregoing materials in combination therewith.

(6) To the extent possible, screen or mask roof mounted mechanical equipment, except solar collection apparatus, from view.

(7) Buildings shall be oriented so that major service activity areas (for example, loading, delivery, garbage collection and the like) are away from major streets and thoroughfares, especially arterials and collectors.

(K) Landscaping.

(1) A minimum of 10% of the developed site shall be landscaped, except for sites located adjacent to an arterial or major collector, 25% of the area within 100 feet of the street shall be landscaped and shall, at a minimum, include a minimum five-foot landscaped buffer along the street.

(2) Landscaping should consist of a variety of lawn, trees, shrubbery and ground cover, and may include preserved natural vegetation.

(3) Street trees must be provided along street frontages and within off-street parking lots except where significant trees already exist; the trees are required to help delineate entrances, to provide shade and to provide permeable areas for storm water drainage.

(4) In addition to the requirements set forth in this section, a landscaping zone shall be provided and maintained in compliance with the provisions of § 153.087, particularly as related to parking lots, buffering and screening and maintenance.

(5) A bond or other financial guarantee may be required to insure landscape completion.

(L) Outdoor merchandising. Outdoor merchandising is permitted only as set forth in this section and in § 153.093.

(M) Outdoor storage/process areas.

(1) Outdoor storage of materials or products is limited and may only be permitted if fully enclosed and screened from an adjoining street, especially an arterial or major collector.

(2) No outdoor processes shall be permitted in the operation of the business except for the loading, unloading, delivery and shipping of materials and projects.

(3) Loading, unloading, delivery and/or shipping areas shall be located to the side or rear of buildings relative to adjoining streets or roads unless topography, natural features or other requirements of this section dictate front yard loading bays.

(4) Loading/unloading docks may be required to be recessed, screened or otherwise designed to be buffered from adjacent properties, streets and roads.

(5) Waste and recycle receptacles shall be maintained within enclosed structures in all cases.

(N) Display areas. All display areas shall be located within a building except when the display is common to a permitted use, and shall then be limited to a specific area designated for that purpose and appropriately designed and landscaped; the areas shall be subject to a continuing review and are subject to additional requirements, improvements and/or limitations at any time.

(O) Signs. In an IP Zone, signs are permitted in accordance with the provisions set forth in Chapter 152 as amended.

(P) Use limitations. In an IP Zone, all permitted uses shall be subject to the following limitations and standards:

(1) No use is permitted in the IP Zone which will or is expected to produce noise, fumes, gases or vibrations which exceed the standards of the State Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ).

(2) No use shall be permitted which has been declared a nuisance by action of the city, county, state or federal government or by a court of competent jurisdiction.

(3) No use is permitted which is reasonably expected to create a nuisance because of noise, smoke, odor, dust or gas.

(4) No use is permitted in the IP Zone which will or is expected to generate, release, store or deposit hazardous materials or substances except as specifically approved by the DEQ and/or any other appropriate state and/or federal agency.

(5) For uses requiring pollution or contaminant discharge permits by an agency other than the city, final approval for the use shall not be issued by the city prior to review and approval by the applicable permit reviewing authority(ies).

(6) No use is permitted in the IP Zone if determined to be hazardous to aircraft operations by the FAA or State Aeronautics.

(7) Materials shall be stored and grounds maintained in a manner as to prevent the attraction of or aid in the propagation of insects or rodents, or in a manner as to not otherwise create a public health hazard or attractive nuisance hazard or a hazard to airport operations.

(8) Except as approved otherwise by the city in accordance with applicable access management provisions, there shall not be more than one access for ingress and one egress from properties accommodating uses permitted by this section.

(Q) On-site equipment and utilities. Except as approved otherwise by the city, all on-site utility lines shall be placed underground. All roof mounted fixtures, utility cabinets or similar equipment installed above ground shall be visually screened from public view from arterial and major collector streets.

(R) Additional requirements. As a condition of approval of any use proposed within an IP Zone, the city may require the following:

(1) An increase in required setbacks.

(2) Additional off-street parking and loading facilities.

(3) Limitations on signs or lighting, time of operations and points of ingress and egress.

(4) Additional landscaping, screening and other improvements.

(5) Any other conditions considered necessary to achieve compliance with the intent and purposes of this section, this chapter and policies of the Comprehensive Plan.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11; Am. Ord. 1208, passed 12-9-14)


153.063 MIXED USE (MU) ZONE.

In an MU Zone, the following regulations shall apply:

(A) Purpose. Mixed Use (MU) Districts allow the emergence of complete neighborhoods with a mix of residential, retail, service, office and employment activities. These districts de-emphasize land use regulations, and instead permit a broader range of uses subject to design standards established in this section. Urban design standards are required in order to maintain a neighborhood commercial scale, to promote bicycle and pedestrian activity, and to maintain the unique character of the center. There are a number of benefits that could result from appropriately sited Mixed Use Zones, including:

(1) Provides a transition from one single-use zone to another (i.e., residential to commercial);

(2) Reduces dependence on automobile travel;

(3) Increases the vitality and convenience of formerly single-use zones by adding complementary uses (for example, restaurants or dry cleaners to a residential area or high density housing in proximity to a commercial center);

(4) Offers residents, including seniors and youth, the opportunity to meet some of their daily needs by walking or biking;

(5) Enhances the nighttime and weekend security of commercial areas through the presence of residents;

(6) Efficiently utilizes public investments of streets, parking, infrastructure and services through a higher intensity and mix of uses;

(7) Increases the amount of land available for housing in areas with high housing demand, lessening development pressure on nearby open space and agricultural land;

(8) Provides for more efficient transit operations by providing a higher density and greater variety of uses within a reasonable distance of a transit stop.

(B) Designation of Mixed Use Zone. Properties may be designated with the MU Zone in accordance with the procedures set forth for a quasi-judicial zone change in § 153.250 et seq., Administration and Enforcement. Application for the MU Zone on a specific property or conglomeration of properties may be made by either the property owner or the Planning Commission on its own initiative. If the application is made by a property owner, a regulating master plan for the site shall be submitted and reviewed in conjunction with the zone change.

(C) Mixed Use Zone classifications. The following shall be the Mixed Use Zone classifications. A zone change proposal may include any mix of these Mixed Use Zones as well as traditional zones or may include a single Mixed Use Zone. While there are no specific standards attached to each zone, the following purpose statements are intended to serve as a guideline for developers in preparing regulating master plans and for the Planning Commission in reviewing zone change proposals. Add open space or public square to the description of each zone.

(1) Commercial Mixed Use District (CMU). The CMU District is established where a mix of commercial with residential uses is intended to be compatible with existing nearby zoning and uses. Development within the CMU District shall have a significant commercial element, along with medium to high density residential uses. Single-family uses are also allowed but should be constructed as high density attached homes (i.e., townhomes) or used to buffer the development from adjacent single-family neighborhoods. The layout of development within the CMU District should have a central focus around the commercial and public areas (public buildings, community facilities, parks, etc.), providing clear access to these elements from the residential uses. While uniformity is not required throughout a development in a CMU District, there should be recognizable themes either throughout the development or within sub-areas of the development. Such themes should include architectural and landscape design, street layout, open space patterns and other elements that reflect the visual character of a neighborhood. The primary development objectives of the CMU District are to expand housing opportunities; allow businesses to locate in a variety of settings; provide options for living, working and shopping environments in close proximity; facilitate more intensive use of land while minimizing potentially adverse impacts; and to provide options for pedestrian-oriented lifestyles.

(2) Employment Mixed Use District (EMU). The EMU District is established where a mix of industrial uses with commercial or medium to high density residential uses is intended and compatible with existing nearby zoning and uses. Development within the EMU District shall have an employment (industrial) emphasis, but may include supporting commercial, public and/or high density residential uses. The scale of commercial uses should be designed primarily to serve employees of other commercial and industrial uses within the development and on nearby properties; commercial uses within the EMU are not intended to serve the greater Prineville area. Likewise, residential uses in an EMU District should be designed and scaled specifically to provide housing for the employees of the commercial and industrial uses within the development. Such residential uses should be carefully located to avoid conflicts with industrial uses in the development and on adjacent properties and, when possible, should be used as a transition area between industrial/commercial in the development and residential uses on adjacent properties. EMU Districts above the grade in the southwest portion of the city shall not include permanent housing due to the proximity to the airport; however, hotels and housing directly associated with an industrial development (i.e., caretaker housing, penthouse for visiting executives, etc.) may be included as part of a development proposal. Centralized public spaces (parks, plazas, community buildings, etc.) are a key feature of development in the EMU Zone in order to provide amenities for the employment base. The primary development objectives of the EMU District are to expand employment opportunities by allowing businesses to locate in a variety of locations, provide services for employees in close proximity to their work place, to increase options for workforce housing near employment centers; facilitate more intensive use of land while minimizing potentially adverse impacts; and to provide greater options and flexibility in the development of land for industrial and supporting commercial purposes.

(D) Mandatory inter-agency pre-application meeting. Any applicant requesting a zone change shall be required to attend a pre-application meeting which will be facilitated by the city. At a minimum, the applicant shall submit a draft regulating master plan as described in subsection (G) of this section. Any additional information that is required as part of the zone change and regulating master plan approval may also be submitted by the applicant in order to obtain preliminary comments. The applicant shall submit the required form and information to the city a minimum of ten days prior to the pre-application meeting.

(E) Optional pre-application Commission meeting. At the request of the applicant, the city will conduct a pre-application meeting with the Planning Commission. The purpose of this meeting would be for the applicant to obtain a general sense of the Commission’s receptiveness to a zone change on a specific property and to identify primary issues prior to investing significant resources into preparation of a full quasi-judicial zone change application. Any such pre-application meeting with the Planning Commission will be held as a public hearing in accordance with § 153.250 et seq., Administration and Enforcement.

(F) Consideration of Mixed Use Zone by Planning Commission initiative. The Planning Commission, on its own initiative, may recommend to City Council that a specific property or conglomeration of properties be changed to a Mixed Use Zone based on the following criteria and conditions:

(1) The property must be identified as a future mixed use site in the City’s Comprehensive Plan or other adopted plan, such as a framework plan or area plan;

(2) The city must obtain written consent from all owners of property under consideration for the zone change;

(3) Once the zone is changed to mixed use, no development shall take place on the subject site(s) until a regulating master plan has been reviewed and approved in accordance with this section. All infrastructure impacts (water, sewer, traffic, storm water, etc.) shall be considered at the time of review of the regulating master plan; therefore, no vesting of rights to infrastructure capacity shall be allowed, nor shall any exactions for these purposes be required, prior to the approval of a regulating master plan.

(4) Review of a zone change proposal shall be conducted in accordance with the land use action procedures in § 153.250 et seq., Administration and Enforcement.

(G) Application for Mixed Use Zone by property owner/developer. Property owners or developers may apply for a change to the Mixed Use Zone by submitting the following to the city:

(1) A quasi-judicial zone change application and fee;

(2) A written burden of proof addressing the following:

(a) Consistency of the proposed rezone with the City’s Comprehensive Plan;

(b) Compliance of the proposed zone change and associated regulating master plan with the criteria in this section;

(c) Statement regarding the compatibility of proposed uses with existing uses or zoning on adjacent properties;

(d) Economic report/analysis demonstrating both the need for additional acreage for proposed uses as well as the abundance of acreage for uses that would be reduced (if applicable);

(3) A regulating master plan meeting the criteria of subsection (H) of this section;

(4) Traffic impact analysis in accordance with the City’s Transportation Systems Plan detailing current traffic conditions, anticipated traffic impacts if property was developed under existing zoning and anticipated traffic impacts under the proposed Mixed Use Zone(s);

(5) Water and sewer analysis application and fee;

(6) Any other documents, forms or reports required by state or federal law;

(7) Review of a zone change proposal shall be conducted in accordance with the land use action procedures in § 153.250 et seq., Administration and Enforcement.

(H) Regulating master plan. Prior to any development on property designated for mixed uses, a regulating master plan shall be required and shall include the following:

(1) Master plan map and accompanying written description detailing the following:

(a) Location and area of zones if multiple zones are proposed;

(b) Location and area of specifically defined (i.e., high density residential, commercial-residential mixed, etc.);

(c) Identification of specific uses proposed within each defined area of the plan;

(d) Description of each of the proposed use categories;

(e) Minimum and maximum residential densities in each defined area;

(f) Any existing uses and structures located on the site and whether they will be retained, removed or modified;

(g) Building envelopes and/or setbacks, orientation and maximum lot coverage for each defined area and/or building type;

(h) Proposed perimeter setbacks and buffer zones;

(i) Street network including proposed street cross-sections;

(j) Location of all existing and proposed parking facilities and street access points;

(k) Location and area of all public or common space, including parks, plazas, community buildings, open space, etc.

(2) Landscape plan depicting the following:

(a) Recreational, park and open space;

(b) Planter strips and vegetative screening;

(c) Street trees and other vegetation, including species;

(d) Areas designated for drainage and retention;

(e) Existing trees and other significant vegetation and whether they will be retained or removed with development of the site.

(3) Bicycle and pedestrian circulating plan depicting the following:

(a) All sidewalks, bike lanes and other pedestrian/multi-use pathways;

(b) Bike/pedestrian amenities such as extra-wide sidewalks, planter strips, benches, covered walkways, bike parking facilities and areas where no curb cuts will be allowed (i.e., parking in rear of buildings);

(c) Any other elements of the site design that enhance the pedestrian experience or promote walking and cycling within and through the site.

(4) Conceptual building elevations.

(a) Required for all multifamily, attached single-family and commercial uses;

(b) Recommended for detached single-family uses (may be required by Planning Commission);

(c) Shall include visual depiction of all visible sides of buildings;

(d) Shall include height, area and general footprint of each building type;

(e) May be conceptual in nature but must be detailed enough to provide an overall understanding of the visual nature of the development.

(5) Engineered grading and drainage plan; including retention.

(6) Architectural renderings, detailed conceptual designs and streetscape profiles and other such visual aids are encouraged and may be required by the Planning Commission if necessary to understand and evaluate a mixed use development proposal.

(7) In the case where a property is designated with an MU Zone as a result of Planning Commission initiative, items in subsections (G)(2) through (6) of this section shall be required to be submitted with the regulating master plan.

(I) Evaluation criteria. The following criteria detail a series of design standards that seek to achieve attractive, pedestrian-friendly development where mixed use zoning is applied. Developers may choose to meet these standards as prescribed, or they may propose other design ideas which are equal to or superior in meeting the objective of a particular standard. When a developer requests an exemption from a required standard, it is their responsibility to propose an alternative that fulfills the intent of the standard to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission has sole authority to authorize the exceptions and to determine the acceptability of the alternative the developer proposes.

(1) Building design standards. Intent: New structures and improvements to existing facades requiring building permits shall provide architectural relief and interest, with emphasis at building entrances and along sidewalks, to promote and enhance a comfortable pedestrian scale and orientation. Blank walls shall be avoided to the maximum extent practicable by complying with the following minimum requirements. The following standards are intended to be specific and quantifiable while allowing for flexibility in design:

(a) Articulation. In order to break up both horizontal and vertical expanses of buildings, wall and roof lines shall include offsets and other architectural methods to provide variation (i.e., pillars, entryway features, awnings, etc.).

(b) Variation of materials. In order to break up vast expanses of single-element building elevations and to provide differentiation between adjacent attached structures and floor levels, building design shall include a combination of architectural elements, features and materials.

(c) Multiple stories. All multifamily and single-family attached structures shall be constructed with at least two stories. At a minimum, 50% of all commercial and civic buildings shall be at least two stories.

(d) Weather protection. Awnings and canopies are intended to protect pedestrians from the weather and add to the architectural interest of buildings. New commercial, industrial and multifamily structures shall provide a weather-protected area over the primary entrances to buildings. Weather protection is encouraged along sidewalks and plazas where appropriate to abate sun exposure or icing of walkways.

(e) Mechanical equipment and trash receptacles. All mechanical equipment (including equipment located on the roof) and trash receptacles for commercial, industrial and multifamily residential buildings shall be screened with building materials consistent with the architecture of the building.

(f) Parking structures. Any parking structures shall be designed to include commercial uses along any portion of the first floor of the structure abutting a street, open space or other public or common area. Upper floors may utilize a combination of residential and commercial uses and false fronts to mask the appearance of the parking structure in order to provide consistency with architecture of surrounding buildings.

(g) Sidewalks. Sidewalks on blocks with commercial buildings shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width for the entire length of the block, regardless of other uses on the block. Sidewalks located on blocks without commercial buildings but which have buildings located at the front property line shall have a minimum width of ten feet. All other sidewalks shall be a minimum of six feet in width.

(h) Large buildings. Commercial buildings with a footprint over 40,000 square feet shall be subject to special design standards in § 153.021.

(2) Building orientation and setbacks. Intent: To the greatest extent practicable, all new buildings in a mixed use development shall be oriented toward streets, open space or other public or common areas in a manner that accommodates pedestrian comfort, convenience and safety.

(a) Any commercial, industrial or multifamily or attached single-family (i.e., townhomes) shall be located at the front property line along a street. On corner lots such buildings shall be located along both property lines. This requirement may be waived by the Planning Commission when the building design incorporates public seating, plazas, landscaped open space (including storm water drainage facilities when designed to enhance pedestrian scale, orientation and interest) or other usable public space into the area between the property line and the building;

(b) Public entrances. Public entrances to all new buildings shall be visible from the street and oriented so that pedestrians have a direct and convenient route from the sidewalk to building entrances. An exception to this standard would be buildings that are oriented to an internal plaza or pedestrian walkway;

(c) Minimum setbacks. Setbacks within the Mixed Use Zoning Districts shall be determined by an approved regulating master plan and shall not be based on distance to property line but distance between buildings or building envelopes (depending on specificity of plan). Minimum required distance between buildings or building envelopes, excluding structures that share a common wall, is as follows:

1. Ten feet between one- and two-story buildings;

2. Additional five feet for each additional story. When adjacent buildings are of a different number of stories, the average of the two buildings shall be used for calculating setbacks. Example: two four-story buildings would require 20 feet whereas a three-story and four-story building would require 17.5 feet.

3. Any garage facing a public street shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the public right-of-way.

4. Any residential accessory structures shall be located at least five feet from a property line or any other structure;

(d) Special setbacks for buildings over two stories. Any building over two stories shall have a setback from any adjacent residentially zoned property (not including residentially zoned property within the development site) equal to twice the height of the structure at the point of setback measurement. This requirement may be waived or reduced by the Planning Commission if the adjacent residentially zoned property has been developed with buildings over two stories in height;

(e) Clear vision areas. All clear vision areas shall be free from vision-impairing development in accordance with § 153.081.

(3) Building height and special setbacks.

(a) Buildings may be built to a maximum height of 45 feet, subject to the restrictions in subsection (I)(2)(e) of this section; solar access should be a consideration of design.

(4) Neighborhood compatibility. Intent: To achieve a compatible transition between mixed use and other zones of differing height, bulk and scale requirements, consideration shall be given to the scale and design of surrounding buildings to promote compatibility and complement or enhance the character of existing single-family neighborhoods.

(a) Lot sizes, building mass and density and land use patterns around the perimeter of the development shall be similar to that which is allowed in the zone of adjacent properties and, as much as is practicable, be consistent with the actual uses on adjacent developed properties.

(b) Site obscuring landscaping shall be required around the perimeter of the property, not including open space areas and access ways.

(c) As much as is practicable, land use types within a mixed use development shall transition at adjoining rear property lines instead of at the street in order to maintain consistent use patterns on both sides of streets.

(5) Parking bonus. Parking shall be provided in accordance with §§ 153.085 and 153.086. However, due to the pedestrian-friendly requirement in Mixed Use Zoning Districts, 50% of on-street parking spaces may be used in determining parking requirements. This bonus does not apply to any building with parking between the building and the street (i.e., detached single-family homes with garages in front). Shared parking areas may also be used as long as they are within 400 feet of the building(s) to which the parking spaces are assigned.

(6) Open space, landscaping and screening. Intent: Open space is intended to provide visual relief and interest in a development as well as to provide recreational opportunities for the residents, employees and customers of the development. Landscaping is intended to complement built forms within a development area, softening and providing visual relief and contrast to buildings, sidewalks, parking lots and other built features of a development. The installation of landscaping shall be accomplished in a manner that assures the planted stock receives adequate irrigation - drought-resistant plantings and xeriscaping is strongly encouraged where practical. Screening is intended to complement a development area by shielding trash receptacles, storage areas and other unsightly facilities from public view within the development area.

(a) Open space - General. A minimum of 20% of the entire mixed use site shall be dedicated to public open space including parks, plazas, gardens, parking lot screening, landscaped storm water drainage areas, paths and trails (not including sidewalks) and other common open areas;

(b) Open space - Central park. Half (50%) of the required general open space shall be dedicated either to a single, centralized park or to a series of parks interconnected by a pedestrian greenway and/or off-street walking trails;

(c) Screening. All parking lots, loading areas, storage areas and the like shall be screened with a combination of fencing and/or densely planted trees and shrubs to minimize the visual impact;

(d) Street trees. A landscape plan shall include a street tree plan describing the type and species of all existing and new trees in the development. At a minimum, street trees shall be planted at an average of one tree per every 25 feet of street frontage throughout the development. Street trees located in the sidewalk shall be planted in grated tree wells with minimum dimensions of four feet by four feet. No street trees may be placed in sidewalks less than ten feet in width;

(e) Preservation of existing trees. Whenever feasible, mature, existing trees should be preserved and incorporated into the design of the development.

(7) Street connectivity and internal circulation. Intent: To make mixed use developments part of a connected street system that serves vehicles, pedestrians and bicycles. Public streets shall connect the development to adjacent neighborhoods and zoning districts. When street connections are not practicable, pedestrian ways shall be made to and through the development in lieu of planned street connections.

(a) Streets and access ways of any one development or site shall interconnect with those of adjacent developments or sites. Internal street or circulation patterns that isolate a development from all adjacent developments, and only allow access to fronting arterial or major collector streets, shall be prohibited. Exception - the Planning Commission may determine that topography and/or existence of natural features or street patterns on adjacent properties would be better accommodated with an alternative circulation pattern.

(b) Streets shall be constructed in accordance with the City’s Standards and Specifications; however, the Planning Commission may make the determination that an alternate design is appropriate for serving the development. Any such alternative should be contingent on the City’s Public Works Director accepting the street as a public street or approving it as a private street.

(c) Mid-block curb cuts (i.e., driveways) shall be minimized as much as possible to create a safe, pedestrian-friendly environment. Access alleys are encouraged and may be required.

(d) Whenever feasible, the bicycle and pedestrian system in a mixed use development shall tie in to and extend trail systems on adjacent properties. Trail connections identified on the Crook County Parks and Recreation District Trails Master Plan shall be constructed and dedicated to the public in accordance with this plan.

(e) Pedestrian paths and sidewalks shall connect all building entrances with each other and with public rights-of-way in a manner that is direct and convenient for the pedestrian. Pedestrian crossings, both in the public right-of-way and in parking areas, shall be clearly marked with paint and/or alternative, raised materials.

(8) Public transit. Mixed use sites may be required to include a public transit stop in accordance with a regional or local transit plan. This may include a pull-out designed for inter-city buses, a bicycle parking facility and a covered passenger waiting area. The public transit stop shall be located along a higher order street within or adjacent to the development, or as otherwise recommended by the regional transit provider, and shall be located to maximize the accessibility of all residents, employees and customers of the development.

(J) Exceptions. Any of the evaluation criteria listed above may be waived by the Planning Commission based on any of the following:

(1) Site specific conditions such as topography or character of neighboring developments which make an alternative design more ideal;

(2) ADA requirements that make it impractical to construct buildings to the prescribed criteria;

(3) At the sole discretion of the Planning Commission, alternative designs may be approved based on the finding that they meet the intent of this section and are equal to or exceed the quality of development that would be created under the prescribed criteria.

(K) Conflicts.

(1) In cases where the development standards of this section conflict with standards found in other sections of this code, the standards of this section shall prevail;

(2) Development standards found in adopted refinement plans, specific area plans and specific development plans shall prevail over those in this section;

(3) The intent of this section is not to create nonconforming uses due to necessary Zoning Map amendments to Mixed Use; however, if a nonconforming situation is created, existing buildings, structures and uses may continue until abandoned or vacated for at least 12 months. No expansion of a nonconforming use shall be allowed.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11; Am. Ord. 1208, passed 12-9-14)


153.070 AIRPORT ZONES GENERAL CRITERIA.

(A) Special definitions. For the purposes of this zone as set forth by this section, and other related airport zones set forth in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

	LIST OF ACRONYMS:

	AA Zone - Airport Approach Overlay

	AC Zone - Airport Commercial

	AD Zone - Airport Development

	AM Zone - Airport Business-Industrial

	AO Zone - Airport Operations

	BRL - Building Restriction Line

	DNL - Decibel Noise Level

	FAA - Federal Aviation Administration

	GPS - Global Positioning Satellite System

	ILS - Instrument Landing System

	MLS - Microwave Landing System

	OAR - Oregon Administrative Rule

	OFA - Object Free Area

	PAR - Precision Approach Radar System

	RPZ - Runway Protection Zone

	RSA - Runway Safety Area

AIRPORT. The strip of land used for taking off and landing aircraft, together with all adjacent land used in connection with the aircraft landing and taking off from the strip of land, including but not limited to land used for existing commercial and recreational airport uses and activities as described in OAR 660-013-0100, for example:

(1) EMERGENCY MEDICAL FLIGHT SERVICES. Includes activities, aircraft accessory structures and other facilities necessary to support emergency transportation for medical purposes; does not include hospitals, medical offices or labs, or medical equipment sales and similar uses.

(2) LAW ENFORCEMENT AND FIREFIGHTING ACTIVITIES. Includes aircraft and ground based activities, facilities and accessory structures necessary to support federal, state or local law enforcement and land management agencies engaged in law enforcement and firefighting activities. Such activities include transport of personnel, aerial observation and transport of equipment, water, fire retardant and supplies.

(3) SEARCH AND RESCUE OPERATIONS. Includes aircraft and ground based activities, facilities and accessory structures located at airport sites that promote the orderly and efficient conduct of search and rescue related activities.

(4) FLIGHT INSTRUCTION AND GROUND TRAINING. Includes activities, facilities and accessory structures located at airport sites that provide education and training directly related to aeronautical activities; does not include schools for flight attendants, ticket agents or similar personnel.

(5) AIRCRAFT MAINTENANCE. Includes activities, facilities and accessory structures provided to maintain, service and repair aircraft and aircraft components, but not including activities, structures and facilities for the manufacturing of aircraft for sale to the public or the manufacturing of aircraft related products for sale to the public. Does include the construction of aircraft and aircraft components for personal use and the assembly of aircraft and aircraft components is allowed as part of servicing, maintaining or repairing aircraft and aircraft components.

(6) AIRCRAFT REFUELING. Includes activities, facilities and accessory structures for dispensing aviation fuel to aircraft.

(7) AIRCRAFT RENTAL. Includes activities, facilities and accessory structures that support the provision of aircraft for rent or lease to the public.

(8) AIRCRAFT SERVICE AND SALES. Includes activities, facilities and accessory structures for the storage, display, demonstration and sale of aircraft to the public.

(9) AERONAUTIC SKILLS TRAINING. Includes activities, facilities and accessory structures used to teach aviation-related skills and subjects, or promote proficiency in the operation of aircraft.

(10) AERONAUTIC RECREATIONAL AND SPORTING ACTIVITIES. Includes activities, facilities and accessory structures at airports that support recreational use of aircraft and sporting activities that require the use of aircraft or other devices used and intended for use in flight. Includes, but is not limited to: fly-ins; glider flights; hot air ballooning; ultralight aircraft flights; displays of aircraft; aeronautic flight skills contests; gyrocopter flights; flights carrying parachutists; and parachute drops onto an airport.

(11) CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF AIRPORT FACILITIES. Includes activities, facilities and accessory structures necessary for the construction and maintenance of runways, taxiways, parking aprons, hangars, approach facilities, airport operational areas, aeronautical aids, lighting, residence for an airport caretaker or security officer, fixed base operator facilities and other uses necessary and accessory to airport operations. Does not include activities, facilities and structures that support residential, commercial or industrial uses that are not necessary and accessory to airport operations.

(12) CROP DUSTING ACTIVITIES. Includes activities, facilities and accessory structures provided for and accessory to crop dusting operations, including, but not limited to, aerial application of chemicals, seed, fertilizer, pesticide, defoliant and other activities and chemicals used in a commercial agricultural, forestry or rangeland management setting.

AIRPORT APPROACH SAFETY ZONE. The land that underlies the approach surface, excluding the RPZ.

AIRPORT DEPENDENT USE OR ACTIVITY. A use or activity directly servicing the airport, employees working on the airport property or air service patrons. Direct service businesses and uses include such uses as aircraft fueling stations, aircraft repair facilities, hangars, air charter services, taxiways, heliports and other similar uses.

AIRPORT HAZARD. Any structure, vegetation or use of land which exceeds height limits established by the airport imaginary surfaces.

AIRPORT IMAGINARY SURFACES. The restricted three dimensional land and air space which is defined by the approach surface, transitional surface, horizontal surface and conical surface and in which any object extending above or within these spaces is an obstruction. See OAR Chapter 660, Division 13 exhibits for dimensions and graphics specifically defining these surfaces.

AIRPORT RELATED USE OR ACTIVITY. A use that is determined to be a use requiring a location at or adjacent to an airport to be economically viable. Economic viability can be measured by finding that the use would suffer an identifiable and measurable economic disadvantage if not so located. Measurements may include consideration of the following: percentage of business done with aircraft or air cargo; and dependence of staff, management, sales personnel, vendors or clientele on air transportation.

APPROACH SURFACE. A surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline and extending outward and upward from each end of the primary surface. See OAR Chapter 660, Division 13 exhibits for graphics specifically defining this surface.

BUILDING RESTRICTION LINE (BRL). This area is intended to protect the runway from building encroachment.

CONICAL SURFACE. A surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 to one for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. See OAR Chapter 660, Division 13 exhibits for dimensions and graphics specifically defining this surface.

FREIGHT. Services and facilities at public use airports.

HORIZONTAL SURFACE. A horizontal plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which is constructed by swinging arcs of specified radii from the center of each end of the primary surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs. See OAR Chapter 660, Division 13 exhibits for dimensions and graphics specifically defining this surface.

NOISE SENSITIVE AREAS. Within 1,500 feet of an airport, or within established noise contour boundaries exceeding 55 DNL.

NONPRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY. A runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance, or area type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved, or planned, or indicated on an FAA or state planning document or military service airport planning document.

OBJECT FREE AREA (OFA). Two dimensional surface intended to be free of ground objects.

PLACE OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY. Structure or place which the public may enter for such purposes as deliberation, education, worship, shopping, entertainment, amusement, awaiting transportation or similar activity.

PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY. A runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing an Instrument Landing System (ILS), Microwave Landing System (MLS), Global Positioning System (GPS) or a Precision Approach Radar System (PAR). It also means a runway for which a precision approach system is planned and is not indicated by an FAA approved Airport Layout Plan, any other FAA or state planning document, or military service airport planning document.

PRIMARY SURFACE. A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. See OAR Chapter 660, Division 13 exhibits for dimensions and graphics specifically defining this surface.

RUNWAY PROTECTION ZONE (RPZ). An area off the runway end (formerly the clear zone) used to enhance the protection of people and property on the ground. The RPZ is trapezoidal in shape and centered above the extended runway centerline. It begins 200 feet beyond the end of the arcs usable for takeoff or landing. The RPZ dimensions are functions of the type of aircraft and operations to be conducted on the runway.

RUNWAY SAFETY AREA (RSA). A defined surface surrounding the runway prepared or suitable for reducing the risk of damage to airplanes in the event of an undershoot, overshoot, or excursion from the runway.

TRANSITIONAL SURFACE. Those surfaces which extend upward and outward at 90 degree angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline. See OAR Chapter 660, Division 13 exhibits for dimensions and graphics specifically defining this surface.

UTILITY RUNWAY. A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight or less.

VISUAL RUNWAY. A runway that is intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures where no instrument approach procedures have been approved or planned or indicated on an FAA or state planning document or military service airport planning document.

(B) Application. Information accompanying an application for a permit within an airport zone shall include the following:

(1) Property boundary lines as they relate to airport imaginary surfaces or to the boundary lines of the RPZ, BRL, OFA and/or RSA areas, and to the Airport Layout Plan as may be amended.

(2) Location and height of all existing and proposed buildings, structures, utility lines and roads.

(3) In accordance with OAR Chapter 738, Division 100, the reviewing planning authority shall notify the airport managing authority and State Aeronautics of land use permits of zone changes within 5,000 feet of a visual and 10,000 feet of an instrument airport in a manner as to provide the parties an opportunity to review and comment.

(C) Design and use criteria. In the consideration of an application for a proposed use in an airport zone, the reviewing authority shall take into account the impact of the proposed use on the airport and on nearby commercial and industrial uses, on resource carrying capacities, on the capacity of transportation and other public facilities and services and on the appearance of the proposal. In approving a proposed use, the reviewing authority shall find the following:

(1) The proposal is in compliance with the Comprehensive Plan, and more specifically with the Airport Layout Plan.

(2) The proposal is in compliance with site and design review §§ 153.020 and/or 153.021. Site design of any permitted use shall protect the future use and development of the airport. Within the AR Zone special design considerations shall be given and may be required to protect scenic views from State Highway 126 and from the airport, and special design considerations shall be given to requirements that maximize the compatibility with and continuing use and development of the airport.

(3) The proposal is in compliance with the intent and provisions of this chapter and more particularly with this section.

(4) That any identifiable social, economic, physical or environmental impacts are minimized or effectively mitigated.

(5) The proposal is in compliance with applicable State Aeronautics and FAA regulations.

(D) Off-street parking and loading and access requirements and limitations. In an airport zone, limitations and requirements for off-street parking, loading and access shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of this subsection and §§ 153.085 and 153.086.

(1) Unless approved otherwise by the reviewing authority, all parking demand created by any use permitted by this section shall be accommodated on the subject premises entirely off-street or off the serving taxiway, including parking for employees, patrons, customers, clientele, visitors and the like.

(2) No use permitted by this section shall require the backing of auto vehicular traffic onto a public or private street or road right-of-way, or onto a taxiway to accommodate ingress or egress to any use of the premises thereof.

(3) It is the intent of this section that no use approved pursuant hereto shall access directly onto the serving state highway (that is, an arterial). Ingress and egress for uses permitted under this section shall utilize existing or future lower order roads in the area, and if necessary to meet this requirement, permitted uses shall provide for shared ingress and egress, and/or the construction of marginal access roads.

(E) Minimum landscaping requirements. A minimum level of landscaping in accordance with the provisions set forth in § 153.087 may be required for all new development in an airport zone, and it shall be the intent of this zone to approve development which is as environmentally attractive as possible for employees, patrons and visitors to the area. The type of landscaping used shall not impede or endanger airport operations such as fruiting or flowering trees that attract birds.

(F) Use limitations. In addition to those limitations that may be applicable as set forth in an Airport Approach Overlay Zone (AA Zone), the following limitations and standards shall apply to all permitted uses in an airport zone:

(1) No use may result in the following:

(a) Electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and aircraft.

(b) Make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and lighting, from nearby land uses.

(c) Impairs visibility.

(d) Creates or is expected to increase bird strike hazards.

(e) Endangers or interferes with the landing, taking off or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport.

(2) Any use shall meet the standards established in FAA Regulations, Part 77 and OAR Chapter 738, Division 70; no structure shall penetrate into the airport imaginary surfaces as defined in subsection (A) of this section.

(3) Whenever there is a conflict on height limitations prescribed by this zone and any applicable overlay or combining zone, the lowest height limitation shall govern.

(4) As may be applicable, no place of public assembly shall be permitted in the Airport Approach Safety Zone or Runway Protection Zone (RPZ), and no structure or building shall be allowed within the RPZ.

(5) Except as may otherwise be approved by the city, county, State Aeronautics and FAA, no use shall be approved under the provisions of this section that proposes or would require any overhead power or other utility lines to be located in clear or approach zones, or in the RPZ.

(6) No development shall be permitted that attracts or sustains hazardous bird movements from feeding, watering or roosting across the runways and/or approach and departure patterns of aircraft, nor shall any use be permitted under the provisions of this section if the use will allow or cause ponding which is likely to attract birds, or which otherwise is likely to attract birds which are normally considered high flight.

(7) No use shall be approved under the provisions of this section that does not utilize glare resistant materials in construction and landscaping that will minimize hazards to airport operations.

(8) It is the intent of this section, and the reviewing authority may require, that all structures permitted pursuant hereto be surfaced primarily with earth tone colors, although limited surface areas of not more than 15% may be approved with accent colors if such a requirement is set forth.

(9) All structures and uses approved under the provisions of this section shall be maintained in a good and attractive appearance, and such may be set forth as a condition of approval by the reviewing authority.

(10) No on-site lighting shall be permitted which is determined to be hazardous to airport operations.

(11) Any use permitted under the provisions of this section that is determined to be incompatible with an existing or planned use adjacent thereto or across the street from it, shall be screened from the incompatible uses by densely planted trees and shrubs or sight-obscuring fencing.

(12) In noise sensitive areas (within 1,500 feet of an airport or within established noise contour boundaries of 55 DNL and above) where noise levels are a concern, a declaration of anticipated noise levels shall be attached to any building permit, land use or division permit, deed and mortgage records. In areas where the noise level is anticipated to be 55 DNL and above prior to issuance of a building permit for construction of a noise sensitive land use (real property normally used for sleeping or normally used as schools, churches, hospitals or public libraries) the permit applicant shall be required to demonstrate that a noise abatement strategy will be incorporated into the building design which will achieve an indoor noise level equal to or less than 55 DNL.

(13) No use shall be permitted which has been declared a nuisance or a hazard to airport operations by statute or action of the city, the county, State Aeronautics, FAA or by a court of competent jurisdiction.

(14) For any use permitted under this section that requires a contaminant or other environmentally related permit from an agency other than the city or the county, final approval shall not be granted until such time as the approval of the agency is evident, and continuing compliance with the conditions of the permit shall be a condition of approval for the use.

(G) Additional requirements. As a condition of approval of any use proposed within an airport zone, the reviewing authority may require the following:

(1) Increases in required setbacks and/or reduced height limitations.

(2) The use of special noise insulation, glare resistant exteriors and other special construction requirements.

(3) Limitations on signs or lighting, time of operations and points of ingress and egress.

(4) Additional landscaping, screening fencing and other improvements; sight-obscuring fence shall be considered and may be required along property lines bordering serving arterials or collectors.

(5) Any other conditions considered necessary to protect the future use and development of the airport and the adjoining areas.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.071 AIRPORT SPECIFIC ZONES.

(A) Airport Approach Overlay (AA) Zone. In an AA Zone, the following regulations shall apply in addition to those of the underlying primary zone as applicable:

(1) Purpose.

(a) This overlay zone is intended to prevent the establishment of airspace obstructions in airport approaches and areas through height restrictions and other land use controls as deemed essential to the future development of the airport, and to protect the health, safety and welfare of the people of the city and county and airport users.

(b) In order to carry out the provisions of this overlay zone, there are hereby created and established certain zones which include certain lands lying beneath the airport imaginary surfaces as they apply to airport located in the Prineville Urban Area within Crook County. The zones are shown on the current Airport Layout Plans and may be amended.

(2) Internal zones. Zones BRL, OFA, RSA and RPZ are within the AA Zone. Uses in this area are limited to the following:

(a) Operations involving the alteration, removal, maintenance and other nonstructural activities associated with native vegetative cover.

(b) Uses of a public works, public service or public utility nature, including the maintenance or improvement of such, and including runway, taxiway, street or road construction or maintenance activities.

(c) Other uses and activities specifically identified on the 1995 Airport Layout Plan within the areas as approved by the city, the county, State Aeronautics and FAA; and as such may be amended and subsequently approved by the city, county, State Aeronautics and FAA.

(3) Uses allowed. See airport zone use tables in § 153.039.

(B) Airport Operations AO Zone. In an AO Zone, the following regulations shall apply:

(1) Purpose. The purpose of this zone is to provide designated areas for development of facilities designed to support and facilitate airport operations and other airport dependent uses or activities; protect airport facilities from incompatible uses; to provide for future airport development and expansion; and to minimize hazards to airport use and operations.

(2) Uses allowed. See airport zone use tables in § 153.039.

(C) Airport Development AD Zone. In an AD Zone, the following regulations shall apply:

(1) Purpose. The purpose of this zone is to provide designated areas for development of airport dependent and airport related uses and activities which support or facilitate airport operations; to protect airport facilities from incompatible uses; to provide for future airport development and expansion; and to minimize hazards to airport use and operations.

(2) Uses allowed. See airport zone use tables in § 153.039.

(D) Airport Commercial AC Zone. In an AC Zone, the following regulations shall apply:

(1) Purpose. The AC Zone is to provide for those business and commercial activities that are supporting, related to and/or dependent upon aircraft or air transportation when such activities, in order to function, require or desire a location adjacent to, or in close proximity to, the airport with or without immediate aircraft access to a taxiway. Business and commercial activities designed to serve users of the airport facilities (i.e., cafes, restaurants, coffee stands, mini-marts, overnight lodging, etc.) are also permitted in this zone provided they are determined to be of appropriate scale, location and orientation so as to focus primarily on airport users and not the general public.

(2) Uses allowed. See airport zone use tables in § 153.039.

(E) Airport Business-Industrial AM Zone. In an AM Zone, the following regulations shall apply:

(1) Purpose. The AM Zone is intended to provide for those business and industrial uses that are considered compatible with airport operations, the long range development plans of the airport and the future economic needs of the community. It is further the purpose of this zone to provide areas for those business and industrial activities that are supporting, related to and/or dependent upon aircraft or air transportation when such activities, in order to function, require or desire a location adjacent to, or in close proximity to, the airport with or without immediate aircraft access to a taxiway.

(2) Use criteria. In the determination of the need or desirability for a use to be located within this zone, and in the determination of compatibility with the stated purpose of the AM Zone, the following use criteria shall be considered:

(a) The use is determined to be a use requiring a location in this zone to be economically viable. Economic viability can be measured by finding that the use would suffer an identifiable and measurable economic disadvantage if not so located. Measurement may include consideration of the following: percentage of business done with aircraft or air cargo; and dependence of staff, management, sales personnel, vendors or clientele on air transportation.

(b) An application for a use permitted by this section may be denied if the applicant fails to demonstrate that the proposed location is essential to the business and industrial sector to be served or an overall benefit of the economic future of the community.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.075 OPEN SPACE-PARK RESERVE PR ZONE.

In a PR Zone, the following regulations shall apply:

(A) Purpose. The purpose of the PR Zone is to protect and provide natural resources within the city and the surrounding urban area considered important for recreation, open space and quality of living amenities and to limit development in those areas considered environmentally sensitive that have been designated by the Urban Area Comprehensive Plan to have open space qualities.

(B) Definition. For the purpose of this zone, as set forth in Statewide Planning Goal 5, OPEN SPACE consists of land that would, if preserved and continued in its present use, do the following:

(1) Conserve and enhance natural or scenic resources (SCENIC AREAS are defined as lands that are valued for their aesthetic appearance).

(2) Protect air or streams or water supply.

(3) Promote conservation of soils or wetlands.

(4) Conserve landscaped areas, such as public or private golf courses, that reduce air pollution and enhance the value of abutting or neighboring property.

(5) Enhance the value to the public of abutting or neighboring parks or other open space.

(6) Enhance recreation opportunities.

(7) Preserve historic sites.

(8) Promote orderly urban development.

(C) Uses permitted outright. In a PR Zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright:

(1) Public park or other passive recreation area including a day use picnic area, playground, open grass covered play area and similar uses.

(2) Nature, hiking, jogging and bicycling trails, including exercise fitness courses in conjunction therewith.

(3) Normal maintenance, replacement and improvement activities for existing parks, recreation, streets and roads and other public works facilities.

(4) The development of parks, recreation areas and facilities, streets, roads and other public works facilities that were adopted as part of a Plan element and/or a separate Plan document directly related thereto prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or the development approved as part of an overall development plan in compliance with this chapter.

(5) Utility lines necessary for public service, limited to those underground except in the case of the replacement, maintenance and/or upgrading of existing overhead facilities that do not exceed their original impact, such as larger structures.

(6) Farming and farm use, excluding structures.

(D) Conditional uses permitted. In a PR Zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted when authorized in accordance with the provisions of this section and § 153.135 et seq.:

(1) Type I conditional uses.

(a) Removal, fill and riprap activities directly related to a stream bank restoration project, and subject to applicable state and/or federal requirements.

(b) Temporary dike and other structural work for emergency flood protection, limited to 90 days and subject to all applicable state and federal requirements.

(c) Vegetative shoreline restoration and stabilization projects subject to applicable state and federal requirements.

(d) Projects involving active restoration of fish and wildlife habitat or water quality subject to applicable state and federal requirements.

(e) Tree and other riparian habitat alteration and removal subject to applicable state and federal requirements.

(f) The expansion of an existing use permitted by this zone by not more than 10%, either in terms of land and/or facility area.

(g) Farm structures.

(2) Type II conditional uses.

(a) Public parks or recreation areas and facilities that include structures associated with active recreation activities.

(b) Public or private museums or other historical display or exhibit areas and/or facilities.

(c) Organizational and/or educational camps, public, private or semi-public.

(d) Permanent dike and other structural work for flood and/or stream bank protection purposes.

(e) Public or private golf courses, including "Pitch ’n’ Putt" and driving ranges.

(f) Submerged cable, sewer line, water line or other pipeline.

(g) Bridge crossings and support structures therefor.

(h) Dredging, fill, alteration or piling installations or slope/soil stabilization structures necessary for the installation of either a Type I or Type II conditional use listed in this section.

(i) Overhead or above ground public utility lines and facilities.

(j) Public or private utility or public works facilities, including, but not limited to, water systems, sewer systems, streets, roads, substations, pumping stations, sewer lift stations and the like.

(E) Dimensional standards. In a PR Zone, the following dimensional standards shall apply:

(1) The minimum lot area shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of this section and this chapter relative to yard and other setback requirements, off-street parking and loading requirements, and any additional area as deemed necessary to maintain air, water, vegetation and other natural resource quality and adjoining and area land uses.

(2) The minimum building setback between a structure and the right-of-way line of an arterial or major collector road or street shall be 50 feet except as otherwise approved by the reviewing authority.

(3) The minimum building setback from a front property line shall be 25 feet.

(4) A yard abutting a residential zone shall be a minimum of 20 feet, except as approved otherwise by the reviewing authority.

(5) A side or rear yard shall be a minimum of ten feet, except as approved otherwise by the Commission.

(6) No building shall exceed a height of 25 feet except as approved otherwise by the reviewing authority.

(F) Design review. Provisions set forth in § 153.020 as applicable. In the consideration of an application for a proposed use, the reviewing authority shall take into account the impact of the proposed use on the open space and natural resource qualities of the area, on nearby uses, on resource carrying capacities, on the capacity of transportation and other public facilities and services, and on the appearance of the proposal.

(G) Off-street parking and loading. Provided in accordance with the provisions set forth in §§ 153.085 and 153.086.

(H) Minimum landscaping requirements. When design review is required, a minimum level of landscaping in accordance with § 153.087 shall be required. It shall also be the intent of this zone to require development to be as environmentally attractive as possible for residents and visitors to the area.

(I) Streets and public facilities. When design review is required, streets and public facilities shall be required in accordance with § 153.194 and the City’s Standards and Specifications. These improvements include but are not limited to right-of-way dedication, streets, storm water management, sidewalks, water lines, sewer lines, access management and the like.

(J) Chapter 155, Natural Features Overlay District (NFOD) and Slope Hazard Requirements. This chapter contains provisions for the protection of riparian areas, wetlands, rimrock, Barnes Butte and construction on steep slopes.

(K) Minimum sidewalk requirements. Whether replacing or required by design review, sidewalks shall be constructed to City Standards and Specifications. The minimum sidewalk width in a PR Zone is five feet.

(L) Signs. In a PR Zone, signs are permitted in accordance with the provisions set forth by Chapter 152 as amended, or as approved otherwise based on subsection (N) of this section.

(M) Use limitations. In a PR Zone, permitted uses shall be subject to the following limitations and standards:

(1) Uses which are found to exceed resource carrying capacities based on qualified technical resource data and information shall not be permitted.

(2) Special project designs may be required to ensure or otherwise maximize the preservation and/or protection of riparian habitats and other wildlife, public recreation or open space values.

(3) Points of access from a public street or way to a use permitted in this zone shall be so located, constructed, maintained and controlled as to minimize traffic congestion, noise and dust pollution and to protect scenic views and vistas.

(4) All parking demand created by any use permitted in this zone shall be accommodated entirely on-premises or off-street on another area or adjoining area. In no case shall the location of the off-premises area require pedestrian crossing of an arterial or major collector street or highway to obtain access to the subject use except as otherwise approved by the city.

(5) All uses permitted in this zone may be required to be screened and/or fenced from abutting residential zones and uses.

(N) Additional requirements. As a condition of approval of any use proposed within this zone, the reviewing authority may require the following:

(1) Increases in required setbacks and/or reduced height limitations.

(2) The preservation and/or enhancement of existing vegetative, scenic views and vistas and other natural resources, and may even consider requirements relative to building colors, placement and maintenance.

(3) Limitations on signs or lighting, time of operations and points of ingress and egress.

(4) Additional landscaping, screening, fencing and other improvements.

(5) Any other conditions considered necessary to protect existing and future open space and other natural resource values and qualities of the area.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11; Am. Ord. 1208, passed 12-9-14)


153.076 NATURAL FEATURES OVERLAY DISTRICT (CHAPTER 155).

For regulations on riparian habitat, scenic views and slope hazards see Chapter 155, Natural Features Overlay District (NFOD) and Slope Hazard Requirements.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)

SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS


153.080 ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS AND GUEST HOUSES.

(A) An accessory dwelling or guest house is a small, secondary living unit containing cooking facilities that may include manufactured homes but excludes recreational vehicles (RVs). The additional unit may be a detached unit, a unit attached to a garage, or in a portion of an existing house. An accessory dwelling unit shall not constitute grounds for future land division. The following standards are intended to control the size and number of accessory dwellings on individual lots, so as to promote compatibility with adjacent land uses. Accessory dwellings shall comply with all of the following standards:

(1) An accessory dwelling is allowed only if specified in the underlying zone use table. Manufactured homes shall only be used in zones that allow manufactured homes. In the case of a residential use in a commercial zone, the R2 Zone standards shall apply.

(2) One unit. A maximum of one accessory dwelling unit is allowed per lot or parcel and only in conjunction with a single-family home.

(3) Floor area. The maximum floor area of the accessory dwelling shall not exceed 700 square feet. Size requirements for manufactured homes in § 153.095 do not apply.

(4) Dimensional standards. An accessory dwelling shall not cause a lot to exceed the dimensional standards of the underlying zone. The lot size requirements per dwelling do not apply to accessory dwellings.

(5) Parking. In addition to the requirements of the primary residence, an accessory dwelling shall provide at least one additional off-street parking space to city standards.

(6) Building height. The building height of any detached accessory dwellings (i.e., separate cottages or above garages) shall not exceed 28 feet.

(7) Building materials. Accessory dwellings shall be constructed with materials and detailing that generally match those used on the primary dwelling, except where the approval body requires different materials and/or detailing to promote compatibility with single-family dwellings on abutting lots.

(8) Buffering. A minimum six-foot hedge or fence and/or trees may be required to buffer a detached accessory dwelling from dwellings on adjacent lots when buffering is necessary for the privacy and enjoyment of yard areas by either the occupants or adjacent residents.

(9) Utilities. Accessory dwelling units shall connect to the city’s water and sewer systems per the City’s Standards and Specifications. System development charges shall apply according to the city policy.

(10) Building Code. The structure shall comply with the current Building Code.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11; Am. Ord. 1229, passed 2-28-17)


153.081 CLEAR VISION AREAS.

In all zones, a clear vision area shall be maintained at the intersection of two streets, a street and a bike or pedestrian way and a street and an alley. A clear vision area shall contain no plantings, sight-obscuring fences, walls, structures or temporary or permanent obstructions exceeding two and one-half feet in height measured from the grade of the street centerline, except that trees exceeding this height may be located in this area, provided all branches and foliage are removed to a height of eight feet above the grade, and trunk diameter does not exceed 18 inches.

(A) Measurement of clear vision areas. A clear vision area shall consist of a triangular area, two sides of which are measured from the corner intersection of the street curb or location where street curb would be located if the right-of-way were developed to full city standards (ignoring any corner radius) for a distance of 25 feet. The third side is a line across the corner of the lot adjoining the nonintersecting ends of the other two sides. The vertical clear vision area is the area above the triangle, between two and one-half feet and eight feet in height (ten feet if located along a designated school bus route). In the case of an intersection of a street with an alley or bike/pedestrian way, the measurement shall be made along the nearest edge of the alley or bike/pedestrian way to the intersection for a distance of 15 feet.

(B) Exceptions to clear vision standards. Buildings constructed in the C-1 Zone shall be exempt from clear vision requirements.


[IMAGE]


(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.082 ON-SITE LIGHTING.

As part of any application for a development or any use within the city, all on-site lighting shall be designed, located, shielded or deflected, so as not to shine directly onto adjoining properties, impair the vision of a driver of any vehicle or be a hazard to aircraft operations within the area.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.083 STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC USES.

A use shall comply with the standards of the zone in which it is located, with the specific standards that may be applicable thereto as set forth by this section, with any additional standards and conditions that may be set forth by the reviewing authority and with any other applicable local, state and/or federal regulations.



(A) Residential care facility or residential care home. When permitted as a conditional use, the facilities shall be subject to the following conditions and limitations:

(1) A provider must live in the home that is to be used for the purpose and must be certified for the intended care, or must hire a certified resident care manager who shall reside in the subject home.

(2) There shall be adequate sleeping accommodations for all occupants and resident staff.

(3) The resident structure shall be inspected by the City Fire Chief and a certified Building Official and determined to be reasonably safe from fire and other safety hazards. The cost of the inspection(s), as applicable, shall be borne by the applicant.

(4) As may be recommended by the officials in the foregoing inspection, appropriate fire alarms shall be installed and an approved fire exit plan established. Not less than two exits from the structure shall be readily available to all occupants.

(5) Appropriate handicapped facilities and access shall be provided and/or installed as recommended by the appropriate local, county or state officials.

(6) Off-street parking shall be provided for all needs generated by the proposed use unless approved otherwise by the city.

(7) Annual inspections of the facilities shall be made by the appropriate state agency, and a report of the inspections shall be provided to the city within ten days of the receipt thereof by the applicant.

(8) As applicable, state licensing requirements shall be complied with on a continuing basis; failure of the compliance shall be a violation of this chapter and constitute sufficient grounds for permit revocation.

(B) Automobile wrecking yard or junk yard. In considering an application for an automobile wrecking yard or junk yard, the following factors, conditions and limitations shall be applicable:

(1) No such facility shall be permitted within 500 feet of the right-of-way of a state highway or other arterial or major collector unless hidden or adequately screened by terrain or other natural objects, or by plantings, fences or other appropriate means so as not to be visible from the main traveled way of the right-of-way.

(2) As applicable, applicant has been issued a wrecker certificate from the Department of Motor Vehicles or that the certificate of issuance be a condition of final approval, and that continued possession and compliance therewith be a condition of approval.

(3) A building and/or enclosure or other barrier at least six feet in height shall be constructed and maintained, and that the subject use shall be contained totally within the building and/or enclosure.

(4) Premises on the outside of the establishment shall be maintained in a clear and clean condition at all times.

(5) No activity involving any wrecking, dismantling or altering of vehicles shall be permitted outside the building, enclosure or barrier at any time.

(6) In an industrial or commercial zone, the display and offer for sale of vehicle parts or vehicles outside the building, enclosure or barrier may be permitted, but shall be limited to a single defined area comprising not more than 5% of the total area of the business and to not more than eight vehicles at any one time.

(7) In any zone except an industrial or commercial zone, the outside display shall be limited to 5% of the total area and not more than four vehicles.

(8) Special consideration shall be given to the following factors, and additional setbacks, screening and other conditions and limitations may be established relative thereto:

(a) Extent of development of surrounding property as a residential area.

(b) Proximity of churches, schools, hospitals, public buildings or other places of public assembly or gatherings, particularly recreational facilities.

(c) The health, safety and general welfare of the city and the public.

(C) Bed and breakfast facility. In the review and approval of such a facility, the following conditions and limitations shall apply (OAR 333-170):

(1) Compliance with applicable state regulations shall be established or assured, and continued compliance therewith shall be a condition of approval.

(2) Subject facility shall be inspected by the City Fire Chief and a certified Building Official relative to structural and fire safety conditions and hazards. A report and recommendation therefor shall be received and considered prior to final action on a proposed facility. The costs of the inspection, as applicable, shall be borne by the applicant.

(3) The owner and/or manager of the facility shall reside on the premises.

(4) All parking demands shall be accommodated totally off-street on the premises, except as approved otherwise by the reviewing authority.

(5) Total occupancy load shall be limited to the number of available private bedroom facilities, but in no case shall the number of rental units exceed six.

(6) As may be applicable, annual inspection shall be made of the subject facility by the appropriate local, county or state official(s) and a copy of the annual inspection report shall be provided to the city within ten days of the receipt thereof; the costs of the inspection shall be borne by the applicant/owner if applicable.

(7) As applicable, state licensing requirements shall be complied with on a continuing basis, and failure to comply therewith shall constitute grounds for permit revocation.

(8) As applicable, a city business license shall be required.

(D) Dog pounds or kennels. The reviewing authority may authorize dog pounds or kennels as permitted by the primary zone, and upon a finding that the use would not be detrimental to the adjoining properties and surrounding area because of noise, odor and other associated nuisances.

(1) Building and site design shall be adequate to minimize noise and odor.

(2) A sight-obscuring and sound-reducing fence or hedge or vegetative screening may be required.

(3) Holding cages and facilities may be restricted to being totally located within a building, and sound-insulating construction may be required.

(4) Vehicular access and loading/unloading facilities may be restricted as to number, location and improvement requirements.

(5) The types and numbers of animals permitted may be specified.

(6) Receipt of a valid complaint concerning odor, sanitary conditions and/or noise shall constitute sufficient grounds for immediate permit review and possible revocation.

(7) No on-site disposal of animals shall be permitted.

(E) Home occupations. When permitted as a conditional use and conducted as an accessory use to the primary use, a home occupation or a cottage industry may be permitted subject to the following standards and limitations:

(1) It will be operated by a resident of the property on which the business is located.

(2) It shall be limited to either an existing accessory structure, or to not more than 25% of the floor area of the main floor of the primary dwelling.

(3) The use is secondary to the main use of the property as a residence.

(4) In no case shall alterations or additions detract from the outward appearance of the property as a residential use.

(5) Except as approved otherwise by the city, total employment shall not exceed four persons, including the owner/operator(s) and members of the immediate family.

(6) No use shall be permitted that is found to be detrimental to the residential use of the subject property or adjoining or area properties because of noise, vibration, dust, smoke, odor, traffic, or interferences with radio or television reception or other factors.

(7) Retail sales shall be limited to homemade products and those commodities and/or materials used in conjunction with an approved use. Off-street parking and access shall be designed and provided for at such levels that the customer traffic does not create the appearance of a commercial business parking lot.

(8) No materials or commodities shall be delivered to and from the premises at a time, or of such bulk or quantity, as to create undesirable traffic, noise, congestion or hazards.

(9) Hours of operation and associated activities shall be within normal daylight business hours for the type of business involved, and in no case infringe upon the rights of neighboring residents to enjoy the residential occupancy of their homes. Uses involving nonresident employees, the delivery of goods or materials or customer visits shall limit their hours of operation to between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. unless otherwise approved by the city.

(10) The existence of a home occupation or a cottage industry shall not be used as justification for a zone change.

(11) All parking shall be entirely accommodated by a combination of off-street and on-street parking limited to the subject premises and the frontage of the subject property.

(12) Sight-obscuring fencing and/or landscaping of at least six feet in height may be required between the use and adjacent properties or public streets.

(13) Signs associated with the proposed use shall not exceed eight square feet in area.

(14) The disposal of all wastes associated with the subject use shall be provided for as required by the city and in accordance with applicable city, county and/or DEQ standards.

(15) The use shall only be operated by residents of the property. As applicable, a city business license shall be required.

(16) The Planning Commission shall review the permit for a home occupation or cottage industry upon the receipt of two or more written complaints of violations of these or applicable state standards or regulations from households within 250 feet of the boundaries of the affected property.

(a) A public hearing shall be held to review the complaints and the subject permit.

(b) The Commission, after reviewing the permit and the complaints relative thereto, and after hearing the evidence presented at the hearing, may, with adequate findings, do any of the following:

1. Approve the continuance of the use as it exists.

2. Require that it be terminated.

3. Impose new and additional restrictions for the continuance. New complaints which are substantially the same as those previously reviewed and acted upon will only be heard by the Commission after a period of six months has elapsed from the date of the earlier decision, unless the Commission believes or finds that any restrictions or conditions imposed on the use have not been followed or complied with.

(17) Home occupations of a minor nature that do not advertise on site, change the outward appearance of the home or produce a significant amount of additional traffic are allowed outright without review. Examples would include: musical lessons, photo studio, attorney, or accountant. Should a home occupation reach a level that is not considered minor, the above criteria shall apply.

(F) Mobile home or manufactured dwelling park. In addition to the standards and conditions set forth herein, the development shall be in compliance with applicable state regulations, and with any additional conditions set forth in the approval thereof, and such compliance may be required prior to the occupancy of the development. (ORS Chapter 446 and OAR 814-28).

(1) Each access road intersecting a public street shall have a surface width of not less than 30 feet, and driveways within the park shall be at least 20 feet in width, or if parking is permitted thereon shall be at least 36 feet in width.

(2) All public roads and driveways shall be well-drained and hard-surfaced as approved by the City Superintendents of Streets and Public Works and/or the City Engineer in accordance with city standards and/or with the "durable and dustless surface" definition set forth in § 153.086.

(3) Walkways, bicycle paths or other pedestrian ways may be required, and if required, shall not be less than five feet in width and hard-surfaced in accordance with the foregoing referenced "durable and dustless surface" definition.

(4) Each space within the park shall be serviced with public water and sewer facilities and electrical power receptacles for solid wastes shall be provided, and fire hydrants shall be installed as deemed necessary by the City Fire Department.

(5) Facilities for incoming and outgoing mail shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of the U.S. Postal Service.

(6) There shall be constructed on each unit space, adjacent and parallel thereto, one or more wooden decks or slabs or patios of concrete, asphalt, flagstone or the equivalent, which singularly or in combination total at least 120 square feet.

(7) In no case shall an individual unit space be permitted that is less than 30 feet in width or less than 40 feet in length.

(8) Except as provided otherwise herein, in no case shall the overall density exceed 12 units per acre. An increase in density may be approved by the city in accordance with the following standards:

(a) An increase of 10% in the maximum allowable density for dedicated and improved open space equaling 30% or more of the total land area of the development.

(b) An increase of 5% in the maximum allowable density for the development and maintenance of an approved recreation and/or common use building or other indoor facility.

(c) An increase of 5% for a developed playground area.

(d) An increase of 10% for a developed recreation area including a covered picnic area, basketball and/or tennis court facilities and the like.

(e) In no case, however, shall the total of density increases provided for herein exceed 25%.

(9) All parks shall provide recreational space of at least 2,500 square feet plus 50 square feet for each unit within the park. The recreational space shall be improved with landscaping to provide open recreation and shall be secured from driveways and parking areas. Facilities such as picnic tables, barbecues and playground equipment are recommended.

(10) No dwelling unit in the park shall be located closer than 15 feet from another unit or from a general use building in the park. No dwelling unit, other building or structure shall be located within 25 feet of a public street right-of-way line, or within ten feet of any other property boundary line.

(11) No unit shall be permitted in a park as a residence that does not meet the definition set forth by § 153.004.

(12) No recreation vehicle shall be permitted to be located within a park and occupied as a residence, and no such vehicle shall be permitted within a park unless spaces for such RV use are designated therefor in the park design and approval.

(13) A unit permitted in a park shall be provided with continuous skirting within 30 days of placement.

(14) The total land area used for park purposes shall be required to be surrounded, except at entry and exit places, by a sight-obscuring fence or hedge not less than six feet in height.

(15) If a park provides spaces for 20 or more units, each vehicular way in the park shall be named and marked with signs which are similar in appearance and location to those used to identify public streets in the city. A map of the entire development showing named vehicular ways shall be provided to the City Fire Department, other service agencies, the City Police Department and the City Planning Official.

(16) An updated listing of the names and addresses of the occupants of each space in the park shall be maintained at all times and a copy thereof provided to the city upon request.

(G) Temporary worker housing. See Chapter 153C for on-site or off-site temporary worker housing.

(H) Multifamily dwelling complex. A multifamily dwelling complex permitted as a conditional use shall comply with the following standards and conditions, and the compliance shall be evident prior to occupancy except as may otherwise be approved by the city:

(1) All such complexes with more than 20 dwelling units shall be so located as to have direct access onto an improved arterial or major collector street unless approved otherwise by the city.

(2) All such complexes shall provide both an improved ingress and egress.

(3) Each access road permitting two-way traffic and intersecting a public street shall have a minimum surface width of not less than 30 feet, and not less than 16 feet in width for single-lane, one-way traffic. Interior complex driveways shall not be less than 24 feet in width for two-way traffic, and not less than 12 feet in width for single-lane traffic. For interior driveways providing on-street parking, an additional eight feet of width shall be added for each parking lane or area. All access roads, driveways and parking facilities shall be improved and maintained with "durable and dustless surfaces" as defined in § 153.086, and as approved by the City Superintendent of Streets.

(4) Sidewalks, walkways, bicycle paths and other pedestrian ways may be required. The walks, paths and ways shall not be less than four feet in width and shall be surfaced with concrete, asphalt, asphaltic concrete or paving bricks as approved by the City Superintendent of Streets.

(5) The complexes may be required to provide storage facilities and/or extra parking spaces as deemed necessary to provide for tenant storage of household goods, equipment, extra furnishings and/or recreation vehicles.

(6) Each complex, and each individual unit contained therein, shall be serviced with public water and sewer, electrical power, receptacles for garbage disposal and collection service, and fire hydrants shall be installed as deemed necessary by the City Fire Department.

(7) Facilities for incoming and outgoing mail shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of the U.S. Postal Service.

(8) The overall density of the complex shall not exceed the dimensional standards set forth by the applicable zone, except as approved otherwise by the city in accordance with the following factors:

(a) An increase of 5% in the maximum allowable density for dedicated and improved open space equaling 25% or more of the total land area of the development.

(b) An increase of 5% in the maximum allowable density for the development and maintenance of an approved recreation and/or common use building or other indoor facility.

(c) An increase of 5% for a developed playground area.

(d) An increase of 5% for a developed recreation area including a covered picnic area, basketball and/or tennis court facilities and the like.

(e) As an incentive for development excellence, a total increase of 25% may be permitted if three or more of the foregoing are provided.

(9) A complex shall provide recreational space of at least 2,500 square feet plus 50 square feet for each unit in the complex. The recreational space shall be improved with landscaping to provide open recreation and shall be secured from driveways and parking areas. Facilities such as picnic tables, barbecues and playground equipment are recommended.

(10) For any complex permitting tenants to have recreation vehicles, camp trailers, boats and similar recreational equipment, there shall be provided a separate, designated parking area for such uses at a ratio of one space per each three units in the complex.

(11) If each unit in the complex is not provided with clothes washing and drying facilities, and there is not a private commercial coin-operated laundry facility within a reasonable walking distance, then there shall be provided within the complex a separate laundry facility providing not less than one washer and one dryer for each six units in the complex.

(12) The total land area of the complex may be required to be surrounded, except at entry and exit locations, by a sight-obscuring fence or hedge not less than six feet in height.



(I) Radio, telephone or television transmitter tower, utility station or substation. When authorized within the applicable zoning, the following standards and limitations shall apply to radio, telephone or television transmitter towers, or utility stations and substations:

(1) In a residential zone, all equipment storage on the site shall be enclosed within a building.

(2) The use may be required to be fenced, including sight-obscuring, and provided with landscaping.

(3) Coloring of structures, buildings and other permanent installations shall be of neutral colors or colors that otherwise blend with the surrounding natural features unless otherwise required by the Commission.

(4) The reviewing authority may set standards or limitations regarding height, shape, location or factors necessary to minimize the impact of the facilities on the area in which they are proposed to be located.

(5) The reviewing authority may set any standards or limitations deemed necessary to ensure that the proposed facilities are aesthetically pleasing and compatible with the area.

(J) Recreation vehicle parks. A recreation vehicle park shall be constructed, maintained and operated in accordance with applicable state standards and regulations, and shall also comply with the standards and conditions set forth herein. (ORS Chapter 446 and OAR 333-31).

(1) Water supply service to each camping space is not required, but at least one water supply service shall be provided on site.

(2) In lieu of individual sewer connections, at least one sewage disposal station shall be provided on site for the park.

(3) All solid waste shall be stored in individual garbage containers, storage bins or storage vehicles. All such containers shall have tight-fitting lids, covers or closable tops, and shall be durable, rust-resistant, watertight, rodent-proof and be readily washable. All solid waste shall be collected for disposal at regular intervals not to exceed seven days.

(4) Liquefied petroleum gas storage tanks on site shall be approved by the City Fire Chief and/or the State Fire Marshal as applicable.

(5) Toilet, hand washing and bathing facilities shall be maintained to meet the requirements set forth by the Building Official and the County and/or State Health Division.

(6) Eating and drinking establishments, commissaries, mobile units and vending machines operated in conjunction with the park shall be approved in accordance with applicable provisions of this chapter and in accordance with applicable regulations administered by the County and/or State Health Division.

(7) All swimming pools, spa pools and wading pools in a recreation park shall comply with the applicable rules of the County and/or State Health Division.

(8) The owner and/or management of a recreation park shall maintain all buildings, grounds, rental units, spaces and furnishings in good repair and appearance, and in clean condition at all times.

(9) Either the owner, an operator, resident manager or other supervisor shall be available on the premises of a recreation park at all times while it is open for use, except as otherwise approved by the city.

(10) Each camping space shall be identified by number, letter or name.

(11) Each camping space shall be large enough to accommodate the parked camping vehicle, tent vehicle or tent as the case may be and for which the space was intended or designed, and to maintain at least ten feet separation from any other camping vehicle or tent, ten feet from any building, 20 feet from a boundary line abutting a public street or highway and ten feet from any other boundary line. Only one camping vehicle, tent vehicle or tent is permitted per space.

(12) Each recreation park shall have direct access to either an arterial or major collector street. Each access road intersecting a public street or highway shall have a surface width of not less than 30 feet, and driveways within the park shall be at 20 feet in width or if parking is permitted thereon, 30 feet in width. All roads and driveways shall be well-drained and hard-surfaced as approved by the city and the City Superintendent of Streets.

(13) Each space in the park shall have direct access to a park driveway or road.

(14) Except as approved otherwise in those parks providing independent sewer and water services to individual spaces, toilet facilities shall be provided in recreation vehicle parks in the following ratios:

	Number of Spaces	Number of Toilets

	1 - 15	2

	16 - 30	3

	31 - 60	5

	61 - 100	7

(15) The density of RV parks shall not exceed 20 campsites per acre except as otherwise approved by the Commission; the Commission may adjust the density downward in the case of limitations necessary by steep slopes, geologic or natural features or impacts on adjacent areas.

(16) Each recreation vehicle space shall be a minimum of 200 square feet.

(17) Each RV space shall contain no more than 33% paving or concrete.

(18) Landscaped or open space areas shall be a minimum of 20% of the project site, and may include nature trails, buffers, landscaping, common picnic or recreation areas, wetlands or streams.

(19) Accessory uses may include an owner’s/manager’s office/residence, restroom and bathing facilities, laundry, mini market with limited gasoline and propane gas services, swimming pool and other small-scale recreational facilities such as tennis courts, miniature golf and playgrounds for the use of park customers only.

(20) One additional parking space for each four campsites shall be provided in convenient locations throughout the park, except that this requirement may be reduced where individual RV spaces are of such dimensions to permit at least one additional parking space on site.

(21) The reviewing authority may exempt certain temporary recreation vehicle facilities from the on-site improvement requirements, requirements for toilets, water supply, sewage disposal and spacing if such temporary facilities are for the purpose of accommodating a camping vehicle rally or other groups of camping vehicles assembled for the purpose of traveling together or for special events such as fairs, rodeos, races, derbies, community event celebrations and the like and the reviewing authority finds that the public health will not be endangered. The period of operation shall be designated by the reviewing authority as shall other conditions such as solid waste collection and disposal found necessary to protect the public health and general welfare. In no case shall the temporary facilities be approved in conjunction with private commercial activities, except as temporary RV locations for highway or building construction or forestry projects, and in no case shall a temporary facility for the projects be approved if other alternatives for housing the employees associated with such projects are found to be available.

(22) Recreational vehicle (RV) parks within the General Residential (R-2) Zone shall comply with the above requirements as well as the following:

(a) RV parks within the R-2 Zone shall only be allowed on properties with direct frontage on an arterial street as identified by the City of Prineville Transportation Systems Plan (TSP). In no case shall a local street or minor collector be used for ingress or egress from the site. If a site has access to both a major collector and an arterial, access shall be determined by the City Engineer.

(b) Arterial streets provide the entrances into our community. Therefore, an applicant shall take careful consideration to the appearance of the entrance to the park. In review of any RV park proposal, the Planning Commission shall be responsible for the design review of the entrance.

(c) As part of the 20% landscaping and open space, screening from neighboring properties and public streets shall take priority.

(K) Camping vehicle building, boat building, cabinet, carpentry or other contractors’ shops, machine shops, vehicle repair or storage or similar uses.

(1) Materials, vehicles or parts shall be stored in an enclosed structure, or where impractical in a structure, behind fences or vegetative buffers.

(2) Odors, fumes, sawdust or other emissions shall be controlled so as not to affect adjacent properties.

(3) Noise and other pollution or contaminant discharge standards of the Department of Environmental Quality shall be adhered to.

(L) Public or private facilities, utilities and services.

(1) Public facilities including, but not limited to, utility substations, sewage treatment plants, storm water and water lines, water storage tanks, radio and television transmitters, cell towers, electrical generation and transmission devices, fire stations and other public facilities shall be located so as to best serve the community or area with a minimum impact on neighborhoods, and with consideration for natural aesthetic values.

(2) Structures shall be designed to be as unobtrusive as possible.

(3) Wherever feasible, all utility components shall be placed underground.

(4) Public facilities and services proposed within a wetland or riparian area shall provide findings of the following:

(a) The location is required and a public need exists.

(b) Dredging, fill and other adverse impacts are avoided, minimized or mitigated to the maximum extent reasonable.

(5) Co-locating on existing utility poles or cellular towers is required unless demonstrated that it is not feasible.

(M) Airports, aircraft landing fields, aircraft charter, rental, service and maintenance facilities not located in an Airport (A) Zone. In the review and approval of the facilities, the Planning Commission shall find the following:

(1) That the location and site design of the proposed facility will not be hazardous to the safety and general welfare of surrounding properties.

(2) That the location will not unnecessarily restrict existing and future development of surrounding lands as designated by the Comprehensive Plan.

(3) That the location will not unnecessarily restrict, be in conflict with or be hazardous to the existing and future development of the City-County Airport.

(4) As applicable, the subject facility has been reviewed and approved by the State Department of Aeronautics and/or the Federal Aviation Administration; or, as applicable, the review and approval is a condition of approval.

(N) Cemeteries. The reviewing authority shall require evidence and shall find that the terrain and soil types of a proposed location are suitable for interment, and that the nature of the subsoil and drainage will not have a detrimental effect of ground water sources or domestic water supplies in the area of the proposed use.

(O) Church, hospital, nursing home, convalescent home, retirement home, and elderly assisted housing complex. Such uses may be approved only after consideration of the following factors:

(1) Sufficient areas provided for the building, required yards, and off-street parking (related structures and uses such as a manse, parochial school or parish house are considered separate principal uses and additional lot areas shall be required therefor).

(2) Location of the site relative to the service area.

(3) Probable growth and needs therefor.

(4) Site location relative to land uses in the vicinity.

(5) Adequacy of accesses to and from principal streets together with the probable effect on the traffic volumes and patterns of abutting and nearby streets.

(6) Such uses or related buildings shall be at least ten feet from a side or rear lot line abutting an existing residential use in a commercial or industrial zone, and 20 feet from a side or rear lot line abutting a residential zone.

(7) Such uses may be required to provide sound-insulating screening and/or construction methods if found to be within an area of influence of an existing commercial or industrial use which is considered incompatible with a noise sensitive use.

(8) Such uses may be built to exceed the height limitations of the zone in which it is located to a maximum height of 50 feet if the total floor area of the building does not exceed the area of the site and if the yard dimensions in each case are equal to at least two-thirds of the height of the principal structure.

(9) Such uses should provide for, and may be required to provide, outside sitting and/or exercise areas in sufficient areas to accommodate patient or resident loads.

(P) Solid waste collection, disposal and/or transfer station. The reviewing authority may authorize a solid waste collection and/or disposal site or transfer station as a conditional use, subject to the following standards:

(1) The proposed site shall not create a fire hazard, litter, insect or rodent nuisance or air or water pollution in the area.

(2) The proposed site shall be located in or as near as possible to the area being served.

(3) The proposed site shall be located at least one-fourth mile from any existing dwelling, home or public road (except the access road), unless approved otherwise with adequate screening and buffering.

(4) The proposed site shall be provided with a maintained access road (all-weather).

(5) The proposed site and facility shall be enclosed in such a manner that materials that may be carried by the wind or animals are totally contained within the site.

(6) Any other condition that the reviewing authority deems necessary to minimize the potential adverse impacts on the surrounding area, while taking into account the public need for solid waste disposal alternatives.

(Q) Mining, quarrying or other aggregate extraction or processing activities. Plans and specifications submitted to the reviewing authority for approval must contain sufficient information to allow the authority to consider and set standards pertaining to the following:

(1) The most appropriate use of the land.

(2) Setbacks from the property lines and surrounding uses.

(3) The protection of pedestrians and vehicles through the use of fencing and screening.

(4) The protection of fish and wildlife habitat and ecological systems through control of potential air and water pollutants.

(5) The prevention of the collection and the stagnation of water at all stages of the operation.

(6) Surface mining equipment and necessary access roads shall be constructed, maintained and operated in such a manner as to eliminate, as far as is practicable, noise, vibration or dust which may be injurious or annoying to persons or other uses in the vicinity.

(7) The comments and recommendations of all appropriate natural resource agencies of the state and federal government shall be sought.

(8) A rock crusher, washer or sorter shall not be located closer than 500 feet from a residential or commercial zone.

(9) A sight-obscuring fence or other screening may be required by the reviewing authority, when, in its judgment, the fence or other screening is necessary to preserve the values of nearby properties or to protect the aesthetic character of the neighborhood or vicinity.

(R) Motel, hotel, convention center, multi-use pavilion, sports arena or other similar uses. Such uses may be approved only after consideration of the following factors:

(1) Sufficient areas provided for the main buildings, required yards, off-street parking and related or accessory or support structures and uses.

(2) Location of the site relative to the service area or to other related facilities and uses.

(3) Probable growth and needs therefor.

(4) Site location relative to land uses in the vicinity.

(5) Adequacy of accesses to and from principal streets; relative thereto, access must be to either a designated major collector or arterial street.

(6) Such uses or related buildings shall be at least 20 feet from a side or rear lot line abutting a residential use or a residential zone.

(7) Such uses may be required to provide sound-insulating screening and/or construction methods if found to be within an area of influence of an existing commercial or industrial use which is considered incompatible with a noise sensitive use.

(S) Professional commercial uses. Professional commercial uses such as offices for accountants, bookkeepers, attorneys, engineers, architects, doctors, dentists, real estate and insurance and medical or dental clinics in an R-2, R-3 or R-4 Zone subject to the following conditions and limitations:

(1) Uses shall be located within a pre-existing residential structure. An applicant may rebuild a structure if it is determined that the existing structure is in such a condition as not to be economically viable to restore. Any new structure shall be residential in design and will be subject to design review by the reviewing authority.

(2) Have frontage on an existing designated or future planned arterial and/or major collector street.

(3) Access to and from the proposed use is not required solely to pass through a residentially zoned and developed area on a minor collector or lower classified street.

(4) Traffic and parking generated and/or required by the proposed use will adversely affect the overall residential character of the area.

(5) The proposed use is found to result in a general improvement of the physical appearance and aesthetics of the subject property and the general area.

(6) In reviewing and approving such a use, the reviewing authority may consider the following factors:

(a) The need for screening, landscaping and other factors that will minimize the impact of the proposed use on adjoining residential uses.

(b) The need for, and availability of, off-street parking.

(c) Limitations on hours and days of operations, signing and other factors deemed necessary to preserve and protect the residential character of the neighborhood.

(T) Residential dwellings in a commercial zone. Residential uses from single-family dwelling to fourplexes shall consider the following limitations when placed in a commercial zone:

(1) Structures shall not be located on a major collector or arterial street unless;

(2) The property is determined not to be commercially viable based on size, location and surrounding uses.

(3) Provisions for the future conversion to a commercial business should be considered when placing a residence on a lot.

(U) Vehicle towing/impound yards. In considering an application for a vehicle towing/storage/impound yard, the following factors, conditions and limitations shall be applicable:

(1) A building and/or enclosure or other barrier at least six feet in height shall be constructed and maintained, and that the subject use shall be contained totally within the building and/or enclosure.

(2) No activity involving any wrecking, dismantling or altering of vehicles shall be permitted on the site.

(3) The site includes adequate containment area for wrecked cars which includes a petroleum-resistant liner.

(4) No vehicle may be stored on site in excess of 60 days.

(5) Special consideration shall be given to the following factors, and additional setbacks, screening and other conditions and limitations may be established relative thereto:

(a) Proximity to residentially zoned areas and existing residential uses on nonresidentially zoned property.

(b) Proximity to churches, schools, hospitals, clinics, public buildings, recreational facilities, or other places of public assembly or gathering.

(c) Visual impact from neighboring properties and adjacent public rights-of-way.

(d) The health, safety and general welfare of the city and the public.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11; Am. Ord. 1186, passed 12-13-11; Am. Ord. 1208, passed 12-9-14; Am. Ord. 1229, passed 2-28-17; Am. Ord. 1248, passed 11-27-18)


153.084 ATTACHED SINGLE-FAMILY HOUSING, TOWNHOMES AND DUPLEX LOTS.

(A) Attached single-family housing. Any two adjacent legal lots zoned for single-family homes may build two single-family homes attached at the lot line (see "Dwelling, townhome" definition in § 153.004) in accordance with the Building Code. All owner signatures are required.

(B) Townhomes (as part of a cluster development, or PUD or R-5 Zone). Shall comply with the standards in subsections (B)(1) through (4) of this section. The standards are intended to control development scale; avoid or minimize impacts associated with traffic, parking, and design compatibility; and ensure management and maintenance of common areas. Cluster development standards can be found in § 153.094.



(1) Building mass supplemental standard. Within the residential zones, the maximum number and width of consecutively attached townhomes (i.e., with attached walls at property line) shall not exceed six units, or 150 feet (from end-wall to end-wall), whichever is less.

(2) Each townhouse shall have some architectural articulation by either staggering the buildings or including unique features within the facade to produce the same effect (i.e., no long continuous flat wall).

(3) Alley access. Subdivisions (four or more lots) containing townhomes shall receive vehicle access only from a rear alley. Alley(s) shall be created at the time of subdivision approval. Alleys are not required when existing development patterns or topography make construction of an alley impracticable (see subsection (B)(4) of this section for standards). Alley access shall also be required on existing lots if available. As necessary, the city shall require dedication of right-of-way or easements and construction of pathways between townhome lots (e.g., between building breaks) for access and circulation.


[IMAGE]


(4) Street access developments. Townhomes receiving access directly from a public or private street shall comply with all of the following standards in order to minimize interruption of adjacent sidewalks by driveway entrances, slow traffic, improve appearance of the streets, and minimize paved surfaces for better storm water management:


[IMAGE]


(a) When garages face the street, they shall be recessed behind the front elevation (i.e., living area or covered front porch) by a minimum of four feet.

(b) The maximum allowable driveway width facing the street is 20 feet per dwelling unit for double car garages and 12 feet for single car garages.

(c) Two adjacent garages shall share one driveway when individual driveways would otherwise be separated by less than 20 feet (i.e., the width of one on-street parking space). When a driveway/curb cut serves more than one lot, the developer shall record an access and maintenance easement/agreement to benefit each lot, prior to building permit issuance.

(5) Common areas. "Common areas" (e.g., landscaping in private tracts, shared driveways, private alleys, and similar uses) shall be maintained by a homeowners association or other legal entity. A homeowners association may also be responsible for exterior building maintenance. A copy of any applicable covenants, restrictions and conditions shall be recorded and provided to the city prior to building permit approval.

(6) Utilities. Each lot shall have separate public and private utilities.

(C) Duplex lots. Duplex lots essentially allow for two-unit townhomes outside of the cluster development standards (§ 153.094). A duplex lot is intended to look, feel and act like a duplex but allow for separate unit ownership of not only the building but the land as well. The following criteria shall be met for the approval of a duplex lot:

(1) Minor partition. The process for creating a duplex lot shall follow the process and platting procedures for a minor partition located in § 153.160.

(2) Lots shall be restricted to attached homes only. A deed restriction shall be recorded with the partition plat.

(3) Original lot size. The original lot shall meet at least the current minimum lot size standard of the applicable zone and street frontage requirements including cul-de-sac standards.

(4) Duplex lot size. Each duplex lot shall be at least half the size of the original lot and at least half the size of the current required street frontage.

(5) Structure. The structure itself shall meet all the dimensional standards of the required zone including parking.

(6) Utilities. All utilities public and private shall be separate.
[IMAGE]


(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.085 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING: PROVISIONS AND REQUIREMENTS.

(A) The provision and maintenance of off-street parking and loading facilities are continuing obligations of the property owner. No building permit shall be issued until plans are submitted and approved by the city that show property that is and will remain available for exclusive use as off-street parking and loading facilities as required by this section and this chapter. The subsequent use of property for which the building permit is issued shall be conditional upon the unqualified continuance and availability of the required parking and loading facilities set forth by this section and this chapter. It is not, however, the intent of these provisions to require off-street parking and loading facilities in a manner as to unreasonably limit improvements to existing structures and uses, particularly in that area identified as the Downtown Core Commercial area.

(B) Applicability. Unless exempted by this section, all construction, reconstruction, enlargement of a structure or at the time a use is changed in any zone off-street parking facilities shall be provided in accordance with the requirements set forth by this section and § 153.086.

(C) Exemptions. The following are exemptions in all zones:

(1) Outright uses existing on or before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter on a lot or parcel of land that has no remaining room for off-street parking and loading facilities.

(2) Exterior remodeling and/or expansion of a use up to and not exceeding 25% of the total square footage of all structures on a specific lot or parcel under unit ownership; however, any existing parking displaced by the remodeling and/or expansion shall be replaced.

(3) Changes of uses that are permitted outright in a zone and occupy an existing building or site that is either similar to the previous use or of equal or lesser impact to the site with regard to traffic impacts as determined by the reviewing authority and City Engineer. A change of use application may be required to make this determination.

(D) Specific parking requirements by zone.

(1) R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 Zones.

(a) No specific requirements; the number of spaces required are listed in the table below; spaces shall meet city standards.

(2) R-5 Zone.

(a) Shall meet the applicable requirements set forth in the parking table in subsection (E) of this section; however, 50% of the adjacent on-street parking spaces shall be counted to meet the parking needs as well as any off-site parking spaces owned or leased specifically for the subject development.

(3) C-1 Zone. More specifically, the provisions of this section shall be exempted for uses permitted outright in a C-1 Zone, which occupy an existing building on a parcel of land which contains no room for parking. For those parcels of land which do have room for parking, the standards of this section shall apply.

(a) All employee and customer parking shall be provided entirely off-street on an area or facility, public or private, designated for such use, unless otherwise approved by the City Planning Commission.

(b) In the event that the city has established a process for a parking in lieu of fee, this fee may be used to reduce required parking in accordance with the policy. This fee would then be used for future public parking facilities.

(c) Redevelopment of existing second and third floor uses, including residential uses, shall also be exempt from the parking requirements.

(d) Required parking for new construction shall utilize alleys to the greatest extent possible primarily placing required parking at the rear of the structure and not along the primary or higher order street.

(e) Bicycle parking shall be provided with all new construction at a minimum of two spaces per use. Consolidation of bicycle racks per block is allowed.

(4) C-2, C-3, C-4 and C-5 Zones. All parking demand created by any use permitted in this zone shall be accommodated entirely on site or off-street on another area or adjoining site within a reasonable walking distance of not more than 1,200 feet that is available for the subject use in compliance with the standards set forth herein. The location of any off-site parking area that requires pedestrians to cross an arterial or major collector street or highway to obtain access to the subject use is prohibited.

(a) No use permitted in this zone shall require the backing of traffic onto a public street right-of-way to accommodate ingress or egress to any use or the premises thereof unless approved otherwise by the city.

(b) Bicycle parking shall be provided at a rate of one space per 12 vehicle parking spaces.

(5) M-1, M-2 and IP Zones. All parking demand created by any use permitted in this zone shall be accommodated entirely on site or off-street on another area or adjoining site shared by one or more uses permitted in this zone. The location of any off-site parking area that requires pedestrians to cross an arterial or major collector street or highway to obtain access to the subject use is prohibited.

(E) Parking table. Where the square feet of the structure or use are specified as the basis for the requirements, the area measured shall be the gross floor area primary to the functioning of the particular use of the structure and property. When the requirements are based on the number of employees and/or the number of occupants, customers or users, the number counted shall be the number of employees working on the premises during the largest shift at peak season, and the number of occupants, customers or users shall be counted as the maximum rated capacity. Fractional requirements shall be counted as a whole space and parking spaces in a public street, including an alley, shall not be eligible as fulfilling any part of the parking requirement.

	Use Description	Minimum Requirements

	Residential

	Single-family dwelling and duplex (includes townhomes)	2 spaces per unit, including driveways and garage approaches.

	Multifamily dwelling (3 to 4 attached units) (includes townhomes)	2 spaces per unit, including driveways and garage approaches.

	Multifamily complex	1.5 spaces per unit from 5 to 8 units; 1.25 spaces per each unit thereafter, plus 2 spaces for owner/manager.

	Residential use other than ground floor	1 space per dwelling unit.

	Residential use ground floor	1 space per dwelling unit.

	Residential 2nd and 3rd story in C-1 Zone	1 space per dwelling unit (new), none for existing dwelling units or converted structures.

	Residential care facility	1 space per each 2 rooms plus 1 space for each manager and employee at peak use.

	Residential care home	2 spaces.

	Accessory dwelling	1 space per dwelling unit.

	Homeless shelter	As determined by reviewing authority.

	Caretaker, watchmen living on site	1 space per dwelling unit.

	Commercial Residential

	Bed and breakfast	1 space per guest room plus 2 spaces for owner/manager.

	Boarding, lodging or rooming house	1 space per unit plus 2 spaces for owner/manager.

	Hotels and motels	1 space per guest room plus 2 spaces for owner/manager.

	Institutional

	Club, lodge or convention center	1 space per 4 seats.

	Convalescent hospital, nursing home, sanitarium, rest home, home for the aged, elderly assisted living complex	1 space per each 4 beds or lodging units for patients or residents, plus 1 space per employee.

	Hospital	1 space per each 4 beds, plus 1 space per employee on the largest work shift.

	Public or Semi-Public Uses

	Public recreational facility/community center	1 space per 300 s.f. of net square footage.

	Park (public or private)	5 spaces per acre.

	Public transportation station	1 space per 1,000 s.f. enclosed.

	RV park (public or private)	1 auto plus RV space for each designated place and 5 guest spaces.

	Utility facility	1 space, no full-time employees.

	Church	1 space per each 4 seats.

	Library, reading room	1 space per each 400 sq. ft. of floor area plus 1 space per each employee.

	Nursery, kindergarten	1 space per employee and adequate off-street parking and loading areas for the delivery/pickup of patrons.

	Elementary or junior high	2 spaces per classroom plus 1 space per administrative employee.

	High school	8 spaces per classroom.

	College	1 space per employee plus 1 space per each 2 students.

	Trade school or adult training	1 space per employee plus 1 space per each student.

	Other auditorium or meeting facility	1 space per each 4 seats, or 1 space for each 75 sq. ft. of assembly room floor area.

	Commercial Amusement

	Amusement park	20 spaces per acre.

	General recreation, outdoor	20 spaces per acre.

	General recreation, indoor	1 space per 4 seats.

	Stadium, arena, theater	1 space per each 4 seats.

	Bowling alley	4 spaces per alley plus 1 for each employee.

	Golf course	50 spaces per each 9 holes.

	Driving range	1 space per driving cage, plus 1 per employee.

	Gymnasium, fitness center, spa	1 space per 300 s.f. of net square footage.

	Dance hall, skating rink	1 space per each 100 s.f. floor area plus 1 space per each employee.

	Commercial

	Retail store except those handling exclusively bulk materials	1 space per 200 s.f. of retail floor area, plus 1 space per employee.

	Retail store handling exclusively bulk merchandise (includes RVs, furniture)	1 space per 1,000 s.f. of retail floor area, plus 1 space for each employee in peak employment shifts.

	Shopping center/department stores	1 space per 250 s.f. of floor area.

	Telemarketing/call center	1 space per employee, plus 5 guest spaces.

	Service and repair	1 space per 600 s.f. retail floor area.

	Auto service	1 space per service bay.

	Auto sales (new and used)	1 space per sales office or cubicle.

	Bank, offices (except medical and dental)	1 space per 600 s.f. of customer service area, plus 1 space per employee during peak employment shifts.

	Medical/dental clinic	1 space per 300 s.f. of customer service area, plus 1 space per employee.

	Veterinarian	2 spaces per DVM.

	Eating and/or drinking establishment	1 space per 100 s.f. of customer service area, plus 1 space per employee.

	Espresso stand or drive-through	1 space per employee.

	Mortuaries, funeral home	1 space per 4 seats, plus 1 space per employee.

	Mini storage	1 space per employee.

	Kennel	1 space per employee, plus 2 spaces per customer service area.

	Industrial

	Equipment rental, sales and service	1 space per 600 s.f. of retail floor area.

	Industrial, general	1 space per 800 s.f.

	Storage warehouse, manufacturing, transport facility	1 space per employee.

	Truck stop	As determined by reviewing authority.

	Wholesale establishment	1 space per 600 s.f. of customer service area, plus 1 space per employee.

	Other Structures and Uses

	To be determined by the reviewing authority on the basis of comparable use requirements.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11; Am. Ord. 1208, passed 12-9-14)


153.086 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING: DESIGN/IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS.

(A) In the event that several uses occupy a single lot or building, the total requirements for off-street parking shall be the sum of the requirements of the several uses computed separately.

(B) Owners of two or more uses, structures or parcels of land may agree to jointly utilize the same parking, loading and access facilities when the hours of operation do not overlap; provided, however, that satisfactory legal evidence is submitted to and approved by the reviewing authority in the form of deeds, leases or contracts to establish the joint use and provide for improvements and maintenance thereof.

(C) Off-street parking spaces for dwellings shall be located on the same lot with the dwelling. Other required parking spaces shall not be located farther than 600 feet from the building or use they are required to serve, measured horizontally in a straight line from the building or use, or not more than 1,200 feet from the building or use they are required to serve, measured along the route of the shortest and most direct walking distance, whichever is greater.

(D) Required parking spaces shall be available for the parking of operable passenger automobiles of residents, customers, patrons and employees only, and shall not be used for storage of inoperable or other nonpassenger vehicles, materials or the parking of trucks used in conducting the business or use.

(E) Unless otherwise approved by the City Planning Commission, all areas used for parking and maneuvering of vehicles when required by § 153.085 shall have durable and dustless surfaces maintained adequately for all weather use as herein defined. DURABLE AND DUSTLESS SURFACES shall mean to be surfaced with asphaltic concrete, concrete or equivalent material. Exceptions include the following when the use is determined not to cause a nuisance and are approved by the reviewing authority:

(1) Parking in conjunction with single- and two-family dwellings.

(2) Parking and maneuvering of heavy equipment (ex.: saw mills, lumber yards, heavy equipment yards, shipping yards and warehousing).

(3) Storage of bulky merchandise (ex.: building materials, ranching and farming materials, contractor yards).

(F) The following off-street parking development standards shall apply:

(1) Parking areas, aisles and turnarounds shall be paved with concrete, asphaltic or comparable durable and dustless surfaces as defined in subsection (E) of this section, or as otherwise approved by an authorized official of the city.

(2) Approaches to driveways providing ingress and egress to parking areas shall be paved with asphalt, asphaltic concrete or concrete surfacing and inspected by the City Street Superintendent. In the event that a serving street is not paved, the approach may be maintained to the same standard as the street until the street is paved.

(3) Parking areas, aisles and turnarounds shall have provisions made for the on-site collection of drainage waters to filter contaminates and eliminate sheet flow of the waters onto or across sidewalks and other pedestrian ways, bike paths, public rights-of-way and abutting private property.

(4) In areas that are duly designated for parking, parking spaces shall be permanently and clearly marked except as otherwise approved by the city.

(5) Wheel stops and bumper guards shall be provided where appropriate for parking spaces abutting a property line or building and no vehicle shall overhang a public right-of-way or other property line. Unless otherwise approved, parking spaces along the outer boundaries of a parking lot shall be contained by a curb which is at least four inches high and set back a minimum of four and one-half feet from the property line or by a bumper rail.

(6) Artificial lighting for parking areas which may be provided or required shall be shielded or deflected so as not to shine directly into adjoining properties, dwellings or businesses and so as not to create a hazard to the public use of a street.

(G) Unless otherwise provided for, required parking spaces and other nonstructural parking facilities may be located in required yards and other setbacks.

(H) Except for parking to serve residential uses not including multifamily dwelling complexes, parking and loading areas adjacent to residential uses shall be designed to minimize disturbance of residents by the erection of a sight-obscuring fence of not less than four nor more than six feet in height, except where vision clearance is required.

(I) Except as may be approved or required otherwise the standards set forth in the table that follows shall be the minimum for parking lots approved under this section and this chapter (all figures are in feet except as noted).

	Parking Angle
[IMAGE]
	Stall Width ft.
[IMAGE]
	Stall depth ft.
[IMAGE]
	Curb Length ft.
[IMAGE]
	Drive Aisle Width ft.

	0º	8.5	8.5	23.0	12.0

	20º	8.5	14.5	24.9	11.0

	30º	8.5	16.9	17.0	11.0

	40º	8.5	18.7	13.2	12.0

	45º	8.5	19.4	12.0	13.5

	50º	8.5	20.0	11.1	12.5

	60º	8.5	20.7	9.8	18.5

	70º	8.5	20.8	9.0	19.5

	80º	8.5	20.2	8.6	24.0*

	90º	8.5	19.0	8.5	25.0*

*    Two-way circulation

(J) Except as otherwise provided for in this subsection, or as may otherwise be approved by the reviewing authority, required parking lots, areas and facilities shall be improved and available for use by the time the use to be served by the parking is ready for occupancy.

(1) An extension of time may be granted by the city or other jurisdictional authority providing a performance bond, or its equivalent, as approved by the city and the other jurisdictional authority, is posted equaling the cost to complete the improvements as established by actual contractor’s bid or by a licensed engineer approved and/or selected by the city.

(2) The extension of time may not exceed one year and, in the event the improvements are not completed within the one-year time period, and an additional time period is not granted by the city, the bond or its equivalent shall be forfeited and the improvements thenceforth constructed under the direction of the city.

(3) In no case shall the total time period of all extensions granted exceed a period of more than three years. In the case that costs to complete the construction are in excess of the bond or its equivalent, including the costs incurred by the city for engineering, bid preparation and advertisement, and construction inspection, the applicant and/or property owner shall be liable for the extra costs.

(K) Loading and unloading.

(1) Passengers. A driveway designed for continuous forward flow of passenger vehicles for the purpose of loading and unloading children shall be located on the site of any school having a capacity greater than 25 students.

(2) Merchandise, materials or supplies. Buildings or structures to be built or substantially altered which receive and distribute material or merchandise by truck or other motor vehicle shall provide and maintain off-street loading berths in sufficient numbers and size to adequately handle the needs of the particular use.

(a) If loading space has been provided in connection with an existing use or is added to an existing use, the loading space shall not be eliminated if elimination would result in less space than is required to adequately handle the needs of the particular use.

(b) Off-street parking areas used to fulfill the requirements of this section and this chapter shall not be used for loading and unloading operations except during periods of the day when not required to take care of parking needs of the subject use.

(L) Access aisles and service drives.

(1) Access aisles shall be surfaced and of sufficient width for all vehicle turning and maneuvering, and in no case shall access aisles be approved which are less than 12 feet in width.

(2) All residential off-street parking areas commencing from a public street or highway shall have at least one service drive, surfaced with a durable and dustless surface as defined in subsection (E) of this section, and all service drives shall likewise be so surfaced.

(3) Service drives to off-street parking areas shall be designed and constructed to facilitate the flow of traffic, provide maximum safety of traffic ingress and egress, and maximum safety of pedestrians and vehicular traffic on site.

(4) Groups of more than four parking spaces shall be served by a driveway so that no backing movements or other maneuvering within a street other than an alley will be required to accommodate ingress and egress. Driveways serving the areas shall be designed and constructed to facilitate the flow of traffic on and off the site, with due regard to pedestrian and vehicle safety, and shall be clearly and permanently marked and defined. In no case shall two-way and one-way driveways be less than 24 feet and 12 feet in width respectively.

(5) The number of required service drives shall be determined by the City Superintendent of Public Works, City Council or other jurisdictional authority.

(6) All commercial service drives shall be clearly and permanently marked and defined through use of rails, fences, walls or other barriers or markers on frontage not occupied by service drives.

(7) Service drives shall have a minimum vision clearance area formed by the intersection of the driveway centerline, the street right-of-way line and a straight line joining the lines through points 20 feet from their intersection or as otherwise required in § 153.081.

(M) For those uses which require off-street parking, a plan drawn to scale indicating how the off-street parking and loading requirements are to be fulfilled shall accompany the application for site plan review or conditional use permit. The plan shall show all those elements necessary to indicate that these requirements are being fulfilled and shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

(1) Delineation of individual parking spaces.

(2) Circulation area necessary to serve spaces.

(3) Access to streets, alleys and properties to be served.

(4) Proposed curb cuts, locations and widths.

(5) Dimensions, continuity and substance of screening.

(6) Landscape, lighting and signage plans.

(7) Grading, drainage, surfacing and sub-grading details.

(8) Delineations of all structures or other obstacles to parking and circulation on the site.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.087 LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.

The following minimum landscape requirements are established for all developments subject to design review plan approval, unless approved otherwise by the reviewing authority:

(A) Landscaping defined. Required landscaping may include, but is not limited to, a combination of any of the following materials: living plant material such as trees, shrubs, ground cover, flowers and lawn (including native vegetation); and nonliving materials such as benches, walkways and courtyards, consisting of brick, decorative rock or other decorative materials.

(B) Existing vegetation. Existing site vegetation may be utilized to the maximum extent possible consistent with building placement and the applicable proposed landscape plan.

(C) Area required. Minimum area requirements may include requirements for landscaping around buildings, along fence lines, in parking and loading areas, outdoor recreational use areas and screening and buffering areas. Except as approved otherwise by the reviewing authority, the area required for landscaping is expressed as a percentage within the zone dimensional tables and/or the following:

(1) Multifamily dwellings and complexes: 20%.

(2) Downtown Enhancement Plan C-1 Zone.

(3) Parking lots. Parking areas shall be required to be landscaped in accordance with the following minimum requirements:

(a) In commercial and residential developments, parking areas shall be divided into bays of 12 spaces and between or at the end of each parking bay a curbed planter containing at least 16 square feet shall be required. Parking areas less than 12 spaces may require curbed planters as part of the landscape standard.


[IMAGE]


(b) Each planter should contain at least one tree and ground cover. An applicant may submit alternate plans for review and approval.

(c) The areas shall be designed to be protected from being damaged by vehicles using the parking area.

(d) Clear vision at the intersection within a parking area shall be maintained to provide adequate vision of vehicles and pedestrians.

(e) Unless sidewalks are provided adjacent to a structure, customer or resident parking areas should be separated from the exterior wall of a commercial or residential structure by a minimum four-foot strip of landscaping.

(f) Where a parking, loading or driveway area serving a multifamily, commercial, industrial or government use abuts a public right-of-way of a collector or arterial street or a local street across from a residential zone, or abuts a residential zone, a screen planting or other approved landscaped planter strip may be required between the parking area and the right-of-way without encroaching into a clear vision area or sidewalk.

(4) Buffering and screening. Requirements for buffering and screening may exceed the area requirement listed above. When required, buffering and screening areas shall conform to the following minimum requirements:

(a) Purpose. The purposes of buffering and screening requirements are to reduce the impacts of a proposed use on adjacent uses and zones which provide for different types of uses. The reviewing authority may waive or reduce the requirements where existing topography or vegetation is appropriate or otherwise negates the effectiveness or intended purpose or benefits of the buffering and screening.

(b) An aesthetic and/or noise reducing landscaped buffer may be required between land uses as follows:

1. Commercial uses abutting a residential zone, public recreation area or use, institutional use, scenic resource, noise sensitive use or public right-of-way.

2. Industrial uses abutting residential or commercial zones, public recreation area or use, institutional use, scenic resource, noise sensitive use or public right-of-way.

3. Multifamily complexes containing four or more units abutting a residentially zoned parcel that is limited to single-family residential use, public recreation area, scenic resource, institutional use or public right-of-way.

4. Manufactured or mobile dwelling subdivision or park abutting a residentially zoned parcel that is limited to single-family residential use, public recreation area, scenic resource, institutional use or public right-of-way.

5. Public or private recreation area or facility abutting a residential or commercial use, institutional use, scenic resource, noise sensitive use or public right-of-way.

(c) A buffer or screening area may only be occupied by screening utilities and landscaping materials, but the same may be located within the required yard or setback requirements provided vision clearance requirements are complied with.

(d) In lieu of the foregoing requirements, an applicant may provide for landscaping and screening, including plantings, fences, walls, walks and other features designed to afford the same degree of buffering as the standards above. A plan and specifications for an alternative shall be reviewed and approved by the reviewing authority with jurisdiction over the approval of the applicable use.

(D) Plant material installation standards. Except as otherwise approved by the city, the following standards shall apply to plant materials and the installation thereof as provided in accordance with the provisions of this section:

(1) Landscape plant materials shall be properly guyed and staked, and shall not interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic or parking and loading.

(2) Trees shall be a minimum size of eight feet in height and be fully branched at the time of planting.

(3) Shrubs shall be supplied in one-gallon containers or six-inch burlap balls with a minimum spread of 12 inches.

(4) Rows of plants should be staggered to provide for more effective coverage.

(E) Maintenance and plant survival. All landscaping approved or required as a part of a development plan shall be continuously maintained, including necessary watering, weeding, pruning and replacement of plant materials. Except where the applicant proposes landscaping consisting of drought-resistant plantings and materials that can be maintained and can survive without irrigation, landscaped areas shall be irrigated. If plantings fail to survive, it is the responsibility of the property owner to replace them.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.088 RIPARIAN HABITAT, SCENIC PROTECTIONS, AND SLOPE HAZARD.

For regulations on riparian habitat, scenic views and slope hazards see Chapter 155, Natural Features Overlay District (NFOD) and Slope Hazard Requirements.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.089 CUTTING AND FILLING.

(A) Grading, cutting and filling of building lots or sites. Grading, cutting and filling of building lots or sites shall conform to the following standards unless physical conditions warrant other standards as demonstrated by a licensed engineer; in such a case, the documentation justifying such other standards shall be set forth in writing thereby.

(1) The city may require a grading plan by a licensed engineer for any new construction or proposed alteration of a site.

(2) Alterations greater than three feet from the natural pre-existing grade or any alteration greater than one foot within ten feet of a property line shall require a grading permit from the City Engineer; at the discretion of the City Engineer the applicant may be required to submit a plan prepared by a licensed engineer and public notice of neighboring properties.

(3) A grading plan, if required, shall demonstrate construction feasibility, and the engineer shall attest to such feasibility and shall certify an opinion that construction on the cut or fill will not be hazardous to the development of the property or to surrounding properties.

(4) The City Engineer’s decision on the proposal shall be based on the following considerations:

(a) That based on the engineer’s report, that construction on the cut or fill will not be hazardous or detrimental to development of the property or to surrounding properties.

(b) That construction on such a cut or fill will not adversely affect the views or privacy of any adjacent property beyond that which could reasonably be expected without the cut or fill based on the provisions of the underlying zone; or that modifications to the design and/or placement of the proposed structure would be sufficient to minimize such adverse impact.

(c) That the proposed grading and/or filling will not have an adverse impact on the drainage on adjacent properties, or other properties down slope.

(d) That the characteristics of soil to be used for fill, and the characteristics of lots made usable by fill, shall be suitable for the use intended.

(e) Cut slopes shall not exceed one foot vertically to one and one-half feet horizontally.

(f) Fill slopes shall not exceed one foot vertically to two feet horizontally.

(5) Filling of wetlands shall only be permitted outside of the Natural Features Overlay District (Chapter 155) and after a permit has been issued by the Division of State Lands (DSL) and U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (if applicable). The City Planning Official, the Building Official, and City Public Works Superintendent shall find that the filling will not cause flooding of adjacent properties or public streets or drainage systems, and that drainage systems are adequate to handle actual or projected storm runoff.

(B) Filling within the designated floodway of Ochoco Creek and Crooked River is prohibited. Filling within the floodplain is prohibited unless necessary to elevate a structure to meet the standards of Chapter 151, Flood Damage Prevention. Filling for any reason is discouraged within the floodplain while a no-net-fill approach or structural solutions such as raised stem walls with pass through vents is preferred.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.090 FENCES.

Fences, except of barbed wire and of similar hazardous materials, are permitted in any zone and do not require a zoning permit for construction. The fences shall, however, be in compliance with the following provisions:

(A) Fences within the setback areas of yards shall not exceed six feet in height except as otherwise approved as a Type I conditional use and constructed to meet Building Code requirements.

(B) Fences which may be located in front yards shall not exceed four feet in height with the exception of the M-1 and M-2 Zones, decorative fencing such as wrought iron that can be easily seen through and flag lots where lot lines may conflict with neighboring side and rear lot lines. All other exceptions shall be approved by the Planning Commission based on unique circumstances or land use. (For the purposes of this section, FRONT YARD shall be defined as the area between the street and nearest point of the primary structure.)

(C) Fences which may be located within clear vision areas shall not exceed two and one-half feet in height.

(D) Fences shall not be located within a surface water or wetland setback. (See Chapter 155, Natural Features Overlay District (NFOD) and Slope Hazard Requirements).

(E) Fences shall be maintained in good condition at all times and shall not create any unsightly or hazardous condition.

(F) All fences, or portions thereof, shall be located or constructed in a way as to not prevent reasonable access to abutting properties for building maintenance or fire protection purposes.

(G) Fences, or portions thereof, shall be located or constructed in a manner as to not unreasonably obstruct significant scenic views of the valley, mountains or natural features of the area from adjacent buildings.

(H) The height of a fence shall be measured from the ground level where located. A fence may be placed on top of a retaining wall where the property has been leveled to one side. The ground may not be elevated for the sole purpose of elevating a fence.

(I) As applicable, the construction or reconstruction of fences shall comply with the Building Code as administered by the City or County Building Department.

(J) No owner or person in charge of property shall create a hazard by being the owner or otherwise having possession of property where there is a fence that is not structurally stable.

(K) No owner or persons in charge of property shall construct or maintain a barbed-wire fence along a sidewalk or public way; except the wire may be placed above the top of fencing that is not less than six feet high.

(L) No owner or person in charge of property shall construct, maintain or operate an electric fence along a sidewalk or public way or along the adjoining property of another person.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.091 DECKS.

Except as otherwise required for compliance with the Uniform Building Code as administered by the City-County Building Department, the following provisions are applicable to decks:

(A) Decks may be constructed within setback areas up to three feet from the property line, provided they shall not exceed three feet in height and are not covered, or have fixed attachments that rise above six feet. Height of the deck and any attachments shall be measured from the ground level where located.

(B) Decks abutting a stream channel or riparian habitat shall adhere to Chapter 155, Natural Features Overlay District (NFOD) and Slope Hazard Requirements.

(C) Decks shall be constructed in a manner as not to be detrimental to abutting properties or obstruct scenic views from adjacent buildings.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.092 STORAGE - UNUSED VEHICLES/JUNK/DEBRIS.

It shall be unlawful to keep inoperative vehicles or vehicle parts within view of persons on a public street or adjacent properties, or to keep unsightly or potentially hazardous accumulations of debris within view of persons on the public street or adjacent properties.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.093 OUTDOOR MERCHANDISING.

(A) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to ensure that certain commercial activities are carried out in a manner that is aesthetically compatible with adjacent and area uses, minimizes congestion, minimizes impacts on pedestrian circulation, maintains open space areas designed for pedestrian use and maintains the residential characteristics of residential areas.

(B) Prohibition. Except as otherwise approved by the city, all uses in the commercial zones shall be conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building, except that the outdoor storage display, sale or rental of merchandise or services may be permitted where the standards of subsection (D) of this section are met.

(C) The following uses and activities, subject to applicable conditions, are exempt from the prohibition set forth in subsection (B) of this section:

(1) The sale of living plants and plant materials.

(2) Outdoor seating in conjunction with a restaurant.

(3) Christmas tree sales lot.

(4) The dispensing of gasoline and other automotive supplies at a service station.

(5) Newspaper vending machines subject to subsection (E) of this section.

(6) Sales of food items, arts and handicrafts by a nonprofit organization subject to subsection (E)(2) of this section.

(7) Automatic teller machines, subject to the design review requirements set forth in this subchapter.

(8) Telephone booths, subject to the design review requirements set forth in this subchapter.

(9) Outdoor displays of merchandise common to a use permitted within the applicable zone such as automobile sales, boat sales, building materials, farm and other heavy equipment, hardware and the like, when such is approved as an integral component of an approved use within the applicable zone.

(10) Outdoor sales of goods and materials as a part of a business community sidewalk, patio or other promotional sales event.

(11) Community outdoor sales events and activities in association with a community event such as a Fourth of July celebration, fair, rodeo, centennial and the like.

(12) Garage, patio and yard sales on an individual or group basis, including community sponsored flea or farmers’ markets.

(13) Outdoor sales or goods and materials authorized pursuant to Chapter 110.

(D) The outdoor storage, display, sale or rental of merchandise or services may be permitted where any of the following conditions are met:

(1) The outdoor storage, display, sale or rental of merchandise or services is permitted, approved or commonly identified as an accessory use or common component of a use permitted within a specific zoning designation.

(2) The outdoor area in which the merchandise or service is stored, displayed, sold or rented is accessible only through a building entrance or other entrance to a business in a secured area of the business.

(3) The outdoor area is screened from a public street or adjacent property in a manner approved by the design review plan reviewing authority.

(E) The following additional requirements are applicable to certain types of outdoor merchandising:

(1) Newspaper vending machines. Newspaper vending machines, placed on a public sidewalk, shall be located so that the use of the sidewalk by handicapped persons is not impeded. This standard shall be met by maintaining a minimum, unobstructed sidewalk width of four feet.

(2) Nonprofit organization sales. The sale is authorized by the City Planning Official, Manager or other city official after finding all of the following:

(a) The sale has the approval of the owner or lessee of the property on which it is to take place.

(b) The sale will be located in a manner that will not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic.

(c) The sale will not interfere with the operation of adjacent businesses.

(d) The sale is an annual or semi-annual event, or is planned as such, or is being held for a special fund-raising purpose.

(e) The sale shall be for a specified period of time, and the duration of the sale shall not exceed three days.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.094 CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT.

In any zone, a cluster development may be permitted when authorized in accordance with the procedures for the type of development and in accordance with the applicable subdivision standards set forth in this chapter.

(A) A cluster development is a development technique wherein structures or lots are grouped together around access courts or cul-de-sacs, or where lot sizes surrounding structures are reduced while maintaining the density permitted by the applicable zoning designation. Duplex lots are exempt from the cluster development criteria.

(1) A cluster development may be permitted to maintain open space, reduce street and utility construction and to increase the attractiveness of a development and the surrounding area.

(2) Clustering may be carried out within the context of a subdivision, partitioning, PUD, replatting of existing lots or other reviews provided for by this chapter.

(3) Attached single-family dwellings may be permitted by the Planning Commission (pursuant to § 153.084) so long as the density of the applicable zone is not exceeded; provided, that the overall design is considered to be in the best public interest and in the interest of the city.

(4) The Planning Commission may permit reduction in the minimum lot size or dimensional standards, setbacks or other standards of the applicable zone so long as the density requirements of the zone are maintained, and provided the overall design is considered to be beneficial to the residents of the development and to the city as a whole.

(5) The establishment of a homeowners association (HOA) shall be required to maintain common open space and amenities not otherwise maintained by the public.

(B) For example, for a development in an R-2 Zone, the reviewing authority may waive the minimum lot size standard of 5,000 square feet for single-family dwelling units for an equivalent overall net density (see definition).

(C) Factors to consider in the approval of a cluster development include, but are not limited to, the following:

(1) Excellence in design and site utilization.

(2) Provision of a variety of housing or other use types.

(3) Maximization of cost-benefit ratios for purchasers and providers of public services and facilities.

(4) Preservation of significant natural, vegetative or other significant public benefitting features or resources.

(5) Inclusion of publicly available recreation, social, educational or other publicly beneficial uses and developments.

(6) Donation of land area for public purposes identified as a need in the area or in the community.

(7) Other factors beneficial to the general public, residents of the proposed development and the city as a whole.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11; Am. Ord. 1229, passed 2-28-17)


153.095 MANUFACTURED DWELLINGS AND RVS.

(A) Manufactured home placement. The provisions set forth by this subsection govern the placement of manufactured homes in the city and the urban area thereof.

(1) Purpose. This subsection (A) is designed to comply with the provisions of ORS 197.307 governing the placement of manufactured homes, as herein defined, within the city and the urban area thereof.

(2) Manufactured home minimum size. For the purposes of these regulations, manufactured home sizes are permitted as follows:

(a) Individual lots or parcels. Shall have more than 750 square feet of living space in a double or multi-sectional unit.

(b) Accessory dwellings. Shall meet accessory dwelling code § 153.080.

(c) Temporary residences. Temporary residences approved under subsection (D) or (F) of this section have no specific size requirement.

(d) Manufactured home parks. Have no specific size requirement unless required by the State of Oregon Building Code.

(e) Manufactured home subdivision. Shall meet the size requirements of an individual lot unless specifically approved otherwise by the Planning Commission.

(3) General provisions.

(a) Manufactured homes are permitted as shown in the use tables of this chapter.

(b) Manufactured homes are also permitted as replacements to existing nonconforming manufactured homes provided the unit is found to be an improvement over current housing of or for the applicant.

(c) Manufactured home parks are permitted as shown in the use tables of this chapter.

(d) In addition, manufactured home parks and subdivisions may be planned under the provisions of a planned unit development, which may be used to provide for individual ownership of manufactured homes and sites and common ownership and maintenance of other lands and facilities.

(e) Manufactured home subdivisions as defined are only permitted as a Type II conditional use as shown in the use tables of this chapter.

(f) Nothing in these provisions shall be interpreted as abrogating or superseding any recorded deed restriction or protective covenants.

(g) Except as specified otherwise by this subsection (A), the standards for subdividing and developing land for and within manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be the same as for all other developments in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

(h) Where standards for manufactured homes and developments therefor are established by state law or administrative rule, the requirements shall be in addition to the provisions of this subsection (A).

(i) All manufactured homes at the time of placement shall meet the minimum standards as adopted by the State Building Codes Division. 

(4) Definitions. For the purposes of this subsection (A) only, the definitions of terms used herein and not defined in this chapter shall be as defined in ORS Chapter 446 or OAR Chapter 814, Division 23 as such may be amended.

(B) Manufactured home placement requirements.

(1) Shall comply with the placement requirements of the Building Code.

(2) Have wheels, axles and hitch mechanisms removed.

(3) Have utilities, public sewer and water connected in accordance with Oregon Department of Commerce requirements, manufacturer’s specifications, and city standards.

(4) Bear an insignia of compliance with the Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Code.

(5) Have a pitched roof with a minimum slope of 3/12 with eaves and trim on all sides.

(6) Have exterior siding, trim and roofing materials that are similar in appearance and complementary to other homes in the same general area including the type, color and horizontal or vertical placement of materials.

(7) Have a garage or carport constructed of like materials and color to the dwelling unit.

(8) Foundations/skirting.

(a) All manufactured homes outside of a manufactured home park shall be placed on a foundation in accordance with the Building Code.

(b) All manufactured homes within a manufactured home park may be either placed on a foundation or be installed with an approved foundation siding/skirting enclosing the entire perimeter of the home.

(9) Additions or accessory structures.

(a) Except for a structure which conforms to the state definition of a mobile or manufactured home accessory structure, no other extension shall be attached to a manufactured home, except a garage or carport constructed to the Oregon State Building Code.

(b) Roofing and siding materials shall be of similar material and color, and complementary to the original unit, and roofs shall have eaves and trim on all sides.

(c) In no case shall any structures or additions to the units be constructed in a manner as to fully enclose the original unit, nor may any such unit be fully enclosed by additional walls or roof structures.

(10) Other standards or limitations.

(a) Except for factory constructed components intended to be joined together to form a single manufactured home unit, no two or more manufactured home units may be joined together to form a single dwelling unit, nor may a manufactured home unit be joined together with a conventional constructed dwelling unit to form a single dwelling unit.

(b) Manufactured home units shall not be joined or interconnected in any manner for utilization as multifamily dwelling units.

(c) All manufactured home lots and spaces shall be provided with sanitary sewer, electric and potable water with easements dedicated where necessary to provide the services. All such utilities shall be located underground.

(d) All pre-owned and pre-occupied units shall be inspected by a certified Building Official prior to installation and occupancy to ensure that the units are in a condition as to not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare of the occupants or to the adjoining properties. The costs of the inspection shall be borne by the applicant. In lieu of an actual inspection of the units which are not readily available for the inspection, the applicant may submit current color photographs of the unit, both exterior and interior, and a certification by the current owner as to the condition of the unit.

(e) No manufactured home shall be occupied for living purposes unless connected to local water, sewer and electrical systems.

(f) No manufactured home shall be sited adjacent to any structure listed on the Register of Historic Landmarks except within a duly approved manufactured home park.

(C) Placement permits required.

(1) Requirements. Prior to the location, relocation or establishment of any manufactured home, the homeowner or authorized representative shall secure from the Building Official a placement permit and from the city a site plan permit which, in combination, state that the building and its location conform with this chapter. Each application for a placement permit and a site plan permit shall be accompanied by the following:

(a) A plot plan as required for all dwelling units, but which at a minimum requires elevations or photographs of all sides of the manufactured home, exterior dimensions, roof materials, foundation support system and enclosure design.

(b) Any other information as may be required by the Building Official, City Planning Director or other reviewing authority, for proper enforcement of this chapter.

(c) For a manufactured home park, these requirements may be consolidated with concurrence of the Building Official and the Planning Director for multiple placements in accordance with the approved park plan.

(2) Additional action necessary. If, after receipt of the information required for either a placement or a site plan permit, the Building Official or the Planning Director finds that the applicant has not fully met the standards set forth in this subsection, and the changes or additional actions needed are deemed by the Building Official or Planning Director to be relatively minor and/or required to meet applicable codes, a conditional approval may be issued with the stated conditions which must be met prior to occupancy set forth and the reasons for change clearly stated in writing. An appeal of the decision may be submitted and processed in accordance with the applicable provisions relevant thereto.

(3) Suspension or revocation of permit. The Building Official or Planning Director may, in writing, suspend or revoke a placement or site plan permit issued under the provisions of this subsection whenever it is found that the permit has been issued in error or on the basis of incorrect information or upon the failure of the applicant to comply with minimum standards or conditions upon which the respective permit approval was issued.

(D) Manufactured homes and RVs as temporary residences. A single-wide or single unit manufactured home, or recreation vehicle (RV), may be authorized as a temporary residence if found to comply with the following conditions:

(1) Residential use during construction of a home.

(a) The unit shall only be placed upon a lot or parcel and occupied by the owner or builder for which a building permit for a conventional housing unit or a placement permit for a manufactured home meeting the standards of the applicable zone has been obtained.

(b) Only one unit shall be allowed and shall only be occupied during a period in which satisfactory progress is being made towards the completion of the conventional housing unit or placement of the manufactured home for which a permit has been obtained, and in no case shall the time period exceed 18 months involving a conventional dwelling or six months involving a manufactured home.

(c) The owner of the lot agrees in writing to remove the manufactured unit from the lot no later than the applicable time period set forth in subsection (D)(1)(b) of this section or not later than one month following the completion of the unit or placement of the manufactured home, whichever occurs first.

(d) Except in the case of a self-contained RV, public sewer and water connections shall be provided, as well as electric power.

(e) The City Planning Official may review permits issued under this subsection (D) at any time and revoke the permits when found to not be in compliance, including evidence of unsatisfactory progress on construction or placement of the intended permanent housing unit.

(E) RVs: residential use. Recreational vehicles may not be occupied for residential purposes or other purposes on any lot in the city except as follows:

(1) As permitted as a temporary residence by subsection (D) or (F) of this section.

(2) In an approved recreational vehicle park or in an approved mobile or manufactured home park on spaces specifically approved for RV vehicle use.

(3) As a temporary residence by guests of the owner for a period not to exceed seven days out of any 30-day period, particularly during major local events such as rodeos, fairs, races, school and community events, adult and youth athletic events and similar events.

(F) Recreational vehicles and manufactured homes: temporary residence for care of relative.

(1) It is the intent of this temporary use permit to provide for the temporary placement and use of certain structures which, because of personal hardship and special needs, require and warrant special consideration for the special temporary use.

(2) No such use shall be approved unless there is a finding by the reviewing authority that there will not be any adverse impact on the welfare of adjacent properties and the community as a whole, nor a detriment to the overall intent of this chapter and the applicable zone designation.

(3) No temporary permit shall be granted which would have the effect of creating a permanent rezoning, nonconforming use or variance or when the use is not permitted to continue at the expiration of the permit period.

(4) As a temporary special use permit in every zone in which residential uses are permitted, the City Planning Official, as a Type I conditional use permit, may approve one manufactured home or RV in conjunction with a primary dwelling unit with the following findings and limitations:

(a) That the unit is necessary to give care for or provide custody of an elderly, handicapped or infirm relative who a medical doctor certifies is in need of this special kind of care or custody.

(b) The applicant and permit holder is the owner and resident of the primary dwelling and is the care provider for the infirm relative for which the special use permit is granted.

(c) That no additions to the manufactured home or RV unit shall be permitted, nor shall the unit be connected in any way, except for a covered walkway to the main dwelling unit.

(d) That all residential utilities and facilities deemed necessary can be and are provided.

(e) That all setback requirements of the applicable zone designation can be met.

(f) That the subject manufactured home or RV unit is not of a condition as to constitute a visual nuisance or be a safety hazard to the occupant thereof.

(5) A temporary special use permit granted under this subsection shall be null and void when the elderly, handicapped or infirm relative who is the subject of the permit moves to another residence or is absent from the residence for more than 120 days, or leaves the residence with no likelihood of returning. Exception to the 120-day limit may be approved because of extraordinary circumstances such as extended hospitalization, but in any case, the subject unit shall not be occupied by any other person(s) other than originally intended and approved for.

(6) Within 30 days of the permit becoming void or revoked, the unit shall be removed by the owner of the real property unless otherwise approved by the city.

(7) The city may review permits issued under this subsection at any time, and revocation thereof shall be effective upon a finding of noncompliance with the provisions of this subsection or with any other conditions set forth at the time of issuance of the permit.

(8) The permits shall be issued on a one-year basis and renewable on an annual basis without reapplication or additional fees provided compliance with the conditions applicable to the permit are maintained.

(9) A unit placed under a permit authorized by this subsection shall be located as close as possible to the primary dwelling.

(G) Manufactured dwellings limited to parks. All single-wide manufactured dwellings shall be limited to location within a duly approved manufactured dwelling park or as a temporary use authorized by this chapter or unless approved otherwise as a conditional use pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11; Am. Ord. 1229, passed 2-28-17)


153.096 LIVESTOCK.

Domestic livestock shall be permitted as provided for by the respective zoning designations set forth in this chapter, but shall be subject to the following limitations:

(A) Except as provided otherwise in this section, the total number of all animals (other than their young under the age of six months) allowed on a lot shall be limited to the square footages listed below for each adult animal or similar type of animal listed. These areas shall be exclusively for the animals.

	(1)	Horses:	20,000 square feet

	 	Cows:	20,000 square feet

	 	Llamas:	10,000 square feet

	 	Ostriches/emus:	10,000 square feet

	 	Sheep:	5,000 square feet

	 	Goats:	5,000 square feet

(2) The number of adult chickens, fowl or other poultry or rabbits over the age of six months shall not exceed one for each 1,000 square feet of total lot area. The number of young (under the age of six months) allowed on the property at any time shall not exceed three times the allowable number of adults.

(3) The number of colonies of bees allowed on a lot shall be limited to one colony for each 5,000 square feet of lot area. Colonies shall be set back a minimum of five feet of any property line. Hives shall be placed on property so the general flight pattern of bees does not unduly impact neighboring properties or their inhabitants. A flyway barrier at least five feet in height consisting of a solid wall, solid fencing material, dense vegetation or a combination is required to encourage bees to fly at an elevation of at least five feet above ground level over property lines in the vicinity of the colony. In any instance in which a colony exhibits aggressive behavior, the beekeeper must ensure that the colony is re-queened. Every beekeeper shall maintain an adequate supply of water for the bees located close to each hive.

(B) Animal runs or barns, chicken or fowl pens shall be reasonably screened from public streets and neighboring properties.

(C) Animals, chickens and/or fowl shall be properly caged or housed, and proper sanitation shall be maintained at all times. All animal or poultry food shall be stored in metal or other rodent-proof receptacles.

(D) No other livestock except for domestic dogs and cats are permitted, and stud horses, bulls and roosters are specifically prohibited.

(E) Domestic livestock kept solely for the purpose of a youth livestock project such as 4-H or FFA may be exempted from the square footage requirements of this section; provided, that the following conditions are complied with:

(1) Evidence is provided to the City Planning Official that the youth is duly enrolled in a 4‑H or FFA livestock project and an outline of the planned project, including animal types and numbers, is also provided.

(2) An acknowledgment of the project and an agreement or statement of no objections to permit the same is provided from all adjoining property owners.

(3) Failure to comply with the sanitation control and other requirements of this section may result in the cancellation of the exemption.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11; Am. Ord. 1208, passed 12-9-14)


153.097 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE/FEDERAL RULES.

Repealed by Ord. 1208.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)

NONCONFORMING USES AND EXCEPTIONS


153.115 NONCONFORMING USES.

(A) Purpose. It is the intent of this code to facilitate new development that is consistent with the goals and policies of the City of Prineville while making reasonable accommodations for existing uses and structures. Over time, increased consistency with this code is the desired result.

It is not the intent of this code to remove existing structures and uses. This code aims to see that new development is consistent with goals and policies while allowing existing development to remain as long as existing structures continue to be viable. Those who invest in this area would like a reasonable expectation that new development, consistent with this code, will complement and reinforce their investment.

(B) For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:

NONCONFORMING USE. A lawful existing use or structure at the time the ordinance codified in this chapter or any amendments hereto become effective which does not conform to the requirements of the zone in which it is located or to any other specific requirements of this chapter applicable thereto.

(C) The lawful use of any building, structure or land in existence at the time of enactment or amendment of this chapter may continue in the same use and form until substantial modification, as determined by the Planning Director, occurs or is requested. A change of ownership or occupancy shall be permitted. When any modification occurs whether deemed substantial or not, subsection (D) of this section shall apply.

(D) The modification of existing buildings is permitted through administrative review if such changes result in greater conformance with the specifications of this chapter, including site improvements not associated with the structure. This also includes expansion necessary to comply with any lawful requirement mandated by local, state or federal regulation for continuation of the subject use. 

(E) A structure conforming as to use but nonconforming as to height, setback, or coverage may be altered or extended, through a Type I conditional use provided the alteration or extension does not deviate further from the standards of this chapter or have a negative impact on neighboring properties.

(F) An expansion or modification of any nonconforming use may be approved by the Planning Commission if found to be reasonably necessary to continue the use and if found to be no more detrimental than the present use.

(G) The extension of a nonconforming use to a portion of a lot or structure which was arranged or designed for the nonconforming use at the time of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, such as an addition to a single-family home, is not an expansion of a nonconforming use provided it complies with subsection (E) of this section.

(H) Restoration or replacement of a nonconforming use may be permitted when the restoration or replacement is made necessary by fire, other casualty or natural disaster, or to meet health and building standards. Such restoration or replacement shall be commenced within one year from the occurrence of fire, casualty or natural disaster, and shall be completed within not more than 18 months from the date of commencement. In the case of the restoration or replacement because of health or building standard deficiencies, such shall be completed within not more than 12 months from the date of notification of the deficiencies.

(I) If a nonconforming use is destroyed by any such cause to an extent exceeding 80% of its fair market value as indicated by the records of the County Assessor, and is not returned to use and in actual operating condition within 18 months from the date of destruction, a future structure or use shall conform to this chapter. An extension to such time period may only be granted where circumstances beyond the owner’s control, such as an insurance claim settlement, have effectively prohibited reconstruction within the 18-month period. An application for the time extension shall be processed in the same manner as the application for reconstruction, and the filing fee shall be one-half of the fee for such an application.

(J) A nonconforming use may not be resumed after a period of interruption or abandonment of more than one year unless the resumed use conforms to the requirements of this chapter or is granted additional time by the Planning Commission based on circumstances beyond the owner’s control and/or a circumstance unique to the particular use. In no case, however, shall the period of inactivity exceed two years in any three-year period. The resumption of a nonconforming residential use shall also be allowed where a structure still retains the original character of its nonconforming use; such as a single-family home in a commercial zone.

(K) Nothing contained in this chapter shall require any change in the plans, construction, alteration or designated use of a structure for which a building permit has been issued and construction has commenced prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter provided the structure, if nonconforming or intended for a nonconforming use, is completed and in use within two years from the time the permit was issued.

(L) Nothing contained in this chapter shall require any change in the plans for any use or development for which a land use permit had been granted prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, provided the building permit(s) therefor are obtained within the assigned time limits of the permit approval and construction is commenced within six months of the issuance of the building permit(s).

(M) If a nonconforming use is replaced by another use, the new use shall conform to the applicable provisions of this chapter.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11; Am. Ord. 1208, passed 12-9-14)


153.116 EXCEPTIONS TO LOT SIZE REQUIREMENTS.

(A) The following exceptions to minimum lot size requirements shall apply:

(1) If a lot or the aggregate of contiguous lots or parcels platted prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in these standards has an area or dimension which does not meet the requirements of these standards, the lot or aggregate holdings may be put to use(s) permitted subject to the other requirements of the zone in which the property is located. Lots that are pre-existing in residential zones that are below the minimum size for a single-family dwelling shall be limited to one single-family dwelling per lot. City sewer and water services shall be approved and provided.

(2) Any parcel of land or portion thereof which is to be dedicated to a public, semi-public or public utility for a park, school, road, canal, railroad, utility or other public use shall be exempt from the minimum lot size requirements of this chapter and the applicable zone.

(B) In any zone, the Planning Commission may grant an exception to the stated minimum lot size for residential purposes in accordance with § 153.094, Cluster development.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.117 EXCEPTIONS TO YARD-SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.

The following exceptions to yard or setback requirements are authorized for a lot or use in any zone:

(A) The reviewing authority may increase the yard requirement when a yard abuts a street which the city has designated for future widening. The reviewing authority may permit a lesser front yard requirement if structures on abutting lots do not meet the front yard requirements of the zone in which it is located.

(B) Any parcel of land or portion thereof which is taken by or is dedicated to a public or semi-public entity for a road, canal, railroad, utility or other public use shall be exempt from the building setback requirements set forth by the Prineville Development Code standards when such dedication of land reduces a setback for an existing building or structure. Such setback shall be treated as a nonconforming setback by the city and shall be subject to those code regulations and provisions that regulate nonconforming uses.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.118 EXCEPTIONS TO BUILDING HEIGHTS.

(A) The following types of structures or structural parts are not subject to the building height limitations of this chapter: chimneys, cupolas, tanks, church spires, belfries, domes, derricks, monuments, fire and hose towers, observation towers, transmission towers, smokestacks, flagpoles, radio, cellular and television towers, masts, aerials, cooling towers, water towers, elevator shafts, windmills, conveyors, mill related apparatus and other similar projections.

(B) The exceptions to building height limitations set forth herein are not applicable to any such structures or structural parts that are located within an Airport Approach (AA) Overlay Zone.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.119 EXCEPTION - ZONE BOUNDARIES.

If a zone boundary as shown on the Zoning Map splits a lot between two zones (a split zoned property), the entire lot shall be deemed to be in the zone in which the greater area of the lot lies. This does not include properties separated by a jurisdiction line such as the Urban Growth Boundary or county zoning.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.120 EXCEPTION - MINOR REPAIR/REHABILITATION.

Except for nonconforming uses, activities involving rehabilitation, replacement, minor betterment, repairs and maintenance, improvements and other similar construction activities involving a lawful use permitted within a specific zone are exempt from the permit requirements of this chapter unless specifically regulated herein and provided the activities do not change the use or expand the capacity of use level.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.121 EXCEPTION - PUBLIC STREET/HIGHWAY IMPROVEMENT.

Excepting for those activities specifically regulated by this chapter, the following public streets and highway improvement activities are permitted outright in all zones and are exempt from the permit requirements of this chapter:

(A) Installation of additional and/or passing lanes, including pedestrian and/or bikeways, within a street or highway right-of-way existing as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, unless such adversely impacts on-street parking capacities and patterns.

(B) Reconstruction or modification of public roads and highways, not including the addition of travel lanes, where no removal or displacement of buildings would occur, and/or no new land parcels result.

(C) Temporary public road and highway detours that will be abandoned and restored to original condition or use at such time as no longer needed.

(D) Minor betterment of existing public roads and highway related facilities such as maintenance yards, weight stations and rest areas within a right-of-way existing as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and contiguous publicly owned property utilized to support the operation and maintenance of public roads and highways.

(E) The construction, reconstruction or modification of a public street or highway that is identified as a priority project in a Transportation System Plan (TSP) or the State Transportation Improvement Plan (STIP) that was duly adopted on or before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.122 EXCEPTION - PUBLIC FACILITIES IMPROVEMENT.

Minor betterment, improvements, replacement or reconstruction of existing public facilities such as sewer and water lines, storm water drainage facilities, sidewalks and other pedestrian ways or facilities, bikeways and similar public facilities within rights-of-way and easements for the purposes existing on or before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or on contiguous publicly owned property designated, intended or utilized to support the facilities, or the facilities that are set forth within an adopted Public Facilities Plan or other Capital Improvement Plan duly adopted on or before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, are exempt from the permit requirements of this chapter unless specifically set forth otherwise.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)

CONDITIONAL USES


153.135 AUTHORIZATION TO GRANT OR DENY.

Uses designated in this chapter as conditional uses may be permitted, enlarged or otherwise altered when authorized in accordance with the standards and procedures set forth in this chapter. In the case of a use existing prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, a change in use, enlargement or alteration of such use shall conform to the provisions of a conditional use if so classified. An application for a conditional use may be approved, modified, approved with conditions or denied by the designated reviewing authority.

(A) A conditional use that is utilizing an existing building may be transferred to a new owner or user for the same type of use. Conditions of the approval shall still apply.

(B) A conditional use that is utilizing an existing building may be transferred to a new owner or user for a similar type of impact as determined by the Planning Director. A change of use application shall be required and may be referred to the Planning Commission if one or more concerns are received or if three or more Commissioners believe the application warrants a Commission review.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.136 SPECIFIC CONDITIONS.

In addition to the standards and conditions set forth in a specific zone, this subchapter, this chapter and other applicable local, county, state and/or federal regulations, additional conditions may be imposed which are found to be necessary to avoid a detrimental impact on adjoining properties, the general area or the city as a whole, and to otherwise protect the general welfare and interests of the surrounding area, the city as a whole and the general public. No condition may be imposed which violates federal or state law with regard to needed housing. The conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:

(A) Limiting the manner in which the use is conducted, including restricting the time an activity may take place, and restrictions to minimize environmental impacts such as noise, vibration, air or water pollution, glare and odor.

(B) Establishing a special setback or other open space requirements, and increasing the required lot size or other dimensional standards.

(C) Limiting the height, size or location of a building or other structure or use.

(D) Increasing street width and/or requiring improvements to public streets and other public facilities serving the proposed use, even including those off site but necessary to serve the subject proposal.

(E) Designating the size, number, improvements, location and nature of vehicle access points and routes, and requiring pedestrian and/or bicycle ways.

(F) Limiting or otherwise designating the number, size, location, height and lighting of signs and outdoor or security lighting, and the intensity and/or direction thereof.

(G) Requiring diking, screening, fencing or other improvements or facilities deemed necessary to protect adjacent or nearby properties, and establishing requirements or standards for the installation and maintenance thereof.

(H) Protecting and preserving existing trees, other vegetation and water, scenic, historic, archaeological, unique, landmark or other natural or manmade significant resources.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.137 APPLICATION FOR CONDITIONAL USE.

A property owner or duly authorized agent may initiate a request for conditional use or the modification of an existing conditional use by filing an application with the city using forms prescribed therefor by the city. The standard application form shall be completed in its entirety and shall be accompanied by a site plan, drawn to scale, and showing the dimensions, arrangement and intended use of the proposed development. The application shall also be accompanied by a vicinity map showing the subject property, all properties within 100 feet and the names and addresses of all property owners within 100 feet as reported by the current County Assessor’s records. If an application is submitted by any person or persons other than the property owner or authorized agent thereof, the application shall be jointly signed by the owner or agent, or there shall be submitted an accompanying certified statement from the owner or agent attesting to the knowledge and approval of the submittal. An application shall not be deemed complete unless accompanied by the required filing fee established by the City Council by ordinance or resolution.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.138 TIME LIMIT ON A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT.

(A) Authorization of a conditional use permit shall be null and void after one year or such other time as may be specified in the approval thereof unless substantial development, compliance and/or investment is clearly evident.

(B) Issuance of a conditional use permit shall confer no right to the applicant beyond the time period for which it was issued.

(C) If the conditions applicable to a conditional use permit are not fulfilled within a reasonable time, the Commission may revoke the permit after giving notice to the applicant, affected property owners and other affected persons or parties, and upon holding a public hearing to make the determination.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11; Am. Ord. 1208, passed 12-9-14. Formerly 153.139)

SUBDIVISIONS, PARTITIONINGS, LOT CONSOLIDATIONS AND REPLATS


153.155 PURPOSE.

It is the purpose of this subchapter, in accordance with the provisions of ORS Chapters 92 and 227, to provide for minimum standards governing the approval of land divisions, including subdivisions, replats, land partitioning and lot consolidations as necessary to carry out the needs and policies for adequate traffic movement, water supply, sewage disposal, drainage and other community facilities, to improve land records and boundary monumentation and to ensure equitable processing of subdivision, replats, partitioning, lot consolidation and other land division activities within the city and the surrounding urban area.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.156 APPLICABILITY.

No person may subdivide, replat, partition, consolidate or otherwise divide land, or create a planned unit or cluster development, or create a street for the purpose of developing land except in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter, this chapter and ORS Chapter 92. (ORS 92.012 and 277.100).

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.157 SUBDIVISIONS - APPLICATIONS.

(A) Application. Any person proposing a subdivision, or the authorized agent or representative thereof, shall submit an application for a subdivision to the City Planning Department. The application shall be accompanied with ten copies of either an outline development plan as provided for in subsection (B) of this section, or a tentative plan as set forth in subsection (C) of this section, together with improvement plans and other supplementary material as may be required, and the appropriate filing fee as established by the City Council. The date of filing shall be construed to be the date on which all of the foregoing materials are received and accepted by the appropriate city official.

(B) Outline development plan. The submittal of an outline development plan in the subdivision application process is at the option of the applicant and/or developer. If an outline development plan is prepared and submitted with the application for a subdivision, it shall include both maps and written statements as set forth in this subsection (B).

(1) The maps which are part of an outline development plan may be in schematic form, but shall be to scale and shall contain the following information:

(a) The existing topographic character of the land.

(b) Existing and proposed land uses, and the approximate location of buildings and other structures on the project site and adjoining lands, existing and proposed.

(c) The character and approximate density of the proposed development.

(d) Public uses including schools, parks, playgrounds and other public spaces or facilities proposed.

(e) Common open spaces and recreation facilities and a description of the proposed uses thereof.

(f) Landscaping, irrigation and drainage plans.

(g) Road, street and other transportation facility schematic plans and proposals.

(2) Written statements which shall be part of the outline development plan submittal shall contain the following information:

(a) A statement and description of all proposed on-site and off-site improvements.

(b) A general schedule of development and improvements.

(c) A statement setting forth proposed types of housing and other uses to be accommodated, and a projection of traffic generation and population.

(d) A statement relative to the impact on the carrying capacities of public facilities and services, including water and sewer systems, schools, serving utilities, streets and the like.

(e) A statement relative to compatibility with adjoining land uses, present and future, environmental protection and/or preservation measures and impacts on natural resource carrying capacities of the site and surrounding/adjacent areas.

(3) Commission approval of an outline development plan for a subdivision shall constitute only a conceptual approval of the proposed development for general compliance with the City’s Urban Area Comprehensive Plan, applicable zoning and this chapter.

(4) Commission review and action on an outline development plan shall follow the requirements for review of land use action procedures, hearings and decisions in §§ 153.254, 153.255 and 153.256.

(C) Tentative plan required. Following submittal and approval of an outline development plan and subdivision application, or as an initial subdivision application, any person proposing a subdivision shall submit a tentative plan together with the required application form, accompanying information and supplemental data and required filing fee, prepared and submitted in accordance with the provisions of this subsection (ORS 92.040). Note: Applicants should review the design standards set forth in § 153.190 et seq. prior to preparing a tentative plan for a development.

(1) Scale of tentative plan. The tentative plan of a proposed subdivision shall be drawn on a sheet 18 inches by 24 inches in size or multiples thereof at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet or multiples thereof as approved by the City Planning Official (ORS 92.080). In addition, at least one copy of the plan on a sheet of paper measuring 11 inches by 17 inches shall be provided for public notice requirements.

(2) Information requirements. Along with showing compliance with the Comprehensive Plan and applicable land use standards and policies, the following information shall be shown on the tentative plan or provided in accompanying materials. No tentative plan submittal shall be considered complete, unless all such information is provided unless approved otherwise by the Planning Official.

(a) General information required.

1. Proposed name of the subdivision.

2. Names, addresses and phone numbers of the owner of record and subdivider, authorized agents or representatives, and surveyor and any assumed business names filed or to be filed by the owner or subdivider in connection with the development.

3. Date of preparation, north point, scale and gross area of the development.

4. Identification of the drawing as a tentative plan for a subdivision. Location and tract designation sufficient to define its location and boundaries, and a legal description of the tract boundaries in relation to existing plats and streets.

5. Title report issued in the last 90 days and supporting documents of all easements identified on the property.

(b) Information concerning existing conditions.

1. Location, names and widths of existing improved and unimproved streets and roads within and adjacent to the proposed development.

2. Location of any existing features such as section lines, section corners, city and special district boundaries and survey monuments.

3. Location of existing structures, fences, irrigation canals and ditches, pipelines, waterways, railroads and natural features, such as rock outcroppings, marshes, wetlands, geological features and natural hazards.

4. Location and direction of watercourses, and the location of areas subject to erosion, high water tables, storm water runoff and flooding.

5. Location, width and use or purpose of any existing easements or rights-of-way within and adjacent to the proposed development.

6. Existing and proposed sewer lines or septic tanks, water mains, wells, fire hydrants, culverts and underground or overhead utilities within and adjacent to the proposed development, together with pipe sizes, grades and locations.

7. Contour lines related to some established bench mark or other engineering acceptable datum and having minimum intervals of two feet for slopes less than 5%, five feet for slopes less than 15%, ten feet for slopes less than 20% and 20 feet for slopes greater than 20%.

8. Address numbers of adjoining properties.

9. Existing covenants, codes and restrictions.

10. Distance to nearest park or recreational area.

(c) Information concerning proposed subdivision.

1. Location and size of all required and proposed public infrastructure and connections to existing infrastructure. This includes but is not limited to names, width, typical improvements, cross-sections, approximate grades, curve radii and length of streets. Connections to future infrastructure associated with an outline development plan, master plan or the City Master Plans for Water, Sewer, Transportation and Storm Water shall also be shown.

2. Location, width and purpose of all proposed easements or rights-of-way, and the relationship to all existing easements or rights-of-way.

3. Location of at least one temporary bench mark within the proposed subdivision boundary.

4. Location, approximate area and dimensions of each lot and proposed lot and block numbers.

5. Location, approximate area and dimensions of any lot or area proposed for public, community or common use, including park or other recreation areas, and the use proposed and plans for improvements or development thereof.

6. Proposed use, location, area and dimensions of any lot which is intended for nonresidential use and the use designated thereof.

7. An outline of the area proposed for partial recording on a final plat if phased development and recording is contemplated or proposed.

8. Source, method and preliminary plans for domestic water supply, sewage disposal, solid waste collection and disposal and all utilities.

9. Storm water, drainage facility and grading plans.

10. Statement from each utility company proposed to serve the subdivision stating their willingness to serve the subdivision as set forth in the tentative plan.

11. Proposed fire protection or fire hydrant system and written approval thereof by the appropriate fire protection agency.

12. Solar access. Demonstrate that this proposal will not unduly affect the solar access of existing homes.

13. Location and type of street trees.

14. Availability of open space, parks and recreational areas meets the requirements of § 153.193, Land for public purposes.

(D) Master development plan required. An overall master development plan shall be submitted for all developments planning to utilize phase or unit development. In addition to the tentative plan requirements of subsection (C) of this section, the plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following elements:

(1) Overall development plan, including phase or unit sequences and the planned development schedule thereof.

(2) Show compliance with the Comprehensive Plan and applicable land use standards and policies.

(3) Schedule of improvements initiation and completion.

(4) Development plans of any common elements or facilities.

(5) Financing plan for all improvements.

(E) Supplemental information required. The following supplemental information shall be submitted with the tentative plan for a subdivision:

(1) Proposed deed restrictions or protective covenants, if such is proposed to be utilized for the proposed development.

(2) Reasons and justifications for any variances or exceptions proposed or requested to the provisions of this subchapter, the applicable zoning regulations or any other applicable local, state or federal ordinance, rule or regulation.

(F) Tentative plan review procedures.

(1) Tentative plan review shall follow the requirements for review of land use action procedures, hearings and decisions in §§ 153.254 through 153.256 et seq.

(2) The decision on a tentative plat shall be set forth in a written decision, and in the case of approval shall be noted on not less than two copies of the tentative plan, including references to any attached documents setting forth specific conditions.

(G) Tentative approval relative to final plat. Approval of the tentative plan shall not constitute final acceptance of the final plat of the proposed subdivision for recording. However, approval of the tentative plan shall be binding upon the city for preparation of the final plat and the city may require only such changes as are deemed necessary for compliance with the terms of its approval of the tentative plan. (ORS 92.040)

(H) Resubmission of denied tentative plan. If the tentative plan for a subdivision is denied, resubmittal of an application for a subdivision of the subject property thereof shall not be accepted by the city for a period of six months after the date of the final action denying the plan. Resubmittal shall be considered a new filing, but shall require the applicant to consider all items for which the prior denial was based, in addition to the other filing requirements set forth by this chapter.

(I) Requirements for approval. The Commission shall not approve an outline development plan or a tentative plan for a subdivision unless the Commission finds, in addition to other requirements and standards set forth by this chapter and other applicable city ordinances, standards and regulation, the following:

(1) The proposal is in compliance with ORS Chapter 92, applicable goals, objectives and policies set forth by the City’s Comprehensive Plan, Master Plans, Standards and Specifications and applicable zoning. (ORS 92.090(2)(c), 197.175(2)(b) and 227.175(4))

(2) Each lot is suited for the use intended or to be offered, including but not limited to sewage disposal, water supply, guaranteed public street access and utilities.

(3) The proposal is in compliance with the design and improvement standards and requirements set forth in § 153.190 et seq. and the City’s Standards and Specifications or as otherwise approved by the city, or that such compliance can be assured by conditions of approval.

(4) The subdivision will not create an excessive demand on public facilities and services required to serve the proposed development, or that the developer has proposed adequate and equitable improvements and expansions to the facilities with corresponding approved financing therefor to bring the facilities and services up to an acceptable capacity level (Goal 11).

(5) The development provides for the preservation of significant scenic, archaeological, natural, historic and unique resources in accordance with applicable provisions of this chapter and the Comprehensive Plan (Goal 5).

(6) The proposed name of the subdivision is not the same as, similar to or pronounced the same as the name of any other subdivision in the city or within a six-mile radius thereof, unless the land platted is contiguous to and platted as an extension of an existing subdivision. (ORS 92.090)

(7) The streets and roads are laid out so as to conform to an adopted Transportation System Plan for the area, and to the plats of subdivisions and maps of major partitions already approved for adjoining property as to width, general direction and in all other respects unless the city determines it is in the public interest to modify the street or road pattern. (ORS 92.090(2)(a))

(8) Streets and roads for public use are to be dedicated to the public without any reservation or restriction; and streets and roads for private use are approved by the city as a variance to public access requirements. (ORS 92.090(2)(b))

(9) Adequate mitigation measures are provided for any identified and measurable adverse impacts on or by neighboring properties or the uses thereof or on the natural environment.

(10) Provisions are made for access to abutting properties that will likely need such access in the future, including access for vehicular and pedestrian traffic, public facilities and services and utilities.

(11) Provisions of the proposed development to provide for a range of housing needs, particularly those types identified as needed or being in demand. (Goal 10 and ORS 197.303 through 197.307)

(12) Provisions for open space, parks and recreational areas shall be provided for in accordance with § 153.193, Land for public purposes.

(J) Improvement requirements. In the approval of any subdivision, the need for a survey and the need for street and other public facility improvements shall be required as a condition of approval. Streets and roads for private use are approved by the city as a variance to public access requirements. (ORS 92.090(2)(b)) 

(1) Provisions are made for access to abutting properties that will likely need such access in the future, including access for vehicular and pedestrian traffic, public facilities and services and utilities.

(2) All required agreements shall be recorded at the Crook County Clerk’s office at the same time of recording of the final subdivision plat.

(3) If the existing street right-of-way is not consistent with city standards or new right-of-way is required through a city master plan or “to and through” standard, street right-of-way shall be dedicated, in compliance with the City’s Standards and Specifications and frontage requirements.

(4) Public infrastructure including right-of-way, water, sewer, streets and sidewalks shall be extended and constructed, per the City’s Standards and Specifications, “to and through” each lot created by the subdivision, unless otherwise approved by the city due to the following:

(a) Phased development.

(b) Certain aspects of the “to and through” standard may be deferred for one clearly defined remainder lot of at least five acres where future development or division is likely and the infrastructure will be brought through the remainder lot at that time. Right-of-way shall be extended to and through but street, water and sewer infrastructure may be deferred until new development or division of the remainder lot.

(5) All public utilities are available to each lot line within an adjacent street or alley.

(6) Paved access is guaranteed to each lot.

(7) Future development is to be connected to the city’s sewer and water systems.

(K) Final plat approval. The submission of a final plat shall follow the requirements set forth in § 153.164.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11; Am. Ord. 1194, passed 9-25-12)


153.158 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD).

(A) Authorization. When a planned unit development is authorized pursuant to the provisions of the applicable zoning or by other provisions of this chapter, the development may be approved by the city in accordance with the provisions of this section and this chapter. A PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) is a development technique where the development of an area of land is developed as a single entity for a number and/or mixture of housing types, or a mixture of other types of uses, or a combination thereof, according to a specific development plan which does not necessarily correspond relative to lot sizes, bulk or types of dwelling units, density, lot coverages or required open space as required by the standard provisions set forth by this chapter and the specific applicable zoning designation.

(B) Applicability of regulations. The requirements for a planned unit development set forth in this section are in addition to the requirements set forth for a standard subdivision by § 153.157, and in addition to those requirements set forth in § 153.094.

(C) Purpose. The purpose of the planned unit development provisions is to permit the application of innovative designs and to allow greater freedom in land development that is not possible under the strict application of the applicable zoning provisions and this chapter. In permitting such design and development freedom, the intent is to encourage more efficient uses of land and public facilities and services, to maximize community needs for a variety of housing, commercial and recreational needs and to maintain as high of a quality living environment.

(D) Principal and accessory uses.

(1) The principal uses permitted within a planned unit development may include any use permitted, outright or conditional in the zone in which the subject proposed development is located.

(2) Except for open land uses such as golf courses, parks, natural areas or natural resources and the like, accessory uses shall not occupy more than 25% of the total area of the development, must be approved as a part of the initial development approval and may include the following uses:

(a) Commercial uses such as a grocery store, convenience store, cafe, bakery, book store, salon, and professional offices.

(b) Tourist accommodations including convention or destination resort facilities.

(c) Recreation areas, buildings, clubhouse or other facilities of a similar use or type.

(d) Other uses which the city finds are designed to serve primarily the residents of the proposed development or are open to and of benefit to the general public, and are compatible to the overall design of the proposed development and with the City’s Comprehensive Plan.

(E) Dimensional standards.

(1) The minimum lot area, width, depth, frontage and yard (setback) requirements otherwise applying to individual lots in the applicable zone may be altered for a planned unit development; provided, that the overall density factor calculated for the applicable zone is not exceeded by more than 25%.

(2) Building heights exceeding those prescribed for by the applicable zone may only be approved if surrounding open space and building setbacks and other design features are used to avoid any adverse impacts due to the greater height. As a guideline, setback requirements should be required to be at least two-thirds of the height of a building.

(3) The building coverage for any PUD shall not exceed 40% of the total land area of the proposed development.

(4) Common open space and other community amenities such as community buildings, recreation buildings and school playgrounds, exclusive of streets, shall constitute at least 30% of the total land area of the development. Landscaped planter strips and medians within the street right-of-way may be approved by the Planning Commission as part of the open space requirement provided they are maintained by a homeowners association.

(a) At least half of the required open space shall be open to the general public.

(5) No PUD in a residential zone may be approved on a site with a total land area less than five acres, and in a commercial zone on a site less than two acres.

(F) Project density approval. If the Planning Commission finds that any of the following conditions would be created by an increase in density permitted by this section for a PUD, it may either prohibit any increase or may limit the increase as deemed necessary to avoid the creation of any of the following conditions:

(1) Inconvenient or unsafe access to the proposed development or adjoining developments or properties.

(2) Generation of traffic loads in excess of the capacity of streets which adjoin or will serve the proposed development and in the overall street system in the area of the development.

(3) Creation of an excessive burden on sewage, water supply, parks, recreational facilities, areas or programs, schools and other public facilities which serve or are proposed to serve the proposed development.

(G) Common open space. No open area may be accepted as common open space within a PUD unless it meets the following requirements:

(1) The common open space is for an identified and designated amenity or recreational purpose(s), and the uses proposed or authorized therefor are appropriate to the scale and character of the proposed development.

(2) The common open space will be suitably improved for its intended use, except that the open space containing significant natural features worthy of preservation in the natural state may be left unimproved, but there shall be approved plans and/or provisions for the continued preservation thereof.

(3) The buildings, structures and improvements to be permitted in the open space are determined to be appropriate and accessory to the uses which are authorized for the open space.

(4) No common open space may be put to a use not authorized and approved in the final development plan of the subject development unless an amendment thereto is duly approved by the city.

(H) Application and procedures. The application for a PUD, and the procedures for the processing of the applications, shall be the same as set forth for a standard subdivision in § 153.157 and for a conditional use as set forth in § 153.135 et seq.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.159 SUBDIVISION AND PUD REVIEW.

Review of a subdivision or planned unit development shall follow the procedures and policies for land use applications, hearings and decisions set forth in §§ 153.254 through 153.256 et seq.

(A) Public hearing and notice required. Neither an outline development plan nor a tentative plan for a proposed subdivision or PUD may be approved unless the Planning Commission first advertises and holds a public hearing thereon. Notice of the hearing shall, at a minimum, be provided as required by this chapter for a conditional use Type II.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.160 LAND PARTITIONING.

(A) Applicability of regulations. As defined in this section and this chapter, all land partitioning within the city, except as set forth in subsection (D) of this section, must be approved by the city as provided for in this section; however, the Planning Director or designee may refer any partition to the Hearings Body for a hearing and decision.

(B) Definitions. For the purposes of this section and this chapter, the words and phrases shall have the meaning set forth herein.

PARTITIONING. To divide a lot, parcel or tract of land into two or three lots or parcels but does not include the following:

(1) A division of land resulting from a lien foreclosure, foreclosure of a recorded contract for the sale of real property, or the creation of a cemetery lot.

(2) An adjustment of a property line by the relocation of a common boundary where an additional unit of land is not created, and where the existing unit of land reduced in size by the adjustment complies with the applicable zoning.

(3) The division of land resulting from the recording of a subdivision or condominium plat.

(4) The sale of a lot in a recorded subdivision or town plat, even though the developer, owner or seller of the lot may have owned other contiguous lots or property prior to the sale; the lot, however, must be sold as platted and recorded.

MAJOR PARTITIONING. A partitioning where a new street or road is created for access to one or more of the parcels created by the partitioning.

MINOR PARTITIONING. A partitioning where each lot or parcel created has access to an existing public road, street, highway or way; that is, a partitioning that does not include the creation of a new road or street for access to one or more of the lots or parcels being created. For the purposes of this definition and this definition only, an easement or public street for access of more than 100 feet in length shall be considered a street or road.

SERIES PARTITIONING. A series of partitions, major or minor, of a tract of land resulting in the creation of four or more parcels over a period of more than one calendar year.

(C) Flag lots and duplex lots. The creation of a flag lot or duplex lot not part of a subdivision shall be considered a minor partition. For criteria regarding flag lots refer to § 153.191(F). For criteria regarding duplex lots refer to § 153.084(B).

(D) Exemption. Partitions resulting in the following are not subject to the land partitioning requirements or applicable zoning regulations set forth by this chapter. However, a final plat map shall be required.

(1) The partitioning of a tract of land in which not more than one parcel is created and the parcel is being transferred to a public or semi-public agency for the purpose of a public road, street, railroad, electric substation, canal, utility right-of-way, public park, school, recreation facility, trail, bikeway, natural area or other similar public purpose.

(E) Filing procedures and requirements. Any person proposing a land partitioning, or the authorized agent or representative thereof, shall prepare and submit ten copies of the tentative plan for a major partitioning requiring a hearing and three copies for a minor partitioning, together with a digital copy and the prescribed application form and required filing fee, to the City Planning Official.

(1) Minor partitioning. The Planning Official shall take action to either approve the application as submitted, approve with modifications or conditions, or deny the application; or the Planning Official may refer the subject application to the Planning Commission for review and action thereon. Review of a minor partition shall follow the procedures and policies for land use applications, hearings and decisions set forth in §§ 153.254 through 153.256 et seq.

(2) Major partitioning. With an application and tentative plan for a major partitioning, the application shall be referred to the Planning Commission for the initial hearing for review and action if one or more objections are received in writing during the required ten-day notice period. The Planning Commission may approve the application as submitted, approve with modifications or conditions or deny the application.

(3) Series partitioning. Any division of land resulting in a series partitioning shall be subject to review and approval by the Planning Commission. Applications for any series partitioning shall be made and processed in the same manner as a major partitioning. Approval requirements shall be the same as for any partitioning; however, the Commission shall deny any such series partitioning when it is determined that the partitioning is done for the purpose of circumventing applicable subdivision regulations.

(4) Proposed partitioning shall be drawn. The tentative plan of a proposed partitioning shall be drawn on a sheet 18 inches by 24 inches in size or multiples thereof at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet or multiples thereof. A copy of the proposed partitioning shall also be provided on a sheet measuring 11 inches by 17 inches for public review and notice requirements.

(5) Requirements for the plan.

(a) A vicinity map locating the proposed partitioning in relation to adjacent subdivisions, roadways, properties and land use patterns.

(b) A plan of the proposed partitioning showing overall boundaries and dimensions, the area of each lot or parcel and the names, right-of-way widths and improvement standards of existing and proposed streets.

(c) Names and addresses of the landowner, the partitioner, the mortgagee if applicable, and the land surveyor employed (or to be employed) to make necessary surveys and prepare the final partitioning map.

(d) A statement regarding provisions for water supply, sewage disposal, solid waste disposal, fire protection, access, utilities and the like.

(e) North point, scale and date of map and the property identification by tax lot, map number, section, township and range, subdivision lot and block or other legal description.

(f) Statement regarding past, present and proposed use of the parcel(s) to be created, or the use for which the parcel(s) is to be created.

(g) A plan showing the layout of public infrastructure, as well as future connections to surrounding properties and existing infrastructure.

(h) Location of all existing buildings, canals, ditches, septic tanks, drain fields, wells and utility poles.

(i) Location of any topographical features which could impact the partition, such as canyons, drainages, rock outcroppings, wetlands, and floodplains.

(F) Requirements for tentative partition approval.

(1) The proposal is in compliance with ORS Chapter 92, the City’s Comprehensive Plan, Master Plans, Standards and Specifications and applicable zoning regulations.

(2) Each parcel is suited for the use intended or to be offered, including but not limited to sewage disposal, water supply, guaranteed public street access and utilities.

(3) The proposal is in compliance with § 153.016, Municipal sewer and water required, the design and improvement standards and requirements set forth in § 153.190 et seq. and the City’s Standards and Specifications or as otherwise approved by the city, or that such compliance can be assured by conditions of approval.

(4) Proposal will not have identifiable adverse impacts on adjoining or area land uses, public services and facilities, resource carrying capacities or on any significant resources.

(5) Adequate mitigation measures are provided for any identified and measurable adverse impacts on or by neighboring properties or the uses thereof or on the natural environment.

(G) Improvement requirements. The approval of any land partitioning, the need for a survey, and the need for street and other public facility improvements shall be considered and such may be required as a condition of approval. Any survey and/or improvement requirements that may be required for a subdivision or other land development may be required for a partitioning, including infrastructure, bonding or other assurance of compliance.

(1) Provisions are made for access to abutting properties that will likely need such access in the future, including access for vehicular and pedestrian traffic, public facilities and services and utilities.

(2) All required agreements shall be recorded at the Crook County Clerk’s office at the same time of recording of the final partition plat.

(3) If the existing street right-of-way is not consistent with city standards or new right-of-way is required through a city master plan or “to and through” standard, street right-of-way shall be dedicated, in compliance with the City’s Standards and Specifications and frontage requirements. 

(4) Public infrastructure including right-of-way, water, sewer, streets and sidewalks shall be extended and constructed, per the City’s Standards and Specifications, “to and through” each lot created by the partition, unless otherwise approved by the city due to the following:

(a) Certain aspects of the “to and through” standard may be deferred for one clearly defined remainder lot of at least five acres where future development or division is likely and the infrastructure will be brought through the remainder lot at that time. Right-of-way shall be extended to and through but street, water and sewer infrastructure may be deferred until new development or division of the remainder lot.

(5) All public utilities are available to each lot line within an adjacent street or alley.

(6) Paved access is guaranteed to each lot.

(7) Future development is to be connected to the city’s sewer and water systems.

(H) Final map requirements. Within one year of the approval of a partitioning, the partitioner shall have prepared and submitted to the City Planning Official a final partitioning map prepared by a licensed surveyor and any other materials or documents required by the approval.

(1) A final partitioning map prepared for this purpose shall comply with the recording requirements applicable to a final plat for a subdivision.

(I) Partitioning for financial purposes.

(1) Upon application to the City Planning Director, the person may grant a special permit authorizing creation of a security interest or leasehold in a parcel of land. A filing fee as may be established by the City Council shall be required.

(2) Permits issued under the authority of this subsection (I) shall be subject to the following limitations and restrictions:

(a) A parcel possessed by a person under the terms of a lease or a security interest, and the remaining parcels, must remain in the legal use(s) that the parcels were at the time the interest became possessory; except as may be the basis of the security interest, no additional structure or improvement may be added to any parcel by the authority of the permit authorized pursuant to this subsection (I).

(b) A permit authorized by this subsection (I) shall only be valid for the time of the lease or the life of the security interest; except when there is a default and foreclosure upon a security interest.

(c) At the end of the life of the security interest, if there is no default or foreclosure, or in the case of leaseholds at the end of the lease, the parcels shall be rejoined into a contiguous unit of land under one ownership and, if possible, shall be reunited or combined into a single tax lot. The owner of the property shall be in violation of this chapter if he has not, within 30 days of the permit becoming void, made written application to the County Assessor for the combination of the parcels into a single tax lot.

(3) A permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this subsection (I) shall be immediately void if the owner of the property attempts any transfer of the subject parcels, except as provided by the terms of the permit.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11; Am. Ord. 1194, passed 9-25-12)


153.161 LOT CONSOLIDATIONS.

All lot consolidations shall follow the same planning process as a boundary line adjustment and final plat map requirements of a partition or subdivision as applicable.

(A) Lot consolidations resulting in a single lot.

(1) May be performed on contiguous lots resulting in a single lot.

(2) A lot consolidation is the actual removal of a lot line or lines not just the consolidation of tax lots.

(3) Lot consolidations shall not be used to avoid public improvements that would otherwise be required or have been required by a land partition or subdivision such as the replatting of a subdivision that has not yet been constructed.

(4) Each noncontiguous consolidation shall be a separate application.

(B) Lot consolidations resulting in the same or fewer lots.

(1) The purpose of the section is to allow for the reconfiguration of lots without having to go through a full subdivision or partition process. The applicant shall meet the following criteria:

(a) All lots shall meet the minimum dimensional standards of the zone, to include public street frontage.

(b) In the case of a commercial development, an applicant may reconfigure lots to meet the development needs and division of ownership.

(C) Final map requirements. Lot consolidations require a recorded plat and shall follow the same map requirements as with a partition or subdivision.

(1) In the case of multiple lot consolidations in the same area, an applicant may combine all consolidations on a single map. If that map results in more than three lots, the signatures required for a subdivision shall be required.

(2) The type of plat required (replat, partition, or subdivision) shall be determined by the County Surveyor.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11; Am. Ord. 1208, passed 12-9-14)


153.162 REPLATS.

(A) Per ORS 92.010 a replat is the act of platting the lots, parcels and easements in a recorded subdivision or partition plat to achieve a reconfiguration of the existing subdivision or partition plat or to increase or decrease the number of lots in the subdivision.

(B) In practice, the City of Prineville will process a replat the same as a partition or subdivision depending on the amount of lots being created or the type of plat being replatted. The County Surveyor shall make the final determination on whether a plat is titled as a replat, partition or subdivision.

(C) The replat of a portion of a recorded plat shall not act to vacate any recorded covenants or restrictions.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.163 BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENT AND FINAL MAP RECORDATION.

(A) Boundary line adjustment regulations. Boundary line adjustments are the modification of the boundaries of a lot of record. New lots are not created by a boundary line adjustment.

(B) Submission requirements. All applications shall include a preliminary boundary line map identifying all existing and proposed boundary lines and dimensions; footprints and dimensions of driveways and public and private streets within or abutting the subject lots of record; existing fences and walls; and any other information deemed necessary by the City of Prineville for ensuring compliance with the Prineville Development Code.

(C) Approval process.

(1) Boundary line adjustments shall be reviewed administratively without prior notice consistent with § 153.254 using the criteria contained in subsection (D) of this section.

(2) Boundary line adjustment approvals shall be effective for one year from the date of approval, during which time it shall be recorded.

(3) The boundary line adjustment approval shall lapse if:

(a) The boundary adjustment is not recorded within the time limit in subsection (C)(2) of this section;

(b) The boundary line adjustment has been improperly recorded with Crook County without satisfactory completion of all conditions attached to the approval; or

(c) The final recording is a departure from the approved plat.

(D) Approval criteria. The city shall approve or deny a request for a lot line adjustment in writing based on findings that all of the following criteria are satisfied:

(1) No additional lot or parcel is created by the adjustment.

(2) All properties adjusted comply with the applicable zone requirements and design and improvement requirements of this chapter.

(E) Recording of final map. A final map shall be recorded in the same manner as a partition or subdivision and comply with the survey requirements of ORS Chapters 92 and 209.

(1) The original plat and an exact copy shall be submitted to and approved by the City Planning Director. The approval shall be evidenced by signature on both the original and exact copy.

(2) The original plat and exact copy shall be submitted along with the appropriate recording fee to the County Surveyor for recording into the county survey records.

(3) The original plat and exact copy shall then be submitted along with the appropriate recording fee to the County Clerk for recording into the County Clerk’s records.

(4) After recording information is placed on the exact copy by the County Clerk, the exact copy and the required number of points, a minimum of six copies, unless otherwise specified by the County Surveyor at the time of survey recording, shall then be submitted to the County Surveyor to complete the recording process.

(5) After recording information is placed on the exact copy, a minimum of three copies shall then be submitted to the City Planning Director, together with the digital data in a format approved by the city and the Crook County GIS Department.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.164 FINAL PLAT FOR SUBDIVISIONS, PARTITIONS, LOT CONSOLIDATIONS AND REPLATS.

(A) Time requirement. Except as otherwise approved in accordance with the approval the subdivider or partitioner shall, within one year after the date of approval (including the appeal period), prepare and submit with the appropriate filing fee the final plat for a subdivision or partition that is in conformance with the tentative plan as approved and with all conditions applicable thereto.

(1) The filing shall be to the City Planning Official. If the subdivider fails to file the final plat before the expiration of the one-year period, the tentative plan approval shall be declared null and void and a new submittal required if the subdivider wishes to proceed with the development.

(2) Master development plan. In the case of a subdivision for which a master development plan has been approved, the tentative plans for each unit or phase thereof shall be submitted in accordance with the schedule approved as a part of the master plan.

(3) Extension. For extension criteria see § 153.259, Limitations on approvals.

(4) Form of final plat. The final plat shall be prepared in conformance with the applicable standards of ORS Chapter 92 and the requirements of the Crook County Surveyor and Crook County Clerk.

(B) Technical review of final plat. Upon receipt by the city, the plat and other data shall be reviewed by the City Planning Official and City Engineer to determine that the subdivision or partition as shown is substantially the same as it appears on the approved tentative plat or as otherwise approved through conditions and complies with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable laws.

(1) Field check. The city may make such checks in the field to verify that the plat is sufficiently correct. A representative of the city may enter the property for this purpose.

(C) Conditions of final plat approval. The conditions for final plat approval are essentially the same for a subdivision or partition. A partition plat may require fewer signatures based on the type of review and dedications.

(1) The City Planning Official and City Engineer shall again determine whether the final plat conforms to the approved plan and other provisions of this chapter and applicable laws. If the City Planning Official and City Engineer do not approve the plat, the applicant shall be advised of the changes or additions that must be made and shall afford a reasonable opportunity (not to exceed 30 days) to make the changes or additions. If the plat does conform and supplemental documents and provisions for required improvements are satisfactory, the City Planning Official will sign and recommend signatures by the Public Works Director, Planning Commission Chair and Mayor.

(2) No final plat for a proposed subdivision shall be approved unless it is found to comply with the following minimum standards. (ORS 92.090(3))

(a) The final plat is found to be in compliance with the tentative plan approval and all conditions set forth thereby.

(b) Streets and roads for public use are dedicated without any reservations or restrictions.

(c) Streets and roads held for private use are clearly indicated.

(d) The plat contains a dedication to the public of all common improvements and public uses proposed or required as a condition of approval of the tentative plan, including but not limited to streets, roads, parks, sewage disposal, and water supply.

(e) Explanations of restrictions required as a condition of approval shall be recorded and referenced on the final plat.

(f) All proposed or required improvements have either been completed or approved by the city and a maintenance surety bond has been executed under § 153.199 or a bond, contract or other assurance of improvements has been executed per § 153.197.

(D) Recording of final plat. The subdivider shall, without delay, submit the final plat for the approval and signatures of other public officials required by law. Approval of the final plat shall be null and void if the plat is not recorded within 45 days after the date of approval by the City Mayor.

(1) After obtaining all required approvals and signatures, the subdivider shall submit an exact copy of the final plats to the County Surveyor for recording into the survey records.

(2) The County Surveyor recording fee shall be submitted with the final plat along with any required post-monumentation bond or letter executed by the City Attorney that the bonding requirements are met.

(3) The plat shall then be submitted to the County Clerk along with the required recording fee. After recording information is placed on the exact copy by the County Clerk, the exact copy and the required number of prints showing the recording information shall be submitted to the County Surveyor to complete the process. The number of prints required shall be 12 for a subdivision plat and six prints for a partition unless a greater number is requested by the County Surveyor at initial review.

(4) An exact copy of all final plats showing the recording information shall also be submitted to the City Planning Department, Assessor and Crook County GIS Department. A copy of the digital data of the plat in an approved format shall also be submitted to the City Planning Department and the Crook County GIS Department.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)

DEDICATION OF STREETS NOT PART OF DEVELOPMENT


153.175 APPLICATION.

Any person desiring to create a street or road not part of a subdivision, PUD, partitioning or other land development shall make written application to the City Planning Department. The application shall be made on prescribed forms and shall be accompanied by the required information and applicable filing fee.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.176 MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS.

The minimum standards of design and improvement for the dedication of a street or road not part of a land development shall be the same as set forth in the City’s Standards and Specifications unless approved otherwise by the city. The street or road shall also be in compliance with other applicable street standard regulations of the city, county or state.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.177 PROCEDURES.

(A) Upon receipt of a written application, together with other required information and the appropriate filing fee, the Planning Director shall refer the proposal to the City Street Superintendent for review and recommendation. A copy of the application shall also be referred to the Planning Commission for review and recommendation at the first regularly scheduled meeting following receipt of the application; referral to the Commission shall be accomplished at least five working days prior to a meeting.

(B) Where the proposed road or street provides access to a county road and/or a state highway, the necessary permits for such access from the appropriate agency(ies) shall be obtained prior to city approval of the road or street.

(C) The Planning Commission and City Street Superintendent shall report their findings to the Planning Director, and shall give their recommendations concerning the proposed dedication and the improvements. The Commission shall also recommend a functional classification for the proposed street or road.

(D) Upon receipt of written findings and recommendations from the Commission and Street Superintendent, the Planning Director shall submit the proposal to the City Council for review and decision. The submission shall be made at least five working days prior to a regularly scheduled Council meeting.

(E) Upon preliminary approval by the City Council, the engineering and improvements design of the street or roadway shall be prepared and submitted to the City Street Superintendent for review and approval. The engineering and improvements design shall be prepared and signed by a licensed engineer or surveyor, and shall be in compliance with applicable City Standards and Specifications.

(F) Following approval of the roadway engineering and design, the applicant shall prepare a warranty deed dedicating the street or road to the public and an improvement guarantee. The documents shall be submitted to the City Attorney for review and approval.

(G) Following receipt of the approvals set forth in subsections (E) and (F) of this section, the deed and improvements guarantee shall be submitted to the City Council for final approval.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)

DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS/REQUIREMENTS


153.190 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.

Any land division or development and the improvements required therefor, whether by subdivision, PUD, partitioning, creation of a street or other right-of-way, zoning approval or other land development requiring approval pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall be in compliance with the design and improvement standards and requirements set forth in this subchapter, in any other applicable provisions of this chapter, in any other provisions of any other applicable city ordinance, in any applicable provisions of county ordinances or regulations or in any applicable state statutes or administrative rules.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.191 LOTS AND BLOCKS.

(A) Blocks. The resulting or proposed length, width and shape of blocks shall take into account the requirements for adequate building lot sizes, street widths, access needs and topographical limitations.

(1) No block shall be more than 1,000 feet in length between street corner lines unless it is adjacent to an arterial street, or unless topography or the location of adjoining streets justifies an exception, and is so approved by the reviewing authority.

(2) The recommended minimum length of a block along an arterial street is 1,800 feet.

(3) A block shall have sufficient width to provide for two tiers of building sites unless topography or the location of adjoining streets justifies an exception; a standard exception is a block in which the building lots have rear yards fronting on an arterial or major collector street.

(B) Lots. The resulting or proposed size, width, shape and orientation of building lots shall be appropriate for the type of development, and consistent with the applicable zoning and topographical conditions.

(C) Access. Each resulting or proposed lot or parcel shall have legal access and abut or front upon a public street, other than an alley, for a width of at least 50 feet or 35 feet in the case of a cul-de-sac.

(1) The following are situations where the reviewing authority may allow reductions to the frontage rule:

(a) When listed otherwise in the dimensional tables.

(b) Cluster developments or PUD.

(c) R-5 Residential High Density Zone.

(d) Other commercial and industrial zones that can demonstrate proper traffic function with regard to parking, ingress and egress.

(e) Mixed Use Zone.

(2) The following is a situation where the reviewing authority may allow an elimination of the frontage rule; however, legal access shall be provided:

(a) An area of steep slopes or other natural barriers where a full public street is not practical and will not be a part of the street grid system; as determined by the city. In this case an easement for access may be allowed for a limited number of newly created residential lots as determined by a ratio of one unit per acre. Emergency access and turnaround shall be required and approved by the Fire Department.

(D) Side lot lines. The side lines of lots and parcels, as far as practicable, shall be perpendicular to the street upon which they front; or radial to the curve as applicable.

(E) Division by boundary, ROW and drainage ways. No lot or parcel shall be divided by the boundary line of the city, county or other taxing or service district, or by the right-of-way of a street, utility line or drainage way or by an easement for utilities or other services, except as approved otherwise.

(F) Flag lots. The intent of a flag lot or lots is to promote infill in residential areas but not disrupt the existing nature of the neighborhood. It is also to provide dedicated public street access for these infill lots while avoiding the need for joint access easements that lead to neighbor disputes. Flag lots may be created by a boundary line adjustment, partition or subdivision with the following limitations:

(1) Flag lots are not permitted in the R-1 or R-3 Zone.

(2) The pole of the flag shall not be counted when calculating the minimum lot size within each zone. (The intent is to ensure the minimum lot size for a structure.)

(3) The front most lot adjacent to the street shall maintain 50 feet of frontage, with the exception of those items listed in subsection (C) of this section.

(4) Flag lots for multifamily including duplexes shall require a two-way access width of at least 30 feet.

(5) As defined, the pole of a flag lot shall be a continuous width of at least 20 feet up to but not including 50 feet. (The intent is to prevent dog leg flag lots.)

(6) A maximum of two flag lots may be permitted per original lot; however, if the poles of each flag are adjacent to one another, only a single shared access will be permitted and a reciprocal access easement shall be recorded.

(7) Flag lots within newly proposed subdivisions shall only be allowed on cul-de-sacs or where irregular lot lines warrant such a technique.


[IMAGE]


(G) Through or double-frontage lots and parcels. Through or double-frontage lots and parcels are to be avoided whenever possible, except where they are essential to provide separation of residential development from major traffic arterials or collectors and from adjacent nonresidential activities, or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. When through or double-frontage lots or parcels are desirable or deemed necessary, a planting screen easement of at least four to six feet in width, and across which there shall be no right of vehicular access, may be required along the line of building sites abutting such a traffic way or other incompatible uses.

(H) Special building setback lines. If special building setback lines, in addition to those required by the applicable zoning, are to be established in a development, they shall be shown on the final plat of the development and included in the deed restrictions.

(I) Large building lots; redivision. In the case where lots or parcels are of a size and shape that future redivision is likely or possible, the Commission may require that the blocks be of a size and shape so that they may be redivided into building sites, and the development approval and site restrictions may require provisions for the extension and opening of streets at intervals which will permit a subsequent redivision of any tract of land into lots or parcels of smaller sizes than originally platted.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11; Am. Ord. 1208, passed 12-9-14)


153.192 EASEMENTS.

(A) Utility lines. Easements for sewer lines, water mains, electric lines or other public utilities shall be as required by the serving entity, but in no case be less than 12 feet wide and centered on a rear and/or side lot line unless approved otherwise by the city. Utility pole anchor or guy wire easements may be reduced to six feet in width.

(B) Watercourses. If a lot is traversed by a watercourse, such as a drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the lines of the watercourse, and such further widths as deemed necessary.

(C) Pedestrian and bicycle ways. When desirable for public convenience, a pedestrian and/or bicycle way of not less than five feet in width may be required to connect to a cul-de-sac or to pass through an unusually long or oddly shaped block, or to otherwise provide appropriate circulation and to facilitate pedestrian and bicycle traffic as an alternative mode of transportation.

(D) Sewer and water lines. Easements may also be required for sewer and water lines, and if so required, shall be provided for as stipulated to by the City Department of Public Works.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.193 LAND FOR PUBLIC PURPOSES.

(A) If the city has an interest in acquiring a portion of a proposed development for a public purpose, or if the city has been advised of the interest by a school district or other public agency, and there is reasonable assurance that steps will be taken to acquire the land, then the city may require that portion of the development be reserved for public acquisition for a period not to exceed one year.

(B) Subdivisions containing 20 or more residential lots may be required (based on size and potential density) to develop and dedicate to the public a parcel of land at least 5% of the gross area of the development for parks and recreation purposes. The parcel of land shall be determined to be suitable for the park and/or recreation purpose(s) intended. This land may be within the development or adjacent to the development on continuous property owned by the developer. Parks approved as part of a subdivision may not be used to satisfy obligations of adjacent subdivisions.

(C) In the event no such area is available that is found to be suitable for parks and/or recreation uses, the developer may be required, in lieu of setting aside land, to pay to the appropriate parks and recreation agency a sum of money equal to the market value of the area required for dedication, plus the additional funds necessary for the development thereof if so required; if such is required, the money may only be utilized for capital improvements by the appropriate parks and recreation agency.

(D) The foregoing land and development or a monetary contribution may be provided for in lieu of an equal value of systems development charge assessment if so approved by the collecting agency (Crook County Parks and Recreation) in accordance with the applicable provisions of the SDC Ordinance. If the collecting agency will not accept the land or monetary contribution in lieu of an applicable systems development charge, the land and development of a park may still be required by the city. Such a park would need to be managed with a homeowners association unless an alternate arrangement can be reached with Crook County Parks and Recreation.

(E) If the nature and design, or approval, of a development is such that over 30% of the tract of land to be developed is dedicated to the public such as parks, rights-of-way, water or sewer system facilities and the like, then the requirements shall be reduced so that the total obligation of the developer to the public does not exceed 35%.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.194 STREETS AND OTHER PUBLIC FACILITIES.

(A) Duties of developer. It shall be the responsibility of the developer to construct all streets, curbs, sidewalks, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water mains, electric, gas, telephone, cable, and other utilities necessary to serve the use or development in accordance with the Standards and Specifications of the city and/or the serving entity.

(B) Underground installation of utility lines. All electrical, telephone or other utility lines shall be underground unless otherwise approved by the city.

(C) Location, width, and grade of streets. The location, width and grade of streets shall be considered in their relationship to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety and to the proposed use or development to be served thereby.

(D) Traffic circulation system. The overall street system shall assure an adequate traffic circulation system with intersection angles, grades, tangents and curves appropriate for the traffic to be carried considering the terrain of the development and the area, per the City’s Standards and Specifications.

(E) Street location and pattern. The proposed street location and pattern shall be shown on the development plan, and the arrangement of streets shall:

(1) Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing principal streets to surrounding areas or adjacent lots;

(2) Conform to a plan for the general area of the development approved by the Planning Commission to meet a particular situation where topographical or other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets impractical; and

(3) Conform to the adopted Urban Area Transportation System Plan as may be amended.

(F) Minimum right-of-way and roadway widths. Unless otherwise approved in the tentative development plan, street, sidewalk and bike rights-of-way and surfacing widths shall not be less than the minimum widths set forth in the City’s Standards and Specifications. Whenever existing rights-of-way adjacent to or within a tract are of less than standard width, additional rights-of-way shall be dedicated at the time of land division or development.

(G) Alignment. All streets, as far as practicable, shall be in alignment with existing streets by continuations of the centerlines thereof. Necessary staggered street alignment resulting in intersections shall, wherever possible, leave a minimum distance of 200 feet between the centerlines of streets of approximately the same direction, and in no case shall the offset be less than 100 feet.

(H) Future street extensions. Where necessary to give access to or permit future subdivision or development of adjoining land, streets shall be extended to the boundary of the proposed development or subdivision.

(I) Intersection angles. Streets shall be laid out to intersect at angles as near to right angles as practicable, and in no case shall an acute angle be less than 80 degrees unless there is a special intersection design approved by the City Engineer. Other streets, except alleys, shall have at least 50 feet of tangent adjacent to the intersection, and the intersection of more than two streets at any one point will not be approved.

(J) Inadequate existing streets. Whenever existing streets, adjacent to, within a tract or providing access to and/or from a tract, are of inadequate width and/or improvement standards, additional right-of-way and/or improvements to the existing streets may be required.

(K) Cul-de-sacs. A cul-de-sac shall terminate with a circular turnaround with a minimum paved surface and right-of-way determined by the City’s Standards and Specifications or Fire Code whichever is greater.

(L) Marginal access streets. Where a land development abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the city may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage lots with suitable depth, screen plantings contained in a nonaccess reservation strip along the rear or side property line or other treatments deemed necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and the intended functions of the bordering street, and to afford separation of through and local traffic.

(M) Streets adjacent to railroad or canal right-of-way. Whenever a proposed land development contains or is adjacent to a railroad or main canal right-of-way, provisions may be required for a street approximately parallel to the ROW at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of land between the street and the ROW. The distance shall be determined with consideration at cross streets of the minimum distance required for approach grades to a future grade separation and to provide sufficient depth to allow screen planting or other separation requirements along the ROW.

(N) Reserve strips. Reserve strips or street plugs controlling access to streets shall not be approved.

(O) Half streets. Half streets, while generally not acceptable, may be approved where reasonably essential to a proposed land development, and when the Commission or other reviewing authority finds it will be practical to require dedication and improvement of the other half of the street when the adjoining property is developed. Whenever a half street exists adjacent to a tract of land proposed for development, the other half of the street shall be dedicated and improved.

(P) Streets. All street design criteria shall conform to the City’s Standards and Specifications and state design standards as determined by the City Engineer.

(Q) Street names. Except for the extension of existing streets, no street names shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with the name of an existing street in the city or within a radius of six miles of the city or within the boundaries of a special service district such as fire or ambulance.

(R) Street name signs. Street name signs shall be installed at all street intersections by the developer in accordance with applicable city, county or state requirements. One street sign shall be provided at the intersection of each street, and two street signs shall be provided at four-way intersections.

(S) Traffic control signs. Traffic control signs shall be provided for and installed by the developer as required and approved by the appropriate city, county and/or state agency or department.

(T) Alleys. Alleys are not necessary in residential developments, but should and may be required in commercial and industrial developments unless other permanent provisions for access to off-street parking and loading facilities are approved by the city.

(U) Curbs. Curbs shall be required on all streets in all developments and with all new commercial and multifamily construction. Curbs shall be installed by the developer in accordance with the City’s Standards and Specifications unless otherwise approved by the city.

(V) Sidewalks. Unless otherwise required in this chapter or other city ordinances or other regulations, sidewalks shall be required as set forth hereinafter on all streets in all developments and with all new commercial and multifamily construction. In lieu of these requirements, however, the reviewing authority may approve a development without sidewalks if alternative pedestrian routes and facilities are provided.

(1) All streets. In general all streets shall have sidewalks at a minimum of five feet in width in residential and industrial areas and eight feet in width in commercial areas unless otherwise provided for in the applicable zone or conditional use approval.

(W) Bike lanes. Unless otherwise required in this chapter or other city ordinances or other regulations, bike lanes shall be required as follows, except that the Planning Commission may approve a development without bike lanes if it is found that the requirement is not appropriate to or necessary for the extension of bicycle routes, existing or planned, and may also approve a development without bike lanes in the streets if alternative bicycle routes and facilities are provided.

(1) Local streets. Bike lanes may be required on local streets, and if required shall not be less than five feet in width for one-way bike lanes and eight feet in width for two-way bike lanes.

(2) Collector streets. Bike lanes are required on both sides of major collector streets, and may be required on minor collector streets, and shall not be less than six feet in width.

(3) Arterial streets. Bike lanes are required on both sides of arterial streets, and shall not be less than six feet in width.

(X) Street lights. Street lights may be required and, if so required, shall be installed by the developer in accordance with standards set forth by the city and the serving utility company.

(Y) Utilities. The developer shall make necessary arrangements with the serving utility companies for the installation of all proposed or required utilities, which may include electrical power, natural gas, telephone, cable television and the like.

(Z) Drainage facilities. Drainage facilities shall be provided as required by the City’s Standards and Specifications.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11; Am. Ord. 1208, passed 12-9-14)


153.195 ACCESS MANAGEMENT.

(A) General. Access management restrictions and limitations consist of provisions managing the number of access points and/or providing traffic and facility improvements that are designed to maximize the intended function of a particular street, road or highway. The intent is to achieve a balanced, comprehensive program which provides reasonable access as new development occurs while maintaining the safety and efficiency of traffic movement.

(B) Access management techniques and considerations. In the review of all new development, the reviewing authority shall consider the following techniques or considerations in providing for or restricting access to certain transportation facilities:

(1) Access points to arterials and collectors may be restricted through the use of the following techniques:

(a) Restricting spacing between access points based on the type of development and the speed along the serving major collector or arterial.

(b) Sharing of access points between adjacent properties and developments.

(c) Providing access via a local order of street; for example, using a collector for access to an arterial, and using a local street for access to a collector.

(d) Constructing frontage or marginal access roads to separate local traffic from through traffic.

(e) Providing service drives to prevent spill-over of vehicle queues onto adjoining roadways.

(f) Requiring internal circulation with adjoining lots for pedestrians and vehicles (internal parcel circulation) to avoid additional access points and unnecessary trips on and off the public street.

(2) Consideration of the following traffic and facility improvements for access management:

(a) Providing of acceleration, deceleration and right-turn-only lanes.

(b) Offsetting driveways to produce T-intersections to minimize the number of conflict points between traffic using the driveways and through traffic.

(c) Installation of median barriers to control conflicts associated with left turn movements.

(d) Installing side barriers to the property along the serving arterial or major collector to restrict access width to a minimum.

(C) General access management guidelines. In the review and approval of new developments, the reviewing authority shall consider the following guidelines:

	(1)	Minimum spacing between driveways and/or streets:

	 	Major arterial	500 feet

	 	Minor arterial	300 feet

	 	Major collector	50 feet

	 	Minor collector	access to each lot

	 	Local streets	access to each lot

	(2)	Minimum spacing between street intersections:

	 	Major arterial	1/4 mile

	 	Minor arterial	600 feet

	 	Collector	300 feet

	 	Local streets	300 feet

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11; Am. Ord. 1208, passed 12-9-14)


153.196 IMPROVEMENT PROCEDURES.

Improvements to be installed by the subdivider, either as a requirement of this chapter, conditions of approval or at the developer’s option as proposed as a part of the subject development proposal, shall conform to the following requirements:

(A) Plan review and approval. Improvement work shall not be commenced until plans therefor have been reviewed and approved by the City Engineer or a designated representative thereof and a "Notice to Proceed" has been issued by the city. The review and approval shall be at the expense of the developer.

(B) Modification. Improvement work shall not commence until after the city has been notified and approval thereof has been granted, and if work is discontinued for any reason, it shall not be resumed until after the city is notified and approval thereof granted.

(C) Improvements as platted. Improvements shall be designed, installed and constructed as platted or approved. Engineered plans shall be filed with the city prior to recordation of the final plat or as otherwise required by the city.

(D) Inspection. Improvement work shall be constructed under the inspection and approval of an inspector designated by the city, and the expenses incurred therefor shall be borne by the developer. The city, through the City Engineer, may require changes in typical sections and details of improvements if unusual or special conditions arise during construction to warrant such changes in the public interest.

(E) Utilities. Underground utilities, including, but not limited to, electric power, telephone, water mains, water service crossings, sanitary sewers and storm drains, to be installed in streets shall be constructed by the developer prior to the surfacing of the streets.

(F) As built plans. As built plans for all public improvements shall be prepared and completed by a licensed engineer and filed with the city upon the completion of all such improvements.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.197 COMPLETION OR ASSURANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS.

(A) Agreement for improvements. Prior to final plat approval for a subdivision, partitioning, PUD or other land development, or the final approval of a design review application, land use or development pursuant to applicable zoning provisions, the owner and/or developer shall either install required improvements and repair existing streets and other public facilities damaged in the development of the property, or shall execute and file with the city an agreement between him/herself and the city specifying the period in which improvements and repairs shall be completed and providing that, if the work is not completed within the period specified, the city may complete the work and recover the full costs thereof, together with court costs and attorney costs necessary to collect the amounts from the developer. The agreement shall also provide for payment to the city for the cost of inspection and other engineer services directly attributed to the project.

(B) Bond or other performance assurance. The developer shall file with the agreement, to assure his/her full and faithful performance thereof, one of the following, pursuant to approval of the City Attorney and City Manager, and approval and acceptance by the City Council:

(1) A surety bond executed by a surety company authorized to transact business in the State of Oregon in a form approved by the City Attorney.

(2) A personal bond co-signed by at least one additional person together with evidence of financial responsibility and resources of those signing the bond sufficient to provide reasonable assurance of the ability to proceed in accordance with the agreement.

(3) Cash deposit.

(4) Such other security as may be approved and deemed necessary by the City Council to adequately assure completion of the required improvements.

(C) Amount of security required. The assurance of full and faithful performance shall be for a sum approved by the city as sufficient to cover the cost of the improvements and repairs, including related engineering, inspection and other incidental expenses, plus an additional 20% for contingencies.

(D) Default status. If a developer fails to carry out provisions of the agreement, and the city has unreimbursed costs or expenses resulting from the failure, the city shall call on the bond or other assurance for reimbursement of the costs or expenses. If the amount of the bond or other assurance deposit exceeds costs and expenses incurred by the city, it shall release the remainder. If the amount of the bond or other assurance is less than the costs or expenses incurred by the city, the developer shall be liable to the city for the difference plus any attorney fees and costs incurred.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.198 BUILDING AND OCCUPANCY PERMITS.

(A) Building permits. No building permits shall be issued upon lots to receive and be served by sanitary sewer and water service, streets as improvements and other required site improvements required pursuant to this chapter unless the improvements are in place, serviceable and approved by the city, and the service connections fees therefor are paid, or all such cost and improvements are bonded for or otherwise assured as set forth by § 153.197 and accepted by the city.

(B) Sale or occupancy. All improvements required pursuant to this chapter and other applicable regulations or approval conditions shall be completed, in service and approved by the city, or be bonded for or otherwise assured as set forth by § 153.197 and accepted by the city prior to sale or occupancy of any lot, parcel or building unit erected upon a lot within the subdivision, partitioning, PUD or other development.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.199 MAINTENANCE SURETY BOND.

Prior to sale and occupancy of any lot, parcel or building unit erected upon a lot within a subdivision, partitioning, PUD or other development, and as a condition of acceptance of improvements, the City Council may require a one-year maintenance surety bond in an amount not to exceed 20% of the value of all improvements, to guarantee maintenance and performance for a period of not less than one year from the date of acceptance.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.200 ENGINEERING/SPECIAL SERVICES FOR REVIEW.

In regards to any development proposal for which the city deems it necessary to contract for engineering and/or other special technical services for the review thereof or for the design of facility expansions to serve the development, the developer may be required to pay all or part of the special services. In such cases, the choice of the contract service provider shall be at the discretion of the city, and the service provider shall perform the necessary services at the direction of the city. The costs for the services shall be determined reasonable, and an estimate of the costs shall be provided to the developer prior to contracting therefor.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)

VARIANCES


153.210 AUTHORIZATION TO GRANT OR DENY.

(A) Variances from the provisions and requirements of this chapter may be approved in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter where it can be shown that, owing to special and unusual circumstances related to a specific lot, parcel or tract of land, strict application of certain provisions of this chapter would cause an undue or unnecessary hardship.

(B) No variance shall be granted that would allow the use of property for a purpose not authorized within the zone in which the proposed use or development is located.

(C) In granting a variance, conditions may be attached that are found necessary to protect the best interests of the adjoining or surrounding properties or the vicinity, and to otherwise achieve the purposes of this chapter, the specific applicable zoning and the objectives and policies of the City’s Comprehensive Plan.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.211 CIRCUMSTANCES FOR GRANTING A MAJOR VARIANCE.

A MAJOR VARIANCE is a request for a variance that does not qualify as a minor variance. Major variances can only be reviewed as a Type II conditional use. A major variance may be granted without restrictions, or may be granted subject to prescribed conditions and limitations; provided, that the following findings are evident:

(A) That the literal application of specific provisions of the chapter would create practical difficulties for the applicant resulting in greater private expense than public benefit; however, a variance is not to be granted simply because it would afford the owner a higher profit or prevent a mere inconvenience.

(B) That the condition creating the difficulty is not general throughout the surrounding area, but is unique to the applicant’s site or property; therefore, the granting of the requested variance will not set a precedent for future applications.

(C) That the condition was not created by the applicant. A self-created difficulty will be found if the applicant knew or should have known of the specific restriction or provision at the time the site was purchased. Self-created hardship also results when an owner and/or developer negligently or knowingly violates a provision of this chapter. A substandard lot, deliberately made so by the owner’s conveyance, is considered a self-created hardship. Violations made in good faith, or circumstances arising from pre-existing conditions or circumstances, are treated more leniently, as is the condition of an area deficiency created by the expansion of a public right-of-way, public utility easement or other public use in the public interest.

(D) In the case of a use variance, that the literal application of specific provisions of the chapter would result in an unnecessary hardship to the applicant and/or property owner. An unnecessary hardship will be found when there is no reasonable use of or return from the property as it may lawfully be used under the applicable provisions of this chapter.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.212 MINOR VARIANCE.

For the purposes of this chapter, a MINOR VARIANCE is an area or dimensional variance that meets one of the following conditions. Only one such variance may be granted for any one lot, parcel or tract of land.

(A) Is a variance request involving a deviation from a minimum lot size, street frontage and lot coverage requirement of not more than 10%.

(B) Is a variance request involving a deviation from a setback requirement of not more than 25%.

(C) Involves a request for the expansion of a nonconforming use by not more than 10%.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.213 APPLICATION FOR A VARIANCE.

An application for a variance under this subchapter shall be filed with the City’s Planning Department on a completed application form established by the Department. An application shall include at least the following information; to the extent such information may be required as a condition of acceptance of filing of an application under Oregon Constitution Article 1, Section 18(a) through (f):

(A) A legal description of the private real property as to which the owner is applying for a variance, including the common address and either a legal metes and bounds description or a Crook County Assessor’s description of the property;

(B) The name, address and telephone number of each owner of and security interest holder in the private real property, together with the signature of the owner making the application;

(C) A copy of the specific regulation as to which the owner is applying for a variance, including the date the regulation was adopted, first enforced, or applied;

(D) A copy of the regulation in existence, and applicable to the private real property, immediately before the regulation that was imposed and allegedly restricts the use of the private real property and caused a reduction in fair market value;

(E) The manner in which, and the extent to which, the regulation restricts the use of the private real property as to which the owner is applying for a variance.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.214 PROCEDURES FOR ACTION ON VARIANCES.

The procedure for taking action on an application for a variance shall be in accordance with the policies and procedures set forth in §§ 153.254 through 153.256 et seq., as well as the following:

(A) Minor variance.

(1) Notice shall be sent to persons entitled to notice under § 153.255.030 in accordance with § 153.254.030.

(2) Following conclusion of the response period, if no objections to the subject application have been received, the Planning Official may either process the variance as an administrative decision or refer the application to the Planning Commission for public hearing.

(3) If one or more objections are received, the subject application shall be referred to the Commission for public hearing.

(4) The Planning Official or Planning Commission shall only grant the variance request if the applicant provides clear and substantial evidence of a practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship.

(B) Major variances and minor variances not processed administratively shall be referred for Planning Commission action. Before the Planning Commission may act on any variance request, the Commission shall conduct a public hearing in the matter thereof in accordance with the policies and procedures set forth in § 153.255 et seq.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.215 TIME LIMIT FOR VARIANCES.

Authorization of a variance shall be null and void after one year unless substantial construction or compliance has taken place or the proposed use has occurred. The Commission may grant an extension of time not to exceed six months, upon request. A request for an extension shall be duly filed with the city prior to the expiration of the initial one-year period, and only one such extension may be granted.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)

AMENDMENTS


153.230 AUTHORIZATION TO INITIATE AMENDMENTS.

An amendment to the text of this chapter or to a Zoning Map may be initiated by the City Council, by the City Planning Commission, by the City Planning Official, by any planning advisory committees duly appointed by the city, by any planning board established by this chapter or by an application of a property owner or the authorized agent thereof.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.231 APPLICATION FOR AMENDMENTS.

An application for an amendment to the text of this chapter or for a zone change by a property owner or the authorized agent thereof shall be filed with the City Planning Official on forms prescribed by the city and shall be accompanied by the required filing fee as established by the City Council. The application shall be filed not less than 30 days prior to the date of the Commission hearing thereon. The applicant shall provide reasons for the requested change, and shall present facts showing that the amendment will substantially be in compliance with the goals, objectives and policies of the City Comprehensive Plan and with the applicable statewide planning goals and implementing administrative rules.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.232 PUBLIC HEARINGS ON AMENDMENTS.

The City Planning Commission shall, at its earliest practicable meeting date following the 30-day filing period, duly advertise and conduct a public hearing on the subject amendment application, and shall, within five working days of the conclusion of the hearing, recommend to the City Council approval, disapproval or modified approval of the proposed amendment. Within 30 days of receipt of the Commission’s recommendations, the City Council (unless § 153.256.030 applies) shall duly advertise and conduct a public hearing on the proposed amendment. The Council shall approve, approve with modifications or disapprove the proposed amendment. The Commission or Council may recess or continue a hearing in order to obtain additional information and input on a subject proposed amendment. (ORS 227.175(3) and (5))

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11; Am. Ord. 1229, passed 2-28-17)


153.233 PUBLIC NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.

Notwithstanding any other public notice requirements that may be set forth in this chapter or by applicable state statutes or administrative rules, the following public notice requirements shall apply to applications for an amendment to the text of this chapter or to an application for a zoning amendment provided for by this subchapter. (ORS 227.175(3) and (5))

(A) Each notice of a public hearing regarding an amendment to the text of this chapter or to a Zoning Map shall be published once a week for each of the two successive weeks prior to the date of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.

(B) In addition to the notice requirements set forth by subsection (A) of this section, for an amendment that proposes to rezone property, individual notice shall be mailed or otherwise delivered to the owner of each lot or parcel of property that is proposed to be rezoned. If such rezoning is for a single lot or parcel, notice shall also be mailed to all property owners within 250 feet of the exterior boundaries of the subject property.

(C) Notice of an application for a zone change shall be provided to the owner of a public use airport if the property subject to the zone change is as follows:

(1) Within 5,000 feet of the side or end of a runway of a visual airport; or

(2) Within 10,000 feet of the side or end of the runway of an instrument airport; and

(3) If the zone change would allow a structure greater than 35 feet in height on property located inside the runway approach surface. (ORS 227.175(6))

(D) Notice of an application for a zone change of property which includes all or part of a mobile or manufactured home park shall be given by first class mail to each existing mailing address for tenants of the mobile home park at least 20 days but not more than 40 days before the date of the first hearing. (ORS 227.175(8))

(E) Notice of an application for a proposed zoning amendment, together with a copy or description of the proposed amendment, shall be provided to the State Land Conservation and Development Commission (LCDC) at least 35 days prior to the date of the final hearing thereon. (ORS Chapter 197)

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11; Am. Ord. 1229, passed 2-28-17)


153.234 RECORDS OF AMENDMENTS.

The duly approved and signed original and a copy thereof of an amendment to the text or Zoning Map(s) of this chapter shall be maintained without change on file in the office of the City Recorder. As applicable, a certified true copy thereof shall be maintained in the office of the City Planning Official. Copies of the amendments shall be available for public review and information.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.235 LIMITATIONS ON REAPPLICATIONS.

No reapplication for an amendment to the text of this chapter or to a Zoning Map by a property owner shall be considered by the Planning Commission or Council within a six-month period immediately following a previous denial of the application. However, if in the opinion of the Planning Commission, new evidence or a change in circumstances warrants the reapplication in a lesser time, the Commission may permit a new application.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.236 ADOPTION OF AN AMENDMENT.

An amendment to the text of this chapter or a Zoning Map shall be approved by ordinance only.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)

ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT


153.250 INTRODUCTION AND DEFINITIONS.


153.250.010 Introduction and application.

(A) Section 153.250 is enacted to provide a uniform procedure for the grant or denial and processing of applications, approvals and determinations by the Planning Department of the City of Prineville, under the applicable Comprehensive Plan, land use regulations and other ordinances which by their terms incorporate by reference the procedures in this chapter.

(B) The provisions of § 153.250 do not apply to the issuance, suspension, or revocation of any on-site sewage disposal, building, electrical or plumbing permits except as they relate to Planning Department consideration of permitted uses.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.250.020 Definitions.

The following definitions apply to § 153.250:

ARGUMENT. Means assertions and analysis by a party regarding the satisfaction or violation of legal standards. ARGUMENT does not include assertion of facts not already in the record.

DE NOVO REVIEW. A hearing by the review body as if the action had not previously been heard and as if no decision had been rendered, except that all testimony, evidence and other material from the record of the previous consideration will be considered a part of the record on review.

DEVELOPMENT ACTION. Means the review of any permit, authorization or determination that the City of Prineville Planning Department is requested to issue, give or make that either:

(1) Involves the application of a city zoning ordinance and is not a land use action as defined below; or

(2) Involves the application of standards in other portions of the Land Usage Ordinance (Chapters 150 through 152). For illustrative purposes, the term DEVELOPMENT ACTION includes review of any lot line adjustment, permit extension, sign permit, setback determination, and lot coverage determination.

EVIDENCE. Means facts, documents, data or other information offered to demonstrate compliance or noncompliance with the standards believed to be relevant to the decision.

LAND USE ACTION. Includes any consideration for approval of a quasi-judicial plan amendment or zone change, any consideration for approval of a land use permit, and any consideration of a request for a declaratory ruling (including resolution of any procedural questions raised in any of these actions). For illustrative purposes, the term LAND USE ACTION includes review of conditional use permit, variance, partition, subdivision, site plan review and other applications which require the exercise of discretion or policy judgment in applying and/or interpreting applicable criteria.

LAND USE PERMIT. Includes any approval of a proposed development of land under the standards in the city zoning ordinances involving the exercise of significant discretion in applying those standards. By way of illustration, LAND USE PERMIT includes review of conditional use permits, partition, master plan, site plan, site plan change of use, modification of approval subdivision, and subdivision variance and variance.

LEGISLATIVE CHANGES. Generally involve broad public policy decisions that apply to other than an individual property owner. These include, without limitation, amendments to the text of the Comprehensive Plans, zoning ordinances, or changes in zoning maps not directed at a small number of property owners.

MODIFICATION OF APPLICATION. Means the applicant’s submittal of new information after an application has been deemed complete and prior to the close of the record on a pending application that would modify a development proposal by changing one or more of the following previously described components: proposed uses, operating characteristics, intensity, scale, site layout (including but not limited to changes in setbacks, access points, building design, size or orientation, parking, traffic or pedestrian circulation plans), or landscaping in a manner that requires the application of new criteria to the proposal or that would require the findings of fact to be changed. It does not mean an applicant’s submission of new evidence that merely clarifies or supports the pending application.

QUASI-JUDICIAL. Zone change or plan amendment generally refers to a plan amendment or zone change affecting a single or limited group of property owners and that involves the application of existing policy to a specific factual setting. (The distinction between legislative and quasi-judicial changes must ultimately be made on a case-by-case basis with reference to case law on the subject.)

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.251 GENERAL PROVISIONS.


153.251.005 Pre-application conference.

A pre-application conference is encouraged for complex applications or for applicants who are unfamiliar with the land use process. The purpose of the conference shall be to acquaint the applicant with the substantive and procedural requirements of the applicable land use ordinances, to provide for an exchange of information regarding applicable requirements of the Comprehensive Plan, zoning ordinance or land division ordinance and to identify issues likely to arise in processing an application. The applicable zoning ordinance may require that a pre-application conference be held for particular types of applications.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.251.010 Application requirements.

(A) Property owner. For the purposes of this section, the term PROPERTY OWNER shall mean the owner of record or the contract purchaser and does not include a person or organization that holds a security interest.

(B) Applications for development or land use actions shall:

(1) Be submitted by the property owner or a person who has written authorization from the property owner as defined herein to make the application;

(2) Be completed on a form prescribed by the city;

(3) Include supporting information required by the zoning ordinance and that information necessary to demonstrate compliance with applicable criteria (burden of proof); and

(4) Be accompanied by the appropriate filing fee, unless such fees are waived by the City Council.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.251.015 Development Review Committee.

(A) Within ten days of the submittal of a land use application, notice shall be sent to the following persons, parties and agencies which shall constitute the membership of the City Development Review Committee:

(1) City Superintendent of Public Works.

(2) City Engineer.

(3) City Superintendent of Streets.

(4) City Police and County Sheriff as applicable.

(5) Crook County Fire and Rescue.

(6) Public utility representatives.

(7) Ochoco Irrigation District as applicable.

(8) School district representatives.

(9) County Roadmaster as applicable.

(10) County Planning representative.

(11) Parks and Recreation District Director.

(12) Any other person, party or agency deemed by city staff to be affected by the land use proposal or to have specific knowledge or expertise in regard to the specific proposal.

(B) Development review conference. Within 30 days of submittal of a land use application, the Community Development Department shall schedule a meeting with the City Development Review Committee to discuss issues relevant to the proposal. At the request of the applicant, or as initiated by staff, the Development Review Committee may conduct a follow-up meeting with the applicant and applicant’s representatives to discuss any issues identified in the development review conference.

(C) Committee review factors. In review of a proposed development, the Committee shall, at a minimum, consider the following factors:

(1) Tentative plan, site plan or other relevant requirements.

(2) Possible adverse effects on the development by natural hazards, or adverse effects on any natural or other Goal 5 resources by the development.

(3) Quantity and quality of existing or proposed water supply, and the adequacy of the existing or proposed sewage disposal system.

(4) Adequacy of public services to serve the development; including streets, schools, police, fire, public utilities and health or medical facilities.

(5) Conformance with the design and improvement standards and requirements set forth in § 153.190 et seq. and in any other applicable city ordinance, regulations or standards.

(6) Conformance with applicable state regulations.

(7) Provisions for the continuity of public services and access to adjoining lands.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.251.020 Acceptance of application.

(A) Development action and land use action applications shall not be accepted until the Planning Director has determined that (1) the requirements of § 153.251.010 have been met and (2) the application is complete or the application is deemed to be complete under state law.

(B) An application is complete when in the judgment of the Planning Director all applicable issues have been adequately addressed in the application.

(C) Acceptance of an application as complete shall not preclude a determination at a later date that additional criteria need to be addressed or a later determination that additional information is needed to adequately address applicable criteria.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.251.030 Incomplete applications.

(A) If an application is incomplete, the Planning Director shall, within 30 days of receipt of the application, notify the applicant in writing of exactly what information is missing. The applicant may amend his application or submit a new application supplying the missing information.

(B) The applicant shall have 30 days from the date of notice from the Planning Director to supply the missing information.

(C) If an applicant does not submit the missing information within the 30-day period specified in subsection (B) of this section, the application may be processed in accordance with § 153.254.040.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.251.040 Withdrawal of application.

An applicant may withdraw an application in writing at any time prior to the time a land use action decision becomes final. If the landowner is not the applicant, no consent to withdraw the application is needed from the landowner.

Refunds for withdrawn applications shall be determined from the following schedule:

(A) Refund request after file is made prior to acceptance of an application as complete and/or prior to the mailing of transmittals or public notice: 75%.

(B) Refund after public notice or transmittals have been sent: 50%.

(C) No refund shall be allowed after the preparation of a decision or staff report.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.251.050 Time computation.

Except when otherwise provided, the time within which an act is required to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is a Saturday, Sunday, legal holiday or any day on which the city is not open for business pursuant to a city or county ordinance, in which case it shall also be excluded.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11; Am. Ord. 1208, passed 12-9-14)


153.251.060 Submission of documents.

A document is "submitted" when it is received. Submittal shall be made either at a noticed hearing or at the offices of the Planning Division, unless specified otherwise by the Hearings Body or notice.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.252 LEGISLATIVE PROCEDURES.


153.252.010 Hearing required.

No legislative change shall be adopted without review by the Planning Commission and a public hearing before the City Council. Public hearings before the Planning Commission shall be set at the discretion of the Planning Director, unless otherwise required by state law.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.252.020 Notice.

(A) Published notice.

(1) Notice of a legislative change shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least ten days prior to each public hearing.

(2) The notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and contain a statement describing the general subject matter of the ordinance under consideration.

(B) Posted notice. Notice shall be posted at the discretion of the Planning Director.

(C) Individual notice. Individual notice to property owners, as defined in § 153.251.010(A), shall be provided at the discretion of the Planning Director, except as required by ORS 227.186.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11; Am. Ord. 1229, passed 2-28-17)


153.252.030 Initiation of legislative changes.

A legislative change may be initiated by application of individuals upon payment of required fees as well as by the City Council or the Planning Commission.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.252.040 Hearings Body.

(A) The following shall serve as hearings or review body for legislative changes in this order:

(1) The Planning Commission.

(2) City Council.

(B) Any legislative change initiated by the City Council may be reviewed by the Planning Commission prior to action being taken by the City Council, at the City Council’s discretion.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.252.050 Final decision.

All legislative changes shall be adopted by ordinance.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.253 DEVELOPMENT ACTION PROCEDURES.


153.253.010 Review of development action applications.

(A) A development action application may be handled administratively by the Planning Director without public notice or hearing.

(B) The Planning Director has the discretion to determine that for the purposes of the Land Usage Ordinance whether a development action application should be treated as if it were a land use action application.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.253.020 Decision.

(A) Development action applications acted upon without notice or hearing shall be approved or denied by the Planning Director or his designee within 30 days of the application’s acceptance by the Planning Director.

(B) Notice of a decision shall be provided to the applicant or the applicant’s representative.

(C) The decision may be appealed under § 153.258.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.254 REVIEW OF LAND USE ACTION APPLICATIONS.


153.254.010 Effect of determinations made outside of established processes.

Any informal interpretation or determination, or any statement describing the uses to which a property may be put, made outside the declaratory ruling process (§ 153.260) or outside the process for approval or denial of a land use permit (§§ 153.254 through 153.256) shall be deemed to be a supposition only. Such informal interpretations, determinations, or statements shall not be deemed to constitute final city action effecting a change in the status of a person’s property or conferring any rights, including any reliance rights, on any person.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11; Am. Ord. 1208, passed 12-9-14)


153.254.020 Action on land use action applications.

(A) Except for Comprehensive Plan amendments and zone changes and other instances where a hearing is required by state law or by other ordinance provisions, the Planning Director may decide upon a land use action application administratively either with prior notice, as prescribed under § 153.254.030 or without prior notice, as prescribed under § 153.254.040 or he/she may refer the application to the Planning Commission for hearing. The Planning Director shall take such action within 30 days of the date the application is accepted or deemed accepted as complete. This time limit may be waived at the option of the applicant.

(B) The Planning Director’s choice between or among administrative or hearing procedures to apply to a particular application or determination shall not be an appealable decision.

(C) Zone change and plan amendment applications shall be referred to a hearing before the Planning Commission.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.254.030 Administrative land use decisions with prior notice.

(A) Notice of the application shall be sent within ten days of submittal of the application to persons entitled to notice under § 153.255.030. Such notice shall include all the information specified under § 153.255.040(A) except for the information specified in § 153.255.040(A)(7) and (10).

(B) Any person may comment in writing on the application within ten days from the date notice was mailed or a longer period as specified in the notice.

(C) The Planning Director’s decision to approve, deny or send to a hearing shall be made within 30 days after an application is accepted as complete. This time limit may be waived by the written consent of the applicant.

(D) Notice of the Planning Director’s decision and the appeal period shall be sent to all persons entitled to notice under § 153.255.030 and to all persons who commented. Notice shall also be given to all members of the Planning Commission who have the authority to call up any decision of the Planning Director within the appeal period in accordance with § 153.258.010. The notice shall contain the applicable information required under § 153.255.040.

(E) The applicant, all persons entitled to notice under § 153.255.030 and all other persons commenting as provided in § 153.254.020 constitute parties to the administrative decision. Any party can appeal the decision in accordance with § 153.258, Appeals.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.254.040 Administrative decision without prior notice.

The procedures for administrative decisions without prior notice shall be the same as those set forth in § 153.254.030, except that no prior notice shall be given.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.254.050 Final action in land use actions.

(A) Except as otherwise provided, the city shall take final action, including consideration of appeals to the City Council, in land use actions within 120 days after the application is deemed complete.

(B) If the applicant refuses or fails to submit missing information within the 30 days specified in § 153.251.030, the application shall be deemed complete, for purposes of processing the application, on the thirty-first day after the application was first submitted, and final action of City Council, if required, shall be taken within 151 days after the application was first received unless otherwise provided.

(C) The periods set forth in this section during which a final decision on an application must be made may be extended for a reasonable period of time at the written request of the applicant.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.254.060 Supplementation of application within first 30 days of submittal.

An applicant shall not submit any evidence to supplement its application during the 30 days following submittal of its application, except to respond to a request for additional information made under § 153.251.030. Any evidence submitted by an applicant in violation of this section will not be considered in determining whether the application is complete and will be returned to the applicant.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11; Am. Ord. 1229, passed 2-28-17)


153.254.070 Modification of application.

(A) An applicant may modify an application at any time during the approval process up until the issuance of an administrative decision, or the close of the record for an application reviewed under a hearings process, subject to the provisions of § 153.254.060 and this section.

(B) The Planning Director or Planning Commission shall not consider any evidence submitted by or on behalf of an applicant that would constitute modification of an application (as that term is defined in § 153.250) unless the applicant submits an application for a modification, pays all required modification fees and agrees in writing to restart the 120-day time clock as of the date the modification is submitted. The 120-day time clock for an application, as modified, may be restarted as many times as there are modifications.

(C) The Planning Director or Planning Commission may require that the application be re-noticed and additional hearings be held.

(D) Up until the day a hearing is opened for receipt of oral testimony, the Planning Director shall have sole authority to determine whether an applicant’s submittal constitutes a modification. After such time, the Planning Commission shall make such determinations. The Planning Director or Planning Commission determination on whether a submittal constitutes a modification shall be appealable only to LUBA and shall be appealable only after a final decision is entered by the city on an application.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11; Am. Ord. 1208, passed 12-9-14)


153.255 LAND USE ACTION HEARINGS.


153.255.010 Filing of staff report for hearing.

(A) At the time an application that in the judgment of the Planning Director requires a hearing is deemed complete, a hearing date shall be set.

(B) A staff report shall be completed seven days prior to hearing. If the report is not completed by such time, the hearing shall be held as scheduled, but any party may at the hearing or in writing prior to the hearing request a continuance of the hearing to a date that is at least seven days after the date the initial staff report is complete.

(C) A copy of the staff report shall be mailed to the applicant, shall be made available to such other persons who request a copy and shall be filed with the Planning Commission.

(D) Oral or written modifications and additions to the staff report shall be allowed prior to or at the hearing.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.255.020 Hearings Body.

(A) The following shall serve as the Hearings Body:

(1) Planning Commission.

(2) City Council.

(B) The Hearings Body order shall be as set forth in subsection (A) of this section, except that the Council may call up an administrative decision for review without the necessity of an application going before the Planning Commission.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.255.030 Notice of hearing or administrative action.

(A) Individual mailed notice.

(1) Except as otherwise provided for herein, notice of a land use application shall be mailed at least 20 days prior to the hearing for those matters set for hearing, or within ten days after receipt of an application for those matters to be processed administratively with notice. Written notice shall be sent by mail to the following persons:

(a) The applicant.

(b) Owners of record of property as shown on the most recent property tax assessment roll of property located within 100 feet of the property that is the subject of the notice where any part of the subject property is within an Urban Growth Boundary.

(c) The owner of a public use airport if the airport is located within 10,000 feet of the subject property.

(d) The tenants of a mobile home park when the application is for the rezoning of any part or all of a mobile home park.

(e) The Planning Commission.

(f) Any neighborhood or community organization formally recognized by the City Council, whose boundaries include the site.

(2) The failure of a property owner to receive mailed notice shall not invalidate any land use approval if the Planning Division can show by affidavit that such notice was given.

(B) Published notice. In addition to notice by mail and posting, notice of an initial hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least ten days prior to the hearing.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11; Am. Ord. 1208, passed 12-9-14)


153.255.040 Contents of notice.

(A) All mailed notices of a land use action hearing shall:

(1) Describe the nature of the applicant’s request and the nature of the proposed uses that could be authorized.

(2) List the criteria from the zoning ordinance and the plan applicable to the application at issue.

(3) Set forth the street address or easily understood geographical reference to the subject property.

(4) State the date, time and location of any hearing or date by which written comments must be received.

(5) State that any person may comment in writing and include a general explanation of the requirements for submission of testimony and the procedures for conduct of testimony, including, but not limited to, a party’s right to request a continuance or to have the record held open.

(6) If a hearing is to be held, state that any interested person may appear.

(7) State that failure to raise an issue in person at a hearing or in writing precludes appeal by that person to the Land Use Board of Appeals (LUBA), and that failure to provide statements or evidence sufficient to afford the decision-maker an opportunity to respond to the issue precludes appeal to LUBA based on that issue.

(8) State the name of a city representative to contact and the telephone number where additional information may be obtained.

(9) State that a copy of the application, all documents and evidence submitted by or on behalf of the applicant and applicable criteria are available for inspection at no cost and will be provided at reasonable cost.

(10) State that a copy of the staff report will be available for inspection at no cost at least seven days prior to the hearing and will be provided at reasonable cost.

(B) All mailed and published notices for hearings shall contain a statement that recipients may request a copy of the staff report.

(C) All mailed and published notices concerning applications necessitating an exception to one of the statewide land use planning goals shall state that a goal exception is proposed and shall summarize the issues in an understandable manner.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11; Am. Ord. 1208, passed 12-9-14; Am. Ord. 1229, passed 2-28-17)


153.255.050 Burden of proof.

Throughout all local land use proceedings, the burden of proof rests on the applicant.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.255.060 Standing.

(A) Any interested person may appear and be heard in a land use action hearing, except that in appeals heard on the record a person must have participated in a previous hearing on the subject application.

(B) Any person appearing on the record at a hearing (including appeals) or presenting written evidence in conjunction with an administrative action or hearing shall have standing and shall be a party. A person whose participation consists only of signing a petition shall not be considered a party.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.255.070 Disclosure of ex parte contacts.

Prior to making a decision, the Hearings Body or any member thereof shall not communicate directly or indirectly with any party or his representative in connection with any issue involved in a pending hearing except upon notice and opportunity for all parties to participate. Should such communication whether written or oral occur, the Hearings Body member shall:

(A) Publicly announce for the record the substance of such communication; and

(B) Announce the parties’ right to rebut the substance of the ex parte communication during the hearing. Communication between city staff and the Hearings Body shall not be considered to be an ex parte contact.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.255.080 Disclosure of personal knowledge.

(A) If the Hearings Body or any member thereof uses personal knowledge acquired outside of the hearing process in rendering a decision, the Hearings Body or member thereof shall state the substance of that knowledge on the record and allow all parties the opportunity to rebut such statement on the record.

(B) For the purposes of this section, a site visit by the Hearings Body shall be deemed to fall within this rule. After the site visit has concluded, the Hearings Body must disclose its observations and conclusions gained from the site visit in order to allow for rebuttal by the parties.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.255.090 Challenge for bias, prejudgment or personal interest.

Prior to or at the commencement of a hearing, any party may challenge the qualification of the Hearings Body, or a member thereof, for bias, prejudgment or personal interest. The challenge shall be made on the record and be documented with specific reasons supported by facts. Should qualifications be challenged, the Hearings Body or the member shall disqualify itself, withdraw or make a statement on the record of its capacity to hear.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.255.100 Hearings procedure.

A hearing shall be conducted as follows:

(A) The Hearings Body shall explain the purpose of the hearing and announce the order of proceedings, including reasonable time limits on presentations by parties.

(B) A statement by the Hearings Body regarding pre-hearing contacts, bias, prejudice or personal interest shall be made.

(C) Any facts received, noticed or recognized outside of the hearing shall be stated for the record.

(D) Challenges to the Hearings Body’s qualifications to hear the matter shall be stated and challenges entertained.

(E) The Hearings Body shall list applicable substantive criteria, explain that testimony and evidence must be directed toward that criteria or other criteria in the Comprehensive Plan or land use regulations that the person believes to apply to the decision, and that failure to address an issue with sufficient specificity to afford the decision-maker and the parties an opportunity to respond precludes appeal to LUBA based on that issue.

(F) Order of presentation:

(1) Open the hearing.

(2) Staff report.

(3) Proponents’ presentation.

(4) Opponents’ presentation.

(5) Proponents’ rebuttal.

(6) Opponents’ rebuttal may be allowed at the Hearings Body’s discretion.

(7) Staff comments.

(8) Questions from or to the chair may be entertained at any time at the Hearings Body’s discretion.

(9) Close the hearing.

(G) The record shall be available for public review at the hearing.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.255.110 Setting the hearing.

(A) After an application is deemed accepted a hearing date shall be set. A hearing date may be changed by the city staff, or the Hearings Body up until the time notice of the hearing is mailed. Once the notice of hearing is mailed any changes in the hearing date shall be processed as a continuance in accordance with § 153.255.130.

(B) If an applicant requests that a hearing date be changed, such request shall be granted only if the applicant agrees that the extended time period for the hearing shall not count against the 120-day time limit set forth in § 153.254.050.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11; Am. Ord. 1229, passed 2-28-17)


153.255.120 Close of the record.

(A) Except as set forth herein, the record shall be closed to further testimony or submission of further argument or evidence at the end of the presentations before the Hearings Body.

(B) If the hearing is continued or the record is held open under § 153.255.130, further evidence or testimony shall be taken only in accordance with the provisions of § 153.255.130.

(C) Otherwise, further testimony or evidence will be allowed only if the record is reopened under § 153.255.140.

(D) An applicant shall be allowed, unless waived, to submit final written arguments in support of its application after the record has closed within such time limits as the Hearings Body shall set. The Hearings Body shall allow applicant at least seven days to submit its argument, which time shall be counted against the 120-day clock.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.255.130 Continuances or record extensions.

(A) Grounds.

(1) Prior to the date set for an initial hearing, an applicant shall receive a continuance upon any request if accompanied by a corresponding suspension of the 120-day clock. If a continuance request is made after the published or mailed notice has been provided by the city, the Hearings Body shall take evidence at the scheduled hearing date from any party wishing to testify at that time after notifying those present of the continuance.

(2) Any party is entitled to a continuance of the initial evidentiary hearing or to have the record left open in such a proceeding in the following instances:

(a) Where additional documents or evidence are submitted by any party; or

(b) Upon a party’s request made prior to the close of the hearing for time to present additional evidence or testimony.

For the purposes of subsection (A)(2)(a) of this section, ADDITIONAL DOCUMENTS OR EVIDENCE shall mean documents or evidence containing new facts or analysis that are submitted after notice of the hearing.

(3) The grant of a continuance or record extension in any other circumstance shall be at the discretion of the Hearings Body.

(B) Continuances.

(1) If the Hearings Body grants a continuance, the hearing shall be continued to a date, time and place certain at least seven days from the date of the initial hearing.

(2) An opportunity shall be provided at the continued hearing for persons to rebut new evidence and testimony received at the continued hearing.

(3) If new written evidence is submitted at the continued hearing, any person may request prior to the conclusion of the continued hearing that the record be left open for at least seven days to allow submittal of additional written evidence or testimony. Such additional written evidence or testimony shall be limited to evidence or testimony that rebuts the new written evidence or testimony.

(C) Leaving record open. If at the conclusion of the hearing the Hearings Body leaves the record open for additional written evidence or testimony, the record shall be left open for at least 14 additional days, allowing at least the first seven days for submittal of new written evidence or testimony and at least seven additional days for response to the evidence received while the record was held open. Written evidence or testimony submitted during the period the record is held open shall be limited to evidence or testimony that rebuts previously submitted evidence or testimony.

(D) A continuance or record extension granted under this section shall be subject to the 120-day time limit unless the continuance or extension is requested or otherwise agreed to by the applicant. When the record is left open or a continuance is granted after a request by an applicant, the time period during which the 120-day clock is suspended shall include the time period made available to the applicant and any time period given to parties to respond to the applicant’s submittal.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.255.140 Reopening the record.

(A) The Hearings Body may at its discretion reopen the record, either upon request or on its own initiative. The Hearings Body shall not reopen the record at the request of an applicant unless the applicant has agreed in writing to a suspension of the 120-day time limit.

(B) Procedures.

(1) Except as otherwise provided for in this section, the manner of testimony (whether oral or written) and time limits for testimony to be offered upon reopening of the record shall be at the discretion of the Hearings Body.

(2) The Hearings Body shall give written notice to the parties that the record is being reopened, stating the reason for reopening the record and how parties can respond. The parties shall be allowed to raise new issues that relate to the new evidence, testimony or criteria for decision-making that apply to the matter at issue.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.256 LAND USE ACTION DECISIONS.


153.256.010 Decision.

(A) Approval or denial of a land use action shall be based upon and accompanied by a brief statement that explains the criteria and standards considered relevant to the decision, states the facts relied upon in rendering the decision and explains the justification for the decision based upon the criteria, standards and facts set forth.

(B) Any portion of an application not addressed in a Hearings Body’s decision shall be deemed to have been denied.

(C) A decision on a land use action is not final until the Planning Director or Hearings Body issues a written decision, the decision has been mailed and the appeal period to the next higher Hearings Body within the city has run.

(D) No building permit shall issue until a decision is final. Appeal of a final decision to LUBA does not affect the finality of a decision for purposes of issuing building permits.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.256.020 Notice of decision.

A Hearings Body’s decision shall be in writing and mailed to all parties; however, one person may be designated by the Hearings Body to be the recipient of the decision for a group, organization, group of petitioners or similar collection of individual participants.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.256.030 Decision on plan amendments and zone changes.

(A) Except as set forth herein, the Planning Commission when acting as the Hearings Body shall have authority to make decisions on all quasi-judicial zone changes and plan amendments. Prior to becoming effective, all quasi-judicial plan amendments and zone changes shall be adopted by the City Council.

(B) In considering all quasi-judicial zone changes and those quasi-judicial plan amendments on which the Planning Commission has authority to make a decision, the City Council shall, in the absence of an appeal or review initiated by the Council, adopt the Planning Commission decision. No argument or further testimony will be taken by the Council.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.256.040 Reapplication limited.

(A) If a specific application is denied on its merits, reapplication for substantially the same proposal may be made at any time after the date of the final decision denying the initial application.

(B) Notwithstanding subsection (A) of this section, a final decision bars any reapplication for a nonconforming use verification or for a determination on whether an approval has been initiated.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.256.050 Review by Council.

(A) Review of an administrative action or a Planning Commission decision may be initiated by the City Council. The Council shall consider calling up for review any administrative decision that a majority of the Planning Commission recommends be reviewed.

(B) Review by the Council shall be initiated by Council order within 12 days of the date of the mailing of the final written decision of the Planning Director or Planning Commission.

(C) Review shall be conducted in the same manner provided for in appeals, except that an appeal fee and transcript shall not be required. Any Council order calling up for review a decision shall specify whether the Council will review the decision called up on the record or de novo and whether it intends to limit the issues on review to certain specified issues.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.256.060 Correction of clerical errors.

Upon its own motion or the motion of a party, the Council may, subject to any applicable public notice and hearing requirements, enact an ordinance correcting clerical or typographical errors in plan amendment or zone change ordinances and any maps appended thereto implementing decisions of the Planning Commission. Such changes shall be entered only if the Council is able to make a finding that the decision of the Planning Commission, including appendices, is not accurately reflected in the implementing ordinances.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.257 RECONSIDERATION.


153.257.010 Reconsideration.

(A) An applicant may request that the Planning Commission decision be reconsidered as set forth herein. A request for reconsideration shall be accompanied by a fee established by the city and by applicant’s written consent that the 120-day time clock will not run during the period of the reconsideration.

(B) Grounds for reconsideration are limited to the following instances where an alleged error substantially affects the rights of the applicant:

(1) Correction of an error in a condition established by the Planning Commission where the condition is not supported by the record or is not supported by law;

(2) Correction of errors that are technical or clerical in nature.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.257.020 Procedure.

(A) A request for reconsideration shall be filed with the Planning Director within ten days of the date the decision was mailed. The request shall identify the alleged error in the Planning Commission decision and shall specify how the applicant would be adversely affected if the alleged error were to remain uncorrected.

(B) Upon receipt of a request for reconsideration, the Planning Director shall forward the request for reconsideration to the Planning Commission and notify the other parties to the proceeding of the request and allow for a ten-day comment period on the request. At the end of the comment period, the Planning Commission shall determine whether the request for reconsideration has merit.

(C) The Planning Commission shall modify the decision upon a determination that the request has merit and the alleged error substantially affects the applicant. Notice of the modification shall be sent to all parties to the proceeding. If the Planning Commission determines that no modification is warranted, a determination shall issue a decision to that effect.

(D) Filing a request for reconsideration shall not be a precondition for appealing a decision.

(E) Filing a request for reconsideration stays the deadline for any party to file an appeal of the Planning Commission decision. The appeal period for all parties to the proceeding shall commence upon mailing of a modification or upon mailing a determination that a modification is not warranted. If an opponent files an appeal and an applicant has requested reconsideration, the opponent’s appeal shall be stayed pending disposition of the request for modification. If the decision is not modified, the appeal will be processed in accordance with the procedures set forth in § 153.258. If the decision is modified, the appellant must within 12 days of the mailing of the modified decision file in writing a statement requesting that its appeal be activated.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.257.030 Limitation on reconsideration.

No decision shall be reconsidered more than once by the Planning Commission.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.258 APPEALS.


153.258.010 Who may appeal.

(A) The following may file an appeal:

(1) A party;

(2) In the case of an appeal of an administrative decision without prior notice, a person entitled to notice, a person adversely affected or aggrieved by the administrative decision, or any other person who has filed comments on the application with the Planning Division; and

(3) A person entitled to notice and to whom no notice was mailed.

(4) Any administrative decision may be called up for a public hearing by the Planning Commission as long as at least three Planning Commissioners submit a written request to review a decision. In such a case, there shall be no additional hearings fee charged to the applicant and the hearing shall be scheduled for the next available meeting date with consideration for required notice periods.

(B) A person to whom notice is mailed is deemed notified even if notice is not received.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.258.020 Filing appeals.

(A) To file an appeal, an appellant must file a completed notice of appeal on a form prescribed by the Planning Department and an appeal fee.

(B) Unless a request for reconsideration has been filed, the notice of appeal and appeal fee must be received at the offices of the City of Prineville Planning Department no later than 5:00 p.m. on the twelfth day following mailing of the decision. If a decision has been modified on reconsideration, an appeal must be filed no later than 5:00 p.m. on the twelfth day following mailing of the decision as modified. Notices of appeals may not be received by facsimile machine.

(C) If the City Council is the Hearings Body and the city declines review, a portion of the appeal fee may be refunded. The amount of any refund will depend upon the actual costs incurred by the city in reviewing the appeal.

(D) The appeal fee shall be paid by cash or check or money order, except that local, state or federal governmental agencies may supply a purchase order at the time of filing.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.258.030 Notice of appeal.

The notice of appeal shall include:

(A) A statement raising any issue relied upon for appeal with sufficient specificity to afford the Hearings Body an adequate opportunity to respond to and resolve each issue in dispute.

(B) If the City Council is the Hearings Body, a request for review by the Council stating the reasons why the Council should review the lower Hearings Body’s decision.

(C) If the City Council is the Hearings Body and de novo review is desired, a request for de novo review by the Council stating the reasons why the Council should provide de novo review as provided in § 153.258.060.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11; Am. Ord. 1229, passed 2-28-17)


153.258.040 Transcript requirement.

(A) Except as otherwise provided in this section, appellants shall provide a complete transcript of any hearing appealed from, from recorded magnetic tapes provided by the Planning Department.

(B) Appellants shall submit the transcript to the Planning Department no later than the close of the fifth day prior to the date set for a de novo appeal hearing, in on-the-record appeals, the date for receipt of written arguments. Unless excused under this section, an appellant’s failure to provide a transcript shall cause the Council to decline to consider the appellant’s appeal further and shall, upon notice mailed to the parties, cause the lower Hearings Body’s decision to become final.

(C) An appellant shall be excused from providing a complete transcript if appellant was prevented from complying by:

(1) The inability of the Planning Department to supply appellant with a recording of the prior proceeding; or

(2) Defects on the recording of the prior proceeding that make it not reasonably possible for applicant to supply a transcript. Appellants shall comply to the maximum extent reasonably and practicably possible.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11; Am. Ord. 1229, passed 2-28-17)


153.258.050 Consolidation of multiple appeals.

If more than one party files a notice of appeal on a land use action decision, the appeals shall be consolidated and noticed and heard as one proceeding.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.258.060 Scope of review.

(A) Before Planning Commission. The review on appeal before the Planning Commission shall be de novo.

(B) Before the Council.

(1) Review before the City Council, if accepted, shall be on the record except as otherwise provided for in this section.

(2) The Council may grant an appellant’s request for a de novo review at its discretion after consideration of the following factors:

(a) Whether hearing the application de novo could cause the 120-day time limit to be exceeded; and

(b) If the magnetic tape of the hearing below, or a portion thereof, is unavailable due to a malfunctioning of the recording device during that hearing, whether review on the record would be hampered by the absence of a transcript of all or a portion of the hearing below; or

(c) Whether the substantial rights of the parties would be significantly prejudiced without de novo review and it does not appear that the request is necessitated by failure of the appellant to present evidence that was available at the time of the previous review; or

(d) Whether in its sole judgment a de novo hearing is necessary to fully and properly evaluate a significant policy issue relevant to the proposed land use action.

(e) For the purposes of this section, if an applicant is an appellant, subsection (B)(2)(a) of this section shall not weigh against the appellant’s request if the applicant has submitted with its notice of appeal written consent on a form approved by the city to restart the 120-day time clock as of the date of the acceptance of applicant’s appeal.

(3) Notwithstanding subsection (B)(2) of this section, the Council may decide on its own to hear a timely filed appeal de novo.

(4) The Council may, at its discretion, determine that it will limit the issues on appeal to those listed in an appellant’s notice of appeal.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.258.070 Hearing on appeal.

(A) The appellant and all other parties to the decision below shall be mailed notice of the hearing on appeal at least ten days prior to any de novo hearing or deadline for submission of written arguments.



(B) Except as otherwise provided in § 153.258, the appeal shall be heard as provided in § 153.255. The applicant shall proceed first in all de novo appeals.

(C) The order of the Hearings Body shall be as provided in § 153.255.020.

(D) The record of the proceeding from which appeal is taken shall be a part of the record on appeal.

(E) The record for a review on the record shall consist of the following:

(1) A written transcript of any prior hearing;

(2) All written and graphic materials that were part of the record below;

(3) The Hearings Body decision appealed from;

(4) Written arguments, based upon the record developed below, submitted by any party to the decision;

(5) Written comments submitted by the Planning Commission or individual Planning Commissioners, based upon the record developed below; and

(6) A staff report and staff comment based on the record. No oral evidence, argument or comment other than staff comment based on the record shall be taken. The Board shall not consider any new factual information.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.258.080 Declining review.

Except as set forth in § 153.256.030, when there is an appeal of a land use action and the City Council is the Hearings Body:

(A) The Council may on a case-by-case basis, at a public meeting, determine that the decision of the lower Hearings Body of an individual land use action or a class of land use action decisions shall be the final decision of the city.

(B) If the City Council decides that the lower Hearings Body decision shall be the final decision of the city, then the Council shall not hear the appeal and the party appealing may continue the appeal as provided by law. In such a case, the city shall provide written notice of its decision to all parties. The decision on the land use application becomes final upon mailing of the Council’s decision to decline review.

(C) The decision of the City Council not to hear a land use action appeal is entirely discretionary.

(D) In determining whether to hear an appeal, the City Council may consider only:

(1) The record developed before the lower Hearings Body;

(2) The notice of appeal; and

(3) Recommendations of staff.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.258.090 Development action appeals.

Notice of the hearing date set for appeal shall be sent only to the applicant. Only the applicant, his or her representatives, and his or her witnesses shall be entitled to participate. Continuances shall be at the discretion of the Hearings Body, and the record shall close at the end of the hearing.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.258.100 Withdrawal of an appeal.

An appeal may be withdrawn in writing by an appellant at any time prior to the rendering of a final decision. Subject to the existence of other appeals on the same application, in such event the appeal proceedings shall terminate as of the date the withdrawal is received.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.259 LIMITATIONS ON APPROVALS.


153.259.010 Expiration of approval.

(A) Scope.

(1) Except as otherwise provided herein, this section shall apply to and describe the duration of all approvals of land use permits provided for under the City of Prineville Land Development Ordinance and the various zoning ordinances administered by City of Prineville.

(2) This section does not apply to:

(a) Those determinations made by declaratory ruling or expiration determinations, that involve a determination of the legal status of a property, land use or land use permit rather than whether a particular application for a specific land use meets the applicable standards of the zoning ordinance. Such determinations, whether favorable or not to the applicant or landowner, shall be final, unless appealed, and shall not be subject to any time limits.

(b) Quasi-judicial map changes.

(B) Duration of approvals.

(1) Except as otherwise provided under this section or under applicable zoning ordinance provisions, a land use permit is void one year after the date the discretionary decision becomes final if the use approved in the permit is not initiated within that time period.

(2) Except as otherwise provided under applicable ordinance provisions, preliminary approval of plats or master plans shall be void after one year from the date of preliminary approval, unless the final plat has been submitted to the Planning Department for final approval within that time period, or an extension is sought under subsection (C) of this section, or the preliminary plat or master plan approval has been initiated as defined herein.

(3) In cases of a land use approval authorized under applicable approval criteria to be completed in phases, each phase must be initiated within one year of completion of the prior phase, if no timetable is specified.

(C) Extensions.

(1) The Planning Director may grant one extension of up to one year for a land use approval or a phase of a land use approval, regardless of whether the applicable criteria have changed, if: 

(a) An applicant makes a written request for an extension of the development approval period; 

(b) The request, along with the appropriate fee, is submitted to the city prior to the expiration of the approval period; 

(c) The applicant states reasons that prevented the applicant from beginning or continuing development or meeting conditions of approval within the approval period; and 

(d) The city determines that the applicant was unable to begin or continue development or meet conditions of approval during the approval period for reasons for which the applicant was not responsible, including, but not limited to, delay by a state or federal agency in issuing a required permit. 

(e) All fees charged to the project have been paid. 

(2) Up to two additional one-year extensions may be granted under the above criteria by the Planning Director or his/her designees with the condition that all plans be brought up to current city standards, including land use and zoning code requirements and standards and specifications.  

(3) Any additional extensions beyond the three allowed under subsections (C)(1) and (2) of this section may only be approved by City Council. Such extensions shall be based on the following: 

(a) All requirements listed for extensions under subsections (C)(1)(a), (b), (c), (e) and (C)(2) of this section are met.

(b) Council determines that, due to unforeseen general economic conditions, reasonable expectations for developing the project in a given timeframe have changed since the date of the original approval. General economic conditions refer to citywide (or broader) conditions, not the specific economic situation of the applicant. 

(c) The applicant demonstrates that a substantial effort has been made to move the project forward. Evidence of substantial effort shall be evaluated at the discretion of the council and may include planning, engineering, architectural design, bonding for or construction of public improvements, or other similar demonstrations of economic commitment.

(D) Procedures.

(1) A determination of whether a land use has been initiated shall be processed as a declaratory ruling.

(2) Approval of an extension granted under subsection (C) of this section is an administrative decision, is not a land use decision described in ORS 197.015 and is not subject to appeal as a land use decision and shall be processed under § 153.250 as a development action, except to the extent it is necessary to determine whether the use has been initiated.

(E) Effect of appeals. The time period set forth in subsection (B) of this section shall be tolled upon filing of an appeal to LUBA until all appeals are resolved.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11; Am. Ord. 1185, passed 12-13-11; Am. Ord. 1229, passed 2-28-17)


153.259.020 Initiation of use.

(A) For the purposes of this section, development action undertaken under a land use approval described in § 153.259.010 has been "initiated" if it is determined that:

(1) The proposed use has lawfully occurred;

(2) Substantial construction toward completion of the land use approval has taken place; or

(3) Where construction is not required by the approval, the conditions of a permit or approval have been substantially exercised and any failure to fully comply with the conditions is not the fault of the applicant.

(B) For the purposes of this section, SUBSTANTIAL CONSTRUCTION has occurred when the holder of a land use approval has physically altered the land or structure or changed the use thereof and such alteration or change is directed toward the completion and is sufficient in terms of time, labor or money spent to demonstrate a good faith effort to complete the development.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.259.030 Modification of approval.

(A) An applicant may apply to modify an approval at any time after a period of six months has elapsed from the time a land use action approval has become final.

(B) Unless otherwise specified in a particular zoning ordinance provision, the grounds for filing a modification shall be that a change of circumstances since the issuance of the approval makes it desirable to make changes to the proposal, as approved. A modification shall not be filed as a substitute for an appeal or to apply for a substantially new proposal or one that would have significant additional impacts on surrounding properties.

(C) An application to modify an approval shall be directed to one or more discrete aspects of the approval, the modification of which would not amount to approval of a substantially new proposal or one that would have significant additional impacts on surrounding properties. Any proposed modification, as defined in this section, shall be reviewed only under the criteria applicable to that particular aspect of the proposal. Proposals that would modify an approval in a scope greater than allowable as a modification shall be treated as an application for a new proposal.

(D) An application for a modification shall be handled as a land use action.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.259.040 Transfer of permit.

(A) A land use action permit shall be deemed to run with the land and be transferable to applicant’s successors in interest.

(B) The Planning Department may require that an applicant record a notice of land use permit and conditions of approval agreement in the Crook County Records. Such an agreement shall set forth a description of the property, describe the permit that has been issued and set forth the conditions of approval.

(C) The terms of the approval agreement may be enforced against the applicant and any successor in interest.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.259.050 Revocation of approvals.

(A) Approvals shall be subject to revocation according to standards set forth in the applicable zoning ordinances.

(B) Revocations shall be processed as a declaratory ruling under City of Prineville Land Development Ordinance. Section 153.259.010 notwithstanding, a public hearing shall be held in all revocation proceedings.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.260 DECLARATORY RULING.


153.260.010 Availability of declaratory ruling.

(A) Subject to the other provisions of this section, there shall be available for the City’s Comprehensive Plans, zoning ordinances and City of Prineville Land Development Ordinance process for:

(1) Interpreting a provision of a Comprehensive Plan or ordinance (and other documents incorporated by reference) in which there is doubt or a dispute as to its meaning or application;

(2) Interpreting a provision or limitation in a land use permit issued by the city or quasi-judicial plan amendment or zone change in which there is doubt or a dispute as to its meaning or application;

(3) Determining whether an approval has been initiated or considering the revocation of a previously issued land use permit, quasi-judicial plan amendment or zone change;

(4) Determining the validity and scope of a nonconforming use; and

(5) Determination of other similar status situations under a Comprehensive Plan, zoning ordinance or land division ordinance that do not constitute the approval or denial of an application for a permit.

(6) Such a determination or interpretation shall be known as a "declaratory ruling" and shall be processed in accordance with this section. In all cases, as part of making a determination or interpretation the Planning Director shall have the authority to declare the rights and obligations of persons affected by the ruling.

(B) A declaratory ruling shall be available only in instances involving a fact specific controversy and to resolve and determine the particular rights and obligations of particular parties to the controversy. Declaratory proceedings shall not be used to grant an advisory opinion. Declaratory proceedings shall not be used as a substitute for seeking an amendment of general applicability to a legislative enactment.

(C) Declaratory rulings shall not be used as a substitute for an appeal of a decision in a land use action or for a modification of an approval. In the case of a ruling on a land use action a declaratory ruling shall not be available until six months after a decision in the land use action is final.

(D) The Planning Director may refuse to accept an application for a declaratory ruling if:

(1) The Planning Director determines that the question presented can be decided in conjunction with approving or denying a pending land use action application or if in the Planning Director’s judgment the requested determination should be made as part of a decision on an application for a quasi-judicial plan amendment or zone change or a land use permit not yet filed; or

(2) The Planning Director determines that there is an enforcement case pending in District or Circuit Court in which the same issue necessarily will be decided as to the applicant and the applicant failed to file the request for a declaratory ruling within two weeks after being cited or served with a complaint.

(3) The Planning Director determination to not accept or deny an application under this section shall be the city’s final decision.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.260.020 Persons who may apply.

(A) Section 153.251.010(B) notwithstanding, the following persons may initiate a declaratory ruling under § 153.260:

(1) The owner of a property requesting a declaratory ruling relating to the use of the owner’s property;

(2) In cases where the request is to interpret a previously issued quasi-judicial plan amendment, zone change or land use permit, the holder of the permit; or

(3) In all cases arising under § 153.260.010, the Planning Director.

(4) No other person shall be entitled to initiate a declaratory ruling.

(B) A request for a declaratory ruling shall be initiated by filing an application with the Planning Department and, except for applications initiated by the Planning Director, shall be accompanied by such fees as have been set by the Planning Department. Each application for a declaratory ruling shall include the precise question on which a ruling is sought. The application shall set forth whatever facts are relevant and necessary for making the determination and such other information as may be required by the Planning Department.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.260.030 Procedures.

Except as set forth in this section or in applicable provisions of a zoning ordinance, the procedures for making declaratory rulings shall be the same as set forth in § 153.250 for land use actions. Where the Planning Department is the applicant, the Planning Department shall bear the same burden that applicants generally bear in pursuing a land use action.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.260.040 Effect of declaratory ruling.

(A) A declaratory ruling shall be conclusive on the subject of the ruling and bind the parties thereto as to the determination made.

(B) Section 153.256.040 notwithstanding, and except as specifically allowed therein, parties to a declaratory ruling shall not be entitled to reapply for a declaratory ruling on the same question.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.260.050 Interpretation.

Interpretations made under § 153.260 shall not have the effect of amending the interpreted language. Interpretation shall be made only of language that is ambiguous either on its face or in its application. Any interpretation of a provision of the Comprehensive Plan or other land use ordinance shall consider applicable provisions of the Comprehensive Plan and the purpose and intent of the ordinance as applied to the particular section in question.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.261 ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES.


153.261.010 Enforcement.

(A) The City Manager or designee shall have the powers and the duties to enforce the provisions of this chapter and all amendments thereto.

(B) In addition, the City Manager or designee may initiate action to enforce any provision of this chapter, including any violation of any restriction or condition established under the provisions of this chapter in the granting of any application authorized or required pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

(C) Failure to comply with any order or decision as above provided will subject the violator to any legal remedy provided under law, including but not limited to the following:

(1) A complaint filed with the Circuit Court, or other court of competent jurisdiction where upon conviction the court may fine the violator up to the maximum allowed by law, or imprison the violator in jail for up to the maximum time allowed by law, or both. Each day a violation occurs may be considered a separate offense.

(2) The City Planning Official and/or a certified Building Official may order the stoppage of work of any type which is in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or a permit granted pursuant hereto.

(3) A copy of the stop work order shall be posted at the site of construction or use and a copy thereof shall be mailed to the last known address of the property owner and/or the permittee.

(4) Upon the posting of the order, all work shall cease forthwith, and the property owner, permittee or permittee’s agents or employees who thereafter continue to work shall be in violation of this chapter.

(5) The stop work order shall not be removed until satisfactory evidence that the violation has or will be corrected has been provided.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


153.261.020 Remedies.

A person violating a provision of this chapter shall be subject to the following provisions:

(A) Unlawful construction or use declared a nuisance. The location, erection, construction, maintenance, repair, alteration or use of a building or other structure, or the subdivision, partitioning, other land development or use of land in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a nuisance.

(B) Penalty. Except as otherwise provided for by law or by a court of competent jurisdiction, a person violating a provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by fine of not more than $500. A violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate offense for each day the violation continues.

(C) Alternative remedy. In case a building or structure is, or is proposed to be, located, constructed, maintained, repaired, altered or used, or land is, or is proposed to be, used in violation of this chapter, the building or land thereby in violation shall constitute a nuisance, and the city may, as an alternative to other remedies that are legally available for enforcing this chapter, institute injunction, mandamus, abatement or other appropriate proceedings to prevent, enjoin temporarily or permanently, abate or remove the unlawful location, construction, maintenance, repair, alteration or use.

(D) Nuisances. Violations which constitute or include a nuisance violation shall also be subject to the abatement procedures set forth in §§ 93.70 through 93.99.

(Ord. 1180, passed 6-14-11)


CHAPTER 153A: MEDICAL MARIJUANA AND OVERLAY ZONE

Section

153A.001    Purpose

153A.002    General provisions

153A.003    Definitions

153A.004    Standards for medical marijuana activities

153A.006    Application process

153A.007    Enforcement

153A.008    Penalty


153A.001 PURPOSE.

This chapter establishes regulations for growing, processing and dispensing of medical marijuana. State law has authorized the City of Prineville to allow Oregon Medical Marijuana Act activities. The purpose of this chapter is to minimize adverse impacts on the community including but not limited to impacts on traffic, adjacent properties, schools, parks and other places where minors congregate, and other land uses potentially incompatible with such facilities.

(Ord. 1212, passed 3-31-15)


153A.002 GENERAL PROVISIONS.

All medical marijuana activities shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and Oregon State law as may be amended from time to time. State laws regarding medical marijuana can be found in ORS 475.300 through 475.346.

Medical marijuana activities may be allowed, subject to the Medical Marijuana Overlay Zone adopted as part of this chapter and the underlying zone criteria in Chapter 153. No growing, processing or dispensing of medical marijuana shall be located within the city unless the reviewing authority finds that it satisfies all the requirements of this chapter and state law.

(Ord. 1212, passed 3-31-15)


153A.003 DEFINITIONS.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall be used as well as those listed in state law ORS 475.302 pertaining to medical marijuana and those contained in Chapter 153:

MEDICAL MARIJUANA ACTIVITY (MMA) means any single use or combination of growing, processing or dispensing medical marijuana.

MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY (MMD) means a location registered under ORS 475.314 where medical marijuana is dispensed to a registry identification cardholder.

MEDICAL MARIJUANA FACILITY (MMF) means a location that is growing and/or processing and dispensing medical marijuana.

MEDICAL MARIJUANA GROW SITE (MMG) means a location registered under ORS 475.304 where marijuana is grown or grown and processed for use by a registry identification cardholder.

MEDICAL MARIJUANA OVERLAY (MM) means designated areas of the city where MMFs, MMGs and MMDs are allowed.

MINOR means an individual under the age of 18.

PRESCHOOL means a school of instruction attended primarily by pre-kindergarten or age level equivalent (ages two through five).

PRIMARY SCHOOL (aka elementary school) means a learning institution containing one or any combination of grades kindergarten through eighth grade or age level equivalent.

PUBLIC PARK. For the purposes of this chapter, a PUBLIC PARK is defined as a public area managed for recreation and attended primarily by minors but excluding bike and pedestrian paths or trail systems and staging areas.

REVIEWING AUTHORITY means the City of Prineville and/or applicable state agency.

SCHOOL - CAREER SCHOOL means any private proprietary professional, technical, business or other school instruction, organization or person that offers any instruction or training or preparing persons for any profession at a physical location attended primarily by minors.

SECONDARY SCHOOL means a learning institution containing one or any combination of grades nine through 12 or age level equivalent and includes those institutions that provide junior high schools which include ninth grade.

(Ord. 1212, passed 3-31-15)


153A.004 STANDARDS FOR MEDICAL MARIJUANA ACTIVITIES.

The following standards are in addition to laws and regulations set forth by the State of Oregon:

(A) License/registration.

(1) An applicant shall provide proof of being registered with the state in accordance with the Medical Marijuana Act as stated in ORS 475.300 through 475.346 as amended.

(2) An applicant shall obtain a license from the City of Prineville as applicable.

(B) Location.

(1) A MMA shall be located within the approved MM overlay.

(2) A MMA shall not be mobile.

(3) A MMD shall not be located at the same address as a MMG.

(4) A MMD shall not be located within 1,000 feet of another MMD.

(5) A MMA shall not be located within 1,000 feet of the real property comprising a:

(a) Public or private preschool, elementary, secondary or career school attended primarily by minors; or

(b) Licensed daycare center; or

(c) County Court House or City Hall; or

(d) Public library; or

(e) Public park; except industrially zoned properties above the rimrock.

(C) Operation.

(1) Marijuana plants and products shall not be visible to the public other than within the facility itself.

(2) Marijuana products shall not be sold through a drive-through window.

(3) There shall be no burning of plant waste. Plant waste may be composted or disposed of at the county landfill with the county’s approval.

(D) Overlay zone.

(1) The adoption of this chapter includes adoption of the MM Overlay Zone map attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter.

(2) The MM Overlay Zone is in addition to any requirements of the underlying city zone and shall not be interpreted to supersede any city code or ordinance.

(3) Annexation of property within the Urban Growth Boundary (UGB) does not automatically include the property within the MM Overlay. As part of the annexation process the City Council, with a recommendation from the Planning Commission, shall make the determination on whether to include the property in the MM Overlay using the same criteria listed in subsections (B) and (D)(4) of this section.

(4) Approval of additional area or areas within the MM Overlay other than through an annexation process requires a zone change which places the overlay upon a property. The zone change process shall be in accordance with this chapter and requirements found in Chapter 153. Requests for additional areas within the MM Overlay are at the discretion of the City Council, based on the criteria in subsection (B) of this section and the following:

(a) Shall ensure the health, safety and welfare of minors. The intent is to minimize the exposure of marijuana to minors.

(b) Shall only be located within commercial or industrial zones.

(c) Shall not be located on a commercially or industrially zoned property whose property line is 100 feet from a residential zone or property line of a residential use.

(d) Access to the property shall not be primarily through a residential neighborhood except for arterial or major collector streets.

(e) Overlay areas may be restricted to a specific type of use such as solely a MMD or MMG.

(Ord. 1212, passed 3-31-15)


153A.006 APPLICATION PROCESS.

(A) Applications shall only be processed for properties within the city-approved overlay zone.

(B) Application shall be processed by the city’s Planning Department.

(C) Applications for medical marijuana activities within the overlay zone shall be processed as a Type 1 conditional use as defined in Chapter 153. Application fees shall be consistent with the city’s fee schedule for the type of application, such as a change of use or new construction.

(D) Notice shall be given to owners of record of property within 200 feet of property that is the subject of the notice as shown on the most recent property tax assessment rolls.

(E) The underlying zone criteria shall govern the construction of any new structures within the overlay zone; however, the use of that structure as an MMA shall also meet the criteria of this chapter. Applications for new construction and use may be combined into one application with the fee being the greater of the two.

(Ord. 1212, passed 3-31-15)


153A.007 ENFORCEMENT.

The city’s Planning Director and Chief of Police are charged with enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.

(Ord. 1212, passed 3-31-15)


153A.008 PENALTY.

Any person or persons who are convicted of violating any provisions of this chapter shall be fined not more than $500 for each offense. Each day’s violation of this chapter constitutes a separate offense.

(Ord. 1212, passed 3-31-15)




CHAPTER 153B: MARIJUANA GROWING, PROCESSING AND SELLING

Section

153B.001    Definitions

153B.002    General provisions

153B.003    Standards for marijuana activities

153B.004    Application process

153B.005    Enforcement

153B.006    Penalty

Code reviser’s note: Section 9 of Ord. 1215 provides that the sections codified in this chapter shall become effective the day after the federal government reduces the classification of marijuana to less than a Schedule 1 drug.


153B.001 DEFINITIONS.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall be used as well as those listed in state law pertaining to marijuana and those contained in Chapter 153:

CITY means the City of Prineville.

MARIJUANA ACTIVITY (MA) means any use of a location for a MG, MD or MF.

MARIJUANA DISPENSARY (MD) means a location where marijuana is sold to a customer.

MARIJUANA FACILITY (MF) means a location that is a combination of a MG and a MD.

MARIJUANA GROW SITE (MG) means a location that grows and/or processes marijuana that exceeds the amounts allowed by state law for a household.

MARIJUANA OVERLAY ZONE means designated areas of the city where MFs, MGs, and MDs are allowed.

MINOR means an individual under the age of 21.

PRESCHOOL means a school of instruction attended primarily by pre-kindergarten or age level equivalent (ages two through five).

PRIMARY SCHOOL (aka elementary school) means a learning institution containing one or any combination of grades kindergarten through eighth grade or age level equivalent.

PUBLIC PARK. For the purposes of this chapter, a PUBLIC PARK is defined as a public area managed for recreation and attended primarily by minors but excluding bike and pedestrian paths or trail systems and staging areas.

REVIEWING AUTHORITY means the City of Prineville and/or applicable state agency.

SCHOOL - CAREER SCHOOL means any private proprietary professional, technical, business or other school instruction, organization or person that offers any instruction or training or preparing persons for any profession at a physical location attended primarily by minors.

SECONDARY SCHOOL means a learning institution containing one or any combination of grades nine through 12 or age level equivalent and includes those institutions that provide junior high schools which include ninth grade.

(Ord. 1215, passed 6-23-15)


153B.002 GENERAL PROVISIONS.

All marijuana activities shall comply with the city’s Comprehensive Plan, the provisions of this chapter, and Oregon State law as may be amended from time to time.

Marijuana activities may be allowed, subject to the Marijuana Overlay Zone adopted as part of this chapter and the underlying zone criteria in Chapter 153. No growing, processing, or dispensing of marijuana shall be located within the city unless the reviewing authority finds that it satisfies all the requirements of this chapter and state law.

(Ord. 1215, passed 6-23-15)


153B.003 STANDARDS FOR MARIJUANA ACTIVITIES.

The following standards are in addition to laws and regulations set forth by the State of Oregon:

(A) License/Registration.

(1) An applicant shall provide proof of being registered and/or licensed with the state.

(2) An applicant shall obtain a license from the city as applicable.

(B) Location.

(1) A MA shall be located within the approved Marijuana Overlay Zone.

(2) A MA shall not be mobile.

(3) A MD shall not be located within 1,000 feet of another MD.

(4) A MA may be co-located with a medical marijuana activity so long as the location is in the appropriate Marijuana Overlay Zone and meets state law.

(5) A MA shall not be located within 1,000 feet of the real property comprising a:

(a) Public or private preschool, elementary, secondary or career school attended primarily by minors; or

(b) Licensed daycare center; or

(c) County Court House or City Hall; or

(d) Public library; or

(e) Public park; except public parks located above the rimrock.

(C) Operation.

(1) Marijuana plants and products shall not be visible to the public other than within the facility itself.

(2) Marijuana products shall not be sold through a drive-through window.

(3) There shall be no burning of plant waste. Plant waste may be composted or disposed of as allowed by law.

(D) Overlay zone.

(1) The adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter includes adoption of the Marijuana Overlay Zone map attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter.

(2) The Marijuana Overlay Zone is in addition to any requirements of the underlying city zone and shall not be interpreted to supersede any city code or ordinance.

(3) Annexation of property within the Urban Growth Boundary (UGB) does not automatically include the property within the Marijuana Overlay Zone. As part of the annexation process the City Council, with a recommendation from the Planning Commission, shall make the determination on whether to include the property in the Marijuana Overlay Zone using the same criteria listed in subsections (B) and (D)(4) of this section.

(4) Approval of additional area or areas within the Marijuana Overlay Zone other than through an annexation process requires a zone change which places the Marijuana Overlay Zone upon a property. The zone change process shall be in accordance with this chapter and requirements found in Chapter 153. Requests for additional areas within the Marijuana Overlay Zone are at the discretion of the City Council, based on the criteria in subsection (B) of this section and the following:

(a) Shall ensure the health, safety, and welfare of minors. The intent is to minimize the exposure of marijuana to minors.

(b) Shall only be located within commercial or industrial zones.

(c) Shall not be located within the Central Commercial C-1 Zone.

(d) Shall not be located on a commercially or industrially zoned property whose property line is 100 feet or less from a residential zone or property line of a residential use.

(e) Access to the property shall not be primarily through a residential neighborhood except for arterial or major collector streets.

(f) Overlay areas may be restricted to a specific type of marijuana activity.

(Ord. 1215, passed 6-23-15)


153B.004 APPLICATION PROCESS.

(A) Applications shall only be processed for properties within the city-approved Marijuana Overlay Zone.

(B) Applications shall be processed by the city’s Planning Department.

(C) Applications for marijuana activities within the Marijuana Overlay Zone shall be processed as a Type 1 conditional use as defined in Chapter 153. Application fees shall be consistent with the city’s fee schedule for the type of application, such as a change of use or new construction.

(D) Notice shall be given to owners of record of property within 200 feet of property that is the subject of the notice as shown on the most recent property tax assessment rolls.

(E) The underlying zone criteria shall govern the construction of any new structures within the Marijuana Overlay Zone; however, the use of that structure as an MA shall also meet the criteria of this chapter. Applications for new construction and use may be combined into one application with the fee being the greater of the two.

(Ord. 1215, passed 6-23-15)


153B.005 ENFORCEMENT.

The city’s Planning Director and Chief of Police are charged with enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.

(Ord. 1215, passed 6-23-15)


153B.006 PENALTY.

Any person or persons who are convicted of violating any provisions of this chapter shall be fined not more than $500 for each offense. Each day’s violation of this chapter constitutes a separate offense.

(Ord. 1215, passed 6-23-15)




CHAPTER 153C: TEMPORARY WORKER HOUSING

Section

153C.001    Title

153C.002    Purpose

153C.003    Application

153C.004    General criteria

153C.005    On-site temporary workforce housing

153C.006    Off-site temporary workforce housing


153C.001 TITLE.

This chapter shall be known as the "temporary worker housing" ordinance for the City of Prineville, Oregon ("city").

(Ord. 1223, passed 8-11-16; Am. Ord. 1248, passed 11-27-18)


153C.002 PURPOSE.

The Prineville City Council takes seriously the economic conditions within the city. To this end, the City Council wants to ensure that economic investment and development of businesses within Prineville are supported by land use regulations which help them achieve their goals. The City Council also takes seriously the quality of life in Prineville and to this end wishes to create land use regulations which combine local business opportunities and quality of life in a harmonious manner and at the same time preserve the history of Prineville. 

Large construction projects that demand large populations of temporary workers can create short-term pressure on the local housing market making homes less affordable for residents. Large volumes of temporary workers can occupy a large number of transient housing such as motels and RV parks limiting the number of those units available to visitors who are also an important economic contributor to the community. 

In response to this, the City of Prineville has developed the following temporary worker housing land use code. The intent of this code is to allow for the housing needs of a large temporary workforce while minimizing any adverse impacts on the local housing market. 

(Ord. 1223, passed 8-11-16; Am. Ord. 1248, passed 11-27-18)


153C.003 APPLICATION.

(A) The City of Prineville must be provided an application on a form acceptable to the city for development of a temporary worker housing site.

(1) The written application shall come from either the land owner of the project, the company for whom the project is being built, or from one of the primary general contractors or subcontractors for a project, hereafter referred to as the "applicant."

(2) The term "project" shall mean the development which the temporary worker housing is for.

(Ord. 1223, passed 8-11-16; Am. Ord. 1248, passed 11-27-18)


153C.004 GENERAL CRITERIA.

(A) Approval of on-site or off-site temporary worker housing may only be granted if the following conditions are met:

(1) There is no available space or inadequate space available in existing or planned housing developments, RV parks or other temporary worker housing sites for which construction has commenced within a reasonable distance.

(2) The temporary housing is necessary for the proper housing of the subject company’s employees until the project is finished.

(3) The subject facility will not be occupied by any parties not employed by the project other than immediate family.

(4) There is an identified housing shortage in the area due to the size of the subject project to be served.

(5) The facility shall not be permitted for a period to exceed the time required to provide temporary housing for the project to be served thereby, or for a period determined by the city, whichever is less. (See § 153C.005 or § 153C.006 for duration of approval.)

(Ord. 1223, passed 8-11-16; Am. Ord. 1248, passed 11-27-18)


153C.005 ON-SITE TEMPORARY WORKFORCE HOUSING.

The city may approve on-site temporary housing including RV parks for the establishment of housing for the workers of a specific project that meets the following criteria. Temporary manufactured dwelling parks are allowed based on ORS 446.105 and require state and local approval.

(A) Approval of on-site temporary worker housing may only be granted if the general criteria and the following conditions are met:

(1) Each temporary worker housing site:

(a) Shall be located on the property owned or occupied by the project requiring the temporary workforce;

(b) Shall be served by weekly trash removal service;

(c) Shall be located no closer than 600 feet from an industrial structure already built or being built unless approved otherwise by the Fire Marshal;

(d) Shall comply with city, county and state access permit requirements as applicable;

(e) Shall consider future development of the site in placement of required infrastructure;

(f) Shall pay city room tax if applicable for each space at a temporary worker housing site equal to and using the same process as the city’s transient room tax requirements;

(g) Shall pay city system development charges (SDCs) as determined by the City Engineer.

(2) Each temporary worker housing site space:

(a) May be a single unit structure, shared structure or RV space;

(b) Shall be occupied by at least one worker employed by the landowner of the project, the company for whom the project is being built, or from the primary general contractor or subcontractor for the project being built; 

(c) Shall be served by a road, electricity, water and sewer as approved by the City Engineer, in accordance with Oregon Building Code requirements as approved by the Building Official, in accordance with the Oregon Fire Code as approved by the Fire Marshal;

(d) Shall meet the city’s standards for the health, safety and welfare of the occupants. 

(B) Approval process.

(1) The approval process for on-site temporary worker housing shall follow city’s "outright" use application process with notice found in the City of Prineville Land Use Code Chapter 153. On-site temporary worker housing may also be approved as part of the development it will serve.

(C) Duration of approval.

(1) The temporary worker housing site may continue to operate until the project is deemed complete by the City Manager or its designee. Evidence of project completeness may include, but is not limited to, the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the Crook County Building Department. 

 (2) At such time the project is deemed complete, the temporary worker housing shall be removed and the infrastructure for water, sewer and electrical shall be removed or capped if not designed for a future development allowed outright or by conditional use permit in the zone.

(Ord. 1248, passed 11-27-18)


153C.006 OFF-SITE TEMPORARY WORKFORCE HOUSING.

The city may approve an off-site temporary RV park for the establishment of housing for the workers of a specific project that meets the following criteria: 

(A) Approval of off-site temporary worker housing may only be granted if the general criteria and the following conditions are met:

(1) Off-site temporary worker housing is only available for a project:

(a) With a projected value of $10,000,000 or greater as calculated by the Building Official, not including land value, and has a valid land use approval and building permit for the project;

(b) That currently employs more than 200 construction workers at the project site.

(2) Each temporary worker housing site:

(a) Shall be located in the Light Industrial (M1), Heavy Industrial (M2), or Industrial Park (IP) zones;

 (b) Shall be served by weekly trash removal service;

(c) Shall be located on a parcel of land at least six acres in size;

(d) Shall be located no closer than 600 feet from an industrial structure already built or being built unless approved otherwise by the Fire Marshal;

(e) Shall comply with city, county and state access permit requirements as applicable;

(f) Shall consider future development of the site in placement of required infrastructure;

(g) Shall pay city room tax if applicable for each space at a temporary worker housing site equal to and using the same process as the city’s transient room tax requirements;

(h) Shall pay city system development charges (SDCs) as determined by the City Engineer. Paid SDCs shall be credited toward future development in accordance with city policy.

(3) Each temporary worker housing site RV space:

(a) Shall be occupied by at least one worker employed by the landowner of the project, the company for whom the project is being built, or from the primary general contractor or subcontractor for the project being built; 

(b) Shall be served by a road, electricity, water and sewer as approved by the City Engineer, in accordance with Oregon Building Code requirements as approved by the Building Official, in accordance with the Oregon Fire Code as approved by the Fire Marshal and recreational vehicle park requirements as required by Oregon law.

(B) Approval process.

(1) The approval process for an off-site temporary worker housing site shall follow city’s type 2 conditional use permit process and fee structure found in the City of Prineville Land Use Code Chapter 153 and the City of Prineville adopted fee structure. (The type 2 conditional use permit requires Planning Commission review and approval.)

(C) Duration of approval.

(1) The temporary worker housing site may continue to operate until the project is deemed complete by the City Manager or its designee. Evidence of project completeness may include, but is not limited to, the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the Crook County Building Department.

(2) At such time the project is deemed complete, and within 90 days, the temporary worker housing shall be removed and the infrastructure for water, sewer and electrical shall be removed or capped if not designed for a future development allowed outright or by conditional use permit in the zone. 

(3) The temporary worker housing site may be reauthorized by the city for a new project that meets the same criteria for need, without a new application. Reauthorization shall require a letter of need from either the land owner of the project, the company for whom the project is being built, or from one of the primary general contractors or subcontractors for a project.

(4) Approvals of temporary worker housing projects prior to the adoption of this chapter shall be allowed to comply with the new standards.

(5) In the event that a temporary housing unit is not removed pursuant to subsection (C)(2) of this section; or reauthorized pursuant to subsection (C)(3) of this section, the city may in addition to other legal remedies seek injunctive relief through circuit court of Crook County and if the city prevails, the offending party shall be responsible for all costs and attorney fees in the enforcement action.

(Ord. 1248, passed 11-27-18)


CHAPTER 154: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN

Section

154.01    Adoption of Comprehensive Plan


154.01 ADOPTION OF COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.

(A) The Council specifically finds that the City of Prineville Comprehensive Plan complies with the statewide planning goals for the State of Oregon.

(B) The Council accepts the City of Prineville Planning Commission recommendation as forwarded and adopts the City of Prineville Comprehensive Plan as set forth and attached to Ordinance No. 1143 by reference as if fully set forth herein.

(C) The City Recorder shall place a certified copy of Ordinance No. 1143 in the city’s permanent records and the Community Development Department of the city shall forward a certified copy of that ordinance and the adopted City of Prineville Comprehensive Plan to the Oregon Department of Land Conservation and Development along with the proper notice for acknowledgment within ten days of the effective date of Ordinance No. 1143.

(D) The Community Development Department shall give notice to all relevant parties of the adoption of a City of Prineville Comprehensive Plan.

(Ord. 1143, passed 4-10-07)




CHAPTER 155: NATURAL FEATURES OVERLAY DISTRICT (NFOD) AND SLOPE HAZARD REQUIREMENTS

Section

155.000    Purpose

155.010    Applicability

155.020    General provisions

155.030    Exemptions

155.040    Land uses and review procedures anywhere within the Natural Features Overlay District

155.050    Application requirements within the Natural Features Overlay District

155.060    Surface water features

155.070    Wildlife habitat

155.080    Rimrock scenic area

155.090    Barnes Butte scenic area

155.100    Density transfer (on same lot)

155.110    Underlying zone adjustment process

155.120    Slope hazard requirements

155.130    Enforcement and remedies


155.000 PURPOSE.

This chapter implements the Prineville Comprehensive Plan by protecting significant natural features and mitigating against potential natural hazards as mapped and described in the adopted Prineville Natural Features Inventory.* The standards and density transfer provisions in this chapter are intended to resolve conflicts between permitted urban development uses and significant natural features as evaluated in the Prineville ESEE (Economic, Social, Environmental, and Energy) Analysis.

(Ord. 1165, passed 11-10-09)

*Code reviser’s note: The Prineville Natural Features Inventory was adopted as Exhibit B of Ord. 1165.


155.010 APPLICABILITY.

Significant natural features include surface water features, wildlife habitat areas, rimrock scenic areas, and the Barnes Butte scenic area. The Natural Features Overlay District applies only to significant natural features as described in the Prineville Natural Features Inventory and as mapped on the official Prineville Zoning Map. The Natural Features Overlay District covers:

(A) Surface water features including:

(1) The Crooked River, Ochoco Creek, Hudspeth Drainage and Ryegrass Drainage riparian corridors (including associated wetlands and floodplain areas) within required setbacks;

(2) Hudspeth Reservoir and its required setback area;

(3) Isolated wetlands located outside of riparian corridors and their required setback areas; and

(4) Dry washes and natural drainage ways and their required setback areas.

(B) Wildlife habitat areas including:

(1) Wildlife habitat within surface water features and their respective setback areas;

(2) Wildlife habitat within the Barnes Butte and rimrock scenic areas; and

(3) Raptor nesting sites and their respective impact areas.

(C) Rimrock scenic areas including:

(1) The rimrock face;

(2) The top-of-rimrock setback area; and

(3) The rimrock slope.

(D) Barnes Butte scenic areas including:

(1) Primary scenic area; and

(2) Secondary scenic area.

(Ord. 1165, passed 11-10-09)


155.020 GENERAL PROVISIONS.

The Director shall be responsible for interpreting the provisions of this chapter, periodically amending the Natural Features Overlay District on the City of Prineville Zoning Map to account for site-specific refinements, determining on-site measuring methods.

(A) UGB expansions. As the UGB expands the NFOD shall also expand along identified resources and include additional resources identified in the expansion. UGB expansions may incorporate stricter standards on newly acquired land. Those standards shall be incorporated into this chapter when the expansion is approved.

(B) Development approval required. No development shall occur on property within the Natural Features Overlay District without first obtaining city approval under the provisions of this chapter.

(C) Subdivisions and partitions. Any subdivision or partition shall be required to provide legal provisions that prevent development encroachment into required setbacks through easements, common open space dedications, dedications to the city or parks and recreation or other legal mechanism approved by the city.

(D) Department of State Lands notification required. The Director shall notify the Oregon Department of State Lands (DSL) whenever development is proposed (or has occurred without prior notice) on a property with a wetland, river or stream feature or required buffer that appears on the Prineville Natural Features Inventory, as required by ORS 227.350. DSL shall also be notified of potential wetlands outside the mapped boundaries as determined by the Director. If DSL determines wetlands are present they shall be treated as mapped features and regulated as such.

(E) Measurement and adjustment of required setback areas. Setbacks and impact areas are measured horizontally from and parallel to the outer boundary of the protected natural feature. Therefore, if the boundary of the natural feature changes, so does the required setback area. Over time some surface water features may fall outside the mapped boundaries and will require a new determination or delineation.

(F) The Director may hire, at the applicant’s expense, a third-party expert to review specific plans and recommend additional mitigation measures. The choice of contact service provider shall be at the discretion of the city. Costs shall be determined reasonable based on a comparison of at least three bids. An estimate of the costs shall be provided to the developer prior to contracting and the developer shall pay the cost to the city prior to proceeding with review of the application. The developer shall have the option of revising the proposal or withdrawing the application, with no refund of application fees, instead of paying the additional cost for third-party review.

(G) Conflicts with other provisions. Where there are conflicts between the provisions of this chapter and other adopted land use provisions, the more restrictive provision applies.

(H) Choice of review procedures. Applicants for development of property that lies within or partially within the Natural Features Overlay District have two development review options.

(1) Option 1. An applicant may choose to avoid development within the Natural Features Overlay District entirely. Under this clear and objective option, the Director must determine the land area that is within the Natural Features Overlay District, by overlaying the Natural Features Overlay District map on the subject property. By choosing this option, the applicant may proceed with development on the remainder of the property without having to prepare special studies or further address the requirements of this chapter. The only exception to this would be a determination in reference to General Provisions 4 and 5. The Director may require site fencing and erosion control measures during construction.

(2) Option 2. Alternatively, an applicant may apply for limited development within the Natural Features Overlay District under the discretionary provisions of this chapter. Under this option, the applicant is responsible for preparing special studies and addressing applicable review criteria prior to submitting a complete application to the city. The review authority (the Director, Planning Commission or City Council) may approve, approve with conditions, or deny a land use application based on the provisions of this chapter. The review authority may require conditions deemed necessary to comply with the purpose and provisions of this chapter, or the recommendations of required special studies.

(I) Definitions. In addition to definitions found in § 153.004, Definitions, the following natural features definitions apply. In cases of conflict, the definitions of this section supersede the definitions in § 153.004.

DEVELOPMENT. Means all human caused change to improved or unimproved real estate including but not limited to: buildings, fences, decks, placement or replacement of manufactured or other structures, parking and loading areas, landscaping, roadways, paved or graveled areas, grading, and areas devoted to storage of equipment and materials. DEVELOPMENT does not include items specifically allowed by this chapter or minor structures such as picnic tables, bird feeders and other structures with a small footprint that are easily removed.

DIRECTOR. Means the Prineville Community Development Director, Planning Director, or designee.

DISCRETIONARY REVIEW. Requires judgment by the review authority. Discretionary review is required when the applicant chooses not to meet clear and objective review standards that limit development within a natural feature, required setback area or impact area.

FLOODWAY. Means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.

IMPACT AREA. Means an area described in the Prineville Natural Features Inventory or shown on the Natural Features Overlay District map that requires protection as stipulated under various sections of this code, or may require special studies to determine the conditions under which limited development may be approved.

PRINEVILLE ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, ENVIRONMENTAL, AND ENERGY (ESEE) ANALYSIS. Means the analysis of economic, social, environmental and energy consequences of alternative levels of resource protection, adopted by the Prineville City Council as an appendix to the Prineville Comprehensive Plan.

PRINEVILLE NATURAL FEATURES INVENTORY (NFI). Means the inventory of significant natural features, showing required setback areas and impact areas, adopted by the Prineville City Council as an appendix to the Prineville Comprehensive Plan.

REQUIRED SETBACK AREA. Means the area between the edge of a significant natural feature itself and the setback line where development is prohibited. The setback line is measured horizontally from the boundary of the natural feature.

REVIEW AUTHORITY. Means the person or group making land use decisions on behalf of the City of Prineville. The review authority may be the Director, the Planning Commission, or City Council depending on the level of discretion and complexity of the application.

RIMROCK SETBACK. Means the area measured horizontally from the top-of-rimrock cliff or significant break in slope where development is prohibited.

RIPARIAN CORRIDOR (AREA). Means an area adjacent to a river, lake, or stream consisting of the area of transition from an aquatic ecosystem to a terrestrial ecosystem; the corridor includes water areas, fish habitat, and wetlands within this area.

RIPARIAN CORRIDOR BOUNDARY. Means an imaginary line that is a certain distance upland from the top-of-bank as specified in this document.

SIGNIFICANT NATURAL FEATURE. Means a natural feature as described and mapped in the Natural Features Inventory and mapped on the Prineville Zoning Map.

TOP-OF-BANK. Means the two-year recurrence interval flood elevation.

WATER-DEPENDENT OR RELATED USE. Means a use that requires location on or near a waterway to fulfill its basic purpose.

WETLAND DEFINITIONS.

(1) ASSOCIATED WETLAND. Means a significant wetland that appears on the Natural Features Inventory that is totally or partially located within 50 feet of the top-of-bank of a fish bearing river, creek or lake.

(2) ISOLATED WETLAND. Means a wetland that appears on the Natural Features Inventory that is not totally or partially located within 50 feet of the top-of-bank of a fish bearing river, creek or lake.

(Ord. 1165, passed 11-10-09)


155.030 EXEMPTIONS.

This section lists six exemptions from the provisions of this chapter.

(A) Maintenance of existing landscaping. Maintenance of existing ornamental landscaping or continuation of existing farming activities that were otherwise permitted prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be exempt from the requirements of the Natural Features Overlay District.

(B) Setback adjustments. In limited circumstances, required setbacks may be modified based on site-specific studies, as determined under the applicable standards of this chapter. Once a setback area adjustment has been approved by the Director, the applicant may proceed with development of the remainder of the property outside the adjusted setback area as provided under § 155.020.

(1) Improvements to river, creek or wetland function and wildlife habitat that are professionally designed and constructed may not cause an increase in the required setback from the original boundary of the surface water feature as stated in § 155.020(E), provided the improvements do not increase the risk of flooding and it is determined by the Director to meet the intent of the surface water setback.

(C) Master Plans. Public Facility Master Plans for Sanitary Sewer, Water, Storm Water, Streets or Parks and Recreation may be adopted with deviations to the standards of this chapter when found to be in the best interest of the public.

(D) Approved land use applications. Land use applications approved prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be subject to any city and Department of State Lands conditions of approval, but shall not be subject to further review under this chapter. This general exemption does not apply, however, to:

(1) Barnes Butte scenic area development and design standards (§ 155.090), which apply to land division and building permit applications that implement any approved outline development plans (ODP); or

(2) Land use approvals that have expired.

(3) If an applicant requests a modification to an approved ODP for the purpose of bringing it more into compliance with this chapter, then the ODP modification may be approved through a Type II (administrative with notice) procedure as long as it does not classify as a major modification as defined in subsection (D)(4) of this section.

(4) Major modifications to an ODP within the NFOD shall be subject to all limitations, standards and review criteria of this chapter. Major modifications include the following:

(a) Increase in overall density within the NFOD.

(b) Change in overall percent of uses within the NFOD (i.e., single-family residential, multifamily, commercial, open space, etc.). Other than changes consistent with subsection (D)(3) of this section.

(c) Change of the general street pattern within the NFOD other than that which is required by the City’s Standards and Specifications or consistent with subsection (D)(3) of this section.

(E) City development agreements. The provisions of any development agreement with the city approved prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall prevail over the provisions of this chapter, with the exception of any regulation related directly to public health and safety.

(F) Irrigation maintenance. Normal maintenance of drainage facilities, utilities and irrigation pumps is exempt from the provisions of this chapter.

(Ord. 1165, passed 11-10-09)


155.040 LAND USES AND REVIEW PROCEDURES ANYWHERE WITHIN THE NATURAL FEATURES OVERLAY DISTRICT.

This section lists uses, activities and determinations that may be permitted anywhere within the Natural Features Overlay District. Sections 155.060 through 155.090 refine the list of uses, activities and determinations, depending on the type of natural feature (surface water, wildlife habitat, scenic rimrock areas or the Barnes Butte scenic area). Review of development requests within the Natural Features Overlay District shall occur subject to the following procedures. Unless otherwise indicated below, the Director may approve Type I permits over the counter or following a field check. Type II and III development applications shall be reviewed to ensure consistency with recommendations in required special plans.

(A) Uses permitted under Type I procedure. The following uses, activities and determinations shall be reviewed under a Type I procedure (administrative review by the Director without public notice) anywhere within the Natural Features Overlay District:

(1) A determination that all or a portion of a property is within the Natural Features Overlay District boundary, pursuant to § 155.020(E).

(2) Planting of native plant species.

(3) Removal of permitted landfill.

(4) Removal of nonnative/invasive vegetation, or dead or dying vegetation that is hazardous to the public as determined by the Director. The Director may seek the advice of the City Engineer or a professional arborist in making a decision.

(5) Construction or expansion of major public facilities identified in Sanitary Sewer, Water, Storm Water and Street or Parks Master Plans or of minor public facilities necessary to support development, subject to the provisions of §§ 155.060 through 155.090, provided they are designed and constructed to minimize intrusion into a riparian area.

(6) Construction or expansion of pedestrian or equestrian trails as set forth in adopted Park and Recreation Master Plans, or as approved under a Type III procedure with public access, provided they are designed and constructed to minimize intrusion into a riparian area.

(B) Uses permitted under Type II procedure. The following uses, activities and determinations shall be reviewed under a Type II procedure (administrative review by staff with public notice and right of appeal to Planning Commission) anywhere within the NF Overlay District:

(1) Replacement of a lawfully existing building that does not further encroach into the Natural Features Overlay Zone provided there is no change of use and it is located outside a floodway. In the event that a structure cannot be replaced outside the floodway, the building and site shall be constructed as stated in § 151.22 with FEMA review.

(2) Repair and stabilization of unstable slopes. If emergency slope stabilization is required and authorized by the City Engineer, Type II review shall be required within 60 days of having taken the emergency action.

(3) Development requests that are similar in scope and impact to Type II uses listed above, as determined by the Director. The Director shall include the justification for the classification decision in the required notice to affected property owners.

(C) Type III procedure. In addition to its normal quasi-judicial review functions, the Planning Commission shall be responsible for reviewing appeals and referrals of Type II (Planning Director) decisions under Type III procedure (public hearing before Planning Commission with notice and right of appeal to City Council). Applications for planned unit developments and land divisions within the Barnes Butte primary and secondary scenic areas shall also be reviewed by the Planning Commission pursuant to § 155.090.

(D) Type IV procedure. Following a public hearing and recommendation from the Planning Commission, the City Council shall review legislative and quasi-judicial proposals to add or remove significant natural features identified in the Prineville Natural Features Inventory, or to amend the Prineville ESEE Analysis, the provisions of this chapter, or the Prineville Zoning Map.

(Ord. 1165, passed 11-10-09)


155.050 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS WITHIN THE NATURAL FEATURES OVERLAY DISTRICT.

In addition to other requirements of this code and required special studies, the applicant for alteration or development within the Natural Features Overlay District may be responsible for preparing a survey of the entire site, based on site-specific field surveys, that precisely maps and delineates the following areas:

(A) The Natural Features Overlay District boundary as it affects land within and adjacent to the subject property.

(B) All significant natural features within the Natural Features Overlay District boundary, including their respective impact areas and setback areas, as shown on the Natural Features Inventory and described § 155.010.

(C) The 100-year floodplain and floodway boundaries as determined by current FEMA floodplain maps or, if FEMA floodplain data are not available, based on the best available information.

(D) Existing and proposed contours at two-foot intervals, emphasizing slopes of 18% to 25% and slopes of 25% and greater.

(E) Native and nonnative vegetation, including trees or tree clusters and understory within the Natural Features Overlay District boundary. In areas with no proposed development, tree and understory canopy outlines may be shown, and species composition listed.

(F) Existing artificial features, including public rights-of-way, structures, roads and utilities.

(G) Proposed development, including the precise location and dimensions of any proposed development.

(Ord. 1165, passed 11-10-09)


155.060 SURFACE WATER FEATURES.

(A) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect and enhance significant surface water features and their respective riparian areas while allowing for efficient urban development outside required setback areas. To minimize impacts to the resource, planned unit developments and cluster developments are encouraged.


[IMAGE]


The eastern (upstream) reach of Ochoco Creek flows through grasslands and developed areas.

(B) Type I permitted uses. In addition to uses and activities listed in § 155.040, the following uses are permitted within surface water feature setback areas:

(1) Native landscaping such as trees, shrubs and grasses and limited access that does not alter the floodway by increasing elevations or diverting floodwaters.

(2) Fencing, decks, patios and public trails may be allowed within the required 50-foot setback of Ochoco Creek and associated wetlands on existing residential lots as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, provided they are outside the riparian area and not less than 25 feet from the top-of-bank.

(3) Fencing within dry wash/natural drainage setbacks (No. 9 in Table 155.1) that utilizes materials that do not restrict the natural flow of water or debris and which is located outside other identified resources.

(C) Type II permitted uses. The Director may approve the following permitted uses within surface water features and their respective setback areas under Type II procedure (review by the Director with public notice). Permitted uses listed below are subject to specific review standards in this section.

(1) Construction of water-dependent or water-related uses including necessary access.

(2) Construction, expansion or replacement of a new single-family residence within a required setback area on a legal lot as a hardship adjustment.

(3) Development requests that are similar in scope and impact to Type II uses listed above, as determined by the Director. The Director shall include the justification for the classification decision in the required notice to affected property owners.

(D) Type III permitted uses. The Planning Commission may approve alternative setbacks in cases where restoration projects increase the size of the resource. Such projects shall be professionally designed and constructed and have state or federal agency support.

(E) Required setback areas. At a minimum, setback areas shall be required to protect significant surface water features and their riparian areas from development impacts, and to protect approved development from potential natural hazards. Setbacks are measured horizontally from and parallel to the boundary of the protected surface water feature, as indicated in Table 155.1.

TABLE 155.1: REQUIRED SURFACE WATER SETBACK AREAS  

	Surface Water Feature	Location	Measured From	Distance

	Required Setback from Water Features

	1. Floodway	Within UGB	Flood Insurance Rate Map	As surveyed

	2. Crooked River	Outside city limits as of December 31, 2008	Top of river bank or edge of associated wetland	100 feet

	3. Hudspeth Reservoir	Within UGB	Ordinary high water line	100 feet

	4. Crooked River	Within city limits as of December 31, 2008	Top of river bank or edge of associated wetland	50 feet

	5. Ochoco Creek	Within entire UGB	Top of river bank or edge of associated wetland	50 feet

	6. Hudspeth Drainage	Within entire UGB	Top of river bank or edge of associated wetland	50 feet

	7. Ryegrass Drainage RG-B	Within entire UGB	Top of river bank or edge of isolated wetland	25 feet

	8. Isolated Wetland	Within entire UGB	Edge of wetland	25 feet

	9. Dry Wash/Natural Drainage	Within entire UGB	Centerline of ravine	50 feet

	10. NE Ryegrass Drainage	Within entire UGB	Centerline of ravine	50 feet

Figures 155.1 through 155.4 illustrate the required setbacks listed in Table 155.1.

Figure 155.1 Crooked River and Associated Wetland Setbacks
[IMAGE]


Figure 155.2 Ochoco Creek and Associated Wetland Setbacks
[IMAGE]


Figure 155.3 Hudspeth Reservoir and Dry Wash/Natural Drainage Setbacks
[IMAGE]


Figure 155.4 Isolated Wetlands
[IMAGE]


(F) Natural Features Inventory Map refinement process. The location of the Natural Features Overlay District was based on generalized maps for the Prineville urban area found in the Natural Features Inventory. This section provides a process for refining this generalized map based on site-specific, expert analysis.

(1) The precise location of some surface water features - and their respective setback areas - may be refined based on site-specific wetland delineations or engineering studies.

(2) Map refinements may be approved separately by the Director under Type II review procedure, or as part of a consolidated land use application. Map refinements do not require an amendment to the adopted Natural Features Inventory.

(3) Refinement of the location of an isolated or associated wetland shown in the Natural Features Inventory must be based on a formal wetland delineation and survey with written concurrence by the Department of State Lands.

(4) Refinement of the location of top-of-bank of a river, creek, drainage or ditch must be based on a survey prepared by a surveyor licensed by the State of Oregon.

(5) The City of Prineville will maintain a record of Natural Features Inventory Map refinements and will establish a regular schedule for updating the Prineville Zoning Map, through a quasi-judicial process, to incorporate new data and include annotations identifying local land use decision case number or Department of State Lands wetland delineation concurrence case number.

(G) Riparian corridor setback adjustments. Setback adjustment for common open space amenities including public trails, parks, covered areas, fenced areas, decks, patios, viewing areas and the like may be approved as part of any development under a Type III review procedure. Except for isolated wetland setbacks, the required setback distances in Table 155.1 may be reduced by not more than 50% when all of the following criteria are met:

(1) Alterations within the floodway shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge as certified by a registered professional civil engineer.

(2) Riparian vegetation within the majority of the required setback area on the subject property has been highly degraded, and the degradation resulted from lawful activities that took place before August 1, 2008. The required setback area is considered highly degraded if:

(a) The combination of existing structures, impervious surface areas, and nonnative (invasive) plant species occupies more than 50% of the required setback area; and

(b) The existing tree canopy covers less than 50% of the required setback area.

(3) The remaining setback area will be restored and enhanced with native plants, such that the riparian corridor will function at a substantially higher level than under current conditions.

(a) To address this criterion, the applicant shall be responsible for preparing a riparian vegetation restoration plan.

(b) The plan must be prepared by a landscape architect, botanist, arborist or other qualified professional accepted by the city with specific knowledge of native plant species, planting and maintenance methods, survival rates, and their ability to control erosion and sedimentation.

(c) The plan must provide for the planting and long-term maintenance of native plants within the remaining setback area - including trees, understory and herbaceous layers.

(d) The Planning Commission may incorporate selected measures as conditions of approval in the final decision.

(e) The applicant shall be responsible for replacing any native plant species that do not survive the first two years after planting, and for ensuring the survival of any replacement plants for an additional two years after their replacement. The city may require a bond or other assurances to guarantee compliance.

(f) The applicant shall grant a riparian corridor conservation easement to the city that covers the remaining setback area.

(H) Isolated wetland setback reductions. The required 25-foot setback for isolated wetlands shown on the Natural Features Inventory may be reduced by the Planning Commission under a Type III review process based on a formal delineation with Department of State Lands concurrence.

(I) General development standards. Uses listed in §155.040 and this section, and permitted under Type II procedure, must meet the following standards:

(1) As a general standard, native vegetation shall be preserved and enhanced - and excavation avoided or minimized - within significant surface water features and their required setback areas.

(2) The applicant must demonstrate that no practical alternatives exist for the proposed use outside of the protected surface water feature or its required setback area, and that the site selected has the least impact on water quality, water storage capacity, wildlife habitat and native vegetation.

(3) The applicant shall prepare an impact mitigation plan that considers potential adverse impacts to water quality, water storage capacity, wildlife habitat and native vegetation, and recommends effective mitigation measures.

(4) The Director may contract with a third-party expert to review the application and impact mitigation report and make recommendations, at the applicant’s expense, to reduce identified adverse impacts.

(5) The Director shall incorporate selected measures as conditions of approval in a decision to approve the application.

(J) Hardship adjustment for a single-family home on an existing legal lot. This option applies in situations where it is impossible to construct a usable home on an existing legal lot, in a zone that allows residential uses, due to surface water setback regulations. All of the following standards must be met to grant a special hardship adjustment to allow construction or expansion of a single-family home within a surface water feature setback area required by the Natural Features Overlay District:

(1) The applicant must demonstrate that the lot has received planning approval from either Crook County or the City of Prineville and that there is insufficient buildable land on the same lot to allow the proposed construction or expansion.

(2) All other applicable standards of this chapter and the City of Prineville’s Development Code have been fully satisfied.

(3) The residence or addition has been sited so as to:

(a) Minimize excavation and disturbance to native vegetation in the required setback area; and

(b) Be as far as reasonably possible from the surface water feature itself, but in no case closer than 25 feet or within the floodway.

(4) The maximum impervious surface coverage resulting from development within the restricted development area shall be 2,000 square feet.

(5) The option of an adjustment under § 155.110 has been considered as a means of avoiding or minimizing impacts on restricted development areas.

(6) Development shall not result in cuts or fills in excess of three feet except for basement construction unless approved by the Director under Type II procedure.

(K) Hardship adjustment for a commercial use on an existing legal lot. This option applies in situations where it is impossible to construct a viable commercial building on an existing legal lot, in a zone that allows commercial uses, due to surface water setback regulations. For the purpose of hardship adjustments, a usable commercial building shall be determined by the Planning Commission under a Type III review. The required setback distances in Table 155.1 may be reduced by not more than 50% when all of the following criteria are met:

(1) All other applicable standards of this chapter and City of Prineville’s Development Code have been fully satisfied.

(2) The commercial building and parking areas have been sited so as to:

(a) Minimize excavation and disturbance to native vegetation in the required setback area;

(b) Be as far as reasonably possible from the surface water feature itself; and

(c) Comply with the riparian corridor adjustment standards in subsection (G) of this section.

(3) The option of an adjustment under § 155.110 has been considered as a means of avoiding or minimizing impacts on restricted development areas.

(4) Development shall not result in cuts or fills in excess of three feet.

(L) Riparian area restoration. Riparian area restoration is encouraged. Restoration above top-of-bank or edge of wetland must follow the recommendations of a riparian restoration plan approved under Type I procedure by the Director. This plan must be prepared by specialists in the fields of stream morphology, water quality and riparian vegetation approved by the Director. Restoration below top-of-bank or within a wetland shall be approved by the appropriate state and federal agencies.

(1) The plan shall include monitoring provisions over a two-year period to ensure long-term plant survival.

(2) The plan must achieve at least one of the following objectives:

(a) Remove invasive vegetation and replace it with multi-layered native vegetation that provides for stream shading along the stream bank;

(b) Reduce the steepness of the bank along sections that have been highly eroded.

(Ord. 1165, passed 11-10-09)


155.070 WILDLIFE HABITAT.

(A) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect significant wildlife habitat areas associated with surface water features and their respective setback areas, within steeply sloped portions of the Barnes Butte scenic area, and within rimrock scenic areas. This section also includes standards to identify and mitigate impacts from development near inventoried raptor nesting sites.


[IMAGE]


Prairie falcons nest on Barnes Butte.

(B) Permitted uses. Permitted uses within identified wildlife habitat areas depend on where the wildlife habitat is located.

(1) Uses permitted in wildlife habitat associated with surface water features and their respective setback areas are those listed in §§ 155.040 and 155.060.

(2) Uses permitted in wildlife habitat within the rimrock slope setback, top-of-rimrock setback and on slopes of 25% or greater within the Barnes Butte scenic areas are those listed in § 155.040, except as provided in § 155.080(E).

(3) Uses permitted in the habitat raptor nesting impact areas are those listed in the underlying zoning district, but are subject to the provisions of this section.

(C) Required setback areas. There are no special wildlife habitat setback areas. See §§ 155.060 and 155.080 for surface water resource and rimrock setback requirements.

(D) Native vegetation. Native vegetation provides high desert wildlife habitat and shall be protected:

(1) Within significant surface water features and their setback areas;

(2) Within raptor nest impact areas, where recommended by the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife (ODFW);

(3) On slopes of 18% or greater within the Barnes Butte primary and secondary scenic areas; and

(4) Within significant rimrock scenic areas shown on the Natural Features Inventory.

(E) Wildlife habitat impact mitigation plan. If development is proposed within protected wildlife habitat areas described in subsection (B) of this section, a wildlife habitat impact mitigation plan shall identify adverse impacts from proposed development on wildlife habitat, and recommend measures to mitigate such impacts.

(1) The wildlife habitat impact mitigation plan shall be prepared by a wildlife biologist with expertise in high desert wildlife conditions.

(2) If the use is permitted under Type II procedure, the Director may incorporate selected measures, as conditions of approval, in the decision to approve the application.

(3) If the use is permitted as part of a consolidated Type III land use application, the Planning Commission - should it decide to approve the application - may incorporate selected measures as conditions of approval.

(F) Raptor nest impact area review criteria. An applicant proposing to develop land within a quarter mile of an inventoried raptor nesting site shall coordinate with ODFW in the preparation of a wildlife habitat impact mitigation plan. The plan shall be prepared using the best available science, prior to submitting a development application. The plan shall include measures that minimize the likelihood of nesting site disturbance or abandonment by considering the following potentially adverse impacts from:

(1) Construction activities during the nesting season;

(2) Impacts from new roads, driveways, and public trails;

(3) The loss of existing vegetation or other landscape features that obscure the view of the nest from the proposed development;

(4) Land divisions and permanent urban development; and

(5) Exterior lighting.

(G) Raptor nest impact mitigation plan review process. If the applicant and ODFW reach agreement on an effective impact mitigation plan, the Director shall approve the plan under Type I procedure and condition development approval on compliance with mitigation recommendations in the plan.

(1) If the applicant and ODFW do not reach agreement on the plan, the Director shall:

(a) Contract with a third-party wildlife biologist, at the applicant’s expense, to review the matter and make recommendations regarding effective measures to address subsections (F)(1) through (5) of this section; and

(b) Refer the matter to the Planning Commission for review under Type III procedure.

(Ord. 1165, passed 11-10-09)


155.080 RIMROCK SCENIC AREA.

(A) Purpose. The Prineville Comprehensive Plan recognizes the critical importance that the rimrock plays in defining community character and livability. The purpose of this section is to protect scenic rimrock and sloped areas from adverse visual impacts resulting from development on or above the face of the rimrock bluff and the slope below. This section also includes standards to protect development from rock fall, erosion and slide hazards.
[IMAGE]


The Crooked River Rimrocks provide a dramatic southern backdrop to the city.

(B) Rimrock setback areas. The setback from the top-of-rimrock is incorporated into this section from existing city and county (Ordinance 18, Section 4.210) regulations. Table 155.2 summarizes the top-of-rimrock and rimrock slope setbacks. The top-of-rimrock and rimrock slope setback areas are mapped on the Prineville Natural Features Inventory.

TABLE 155.2: RIMROCK SETBACK AREAS  

	Natural Feature	Location	Measured From	Distance

	Top-of-Rimrock Setback Area

	Rimrock	Within entire UGB	Top-of-rimrock cliff or significant break in slope (~25% slope)	200 feet

	Rimrock Slope Setback Area

	Rimrock and slope	Within entire UGB	Top-of-rimrock cliff or significant break in slope (~25% slope)	500 feet

Figures 155.5 and 155.6 illustrate rimrock setback areas shown on Table 155.2.

Figure 155.5 Top-of-Rimrock and Rimrock Slope Setback (Defined Rimrock)
[IMAGE]


Figure 155.6 Top-of-Rimrock and Rimrock Slope Setback (No Defined Rimrock)
[IMAGE]


(1) Mapping. The top-of-rimrock was mapped using aerial photography. In some cases a defined top-of-rimrock does not exist. Where gaps occurred the top-of-rimrock line was determined as measured from top to bottom; where a significant break in slope occurred at ~25% or greater (Figure 155.6.) The break in slope was determined using aerial photography, five-foot contour intervals and ten-meter Digital Elevation Models.

(2) Setback adjustments.

(a) Top-of-rimrock line. Adjustments may be approved separately under a Type III review procedure, or as part of a consolidated land use application reviewed by the Planning Commission. An applicant shall submit a map prepared by a surveyor licensed by the State of Oregon delineating the top-of-rimrock or proposed break in slope versus the mapped Natural Features Overlay District boundary. The line shall not be moved if it is determined by the Planning Commission to circumvent the purpose of the setback.

(b) Rimrock slope setback. The city recognizes that in some cases where the slope is very steep, a 500-foot setback will include the entire slope and some ground beyond the slope. Unless otherwise determined by an Urban Growth Boundary Expansion the following shall apply:

1. Development below the base of slope clearly outside the resource will be reviewed as required by the underlying zone and not subject to the setback. Development on the slope shall be reviewed under a Type III procedure to consider the scenic value.

(C) Permitted uses. Are those listed in § 155.040 as uses permitted under Type I and II procedure and are subject to development standards in this section.

(1) Uses permitted by the Planning Commission as an exception or variance to the required setback subject to the development standards in this section.

(D) Development exceptions.

(1) Within 200-foot top-of-rimrock setback. The following exception may be approved through a Type III review by the Planning Commission:

(a) Communication facilities operated for the sole use of public agencies.

(2) Within 500-foot rimrock slope setback. The following exception may apply:

(a) Development on land within the last 300 feet (Figures 155.5 and 155.6) on slopes of less than 18% shall be approved as a variance under a Type III review process. Scarring from roads, driveways and other infrastructure shall be minimized to the greatest extent possible and considered a high priority in the review of such a development. Development shall be subject to the following:

1. Recommendations of a geotechnical study prepared by a registered engineer licensed in the State of Oregon.

2. The study shall, at a minimum, consider slope stability on the slope and the potential for structural damage or personal injury resulting from slides, erosion and rock fall.

3. The study shall also include recommended mitigation measures.

4. The development shall be subject to the design and development standards for secondary scenic areas set forth in § 155.090, Barnes Butte scenic area.

(3) Additions. Additions to existing homes or new accessory structures within the rimrock slope setback may be permitted without a geological study; provided, that the property owner signs and records a waiver holding the city harmless from future damage to persons or property resulting from slides, erosion or rock fall.

(E) Development standards.

(1) If a use is permitted under Type II procedure, the Director shall incorporate selected measures, as conditions of approval, in the decision to approve the application.

(2) If a use is permitted as part of a consolidated Type III land use application, the Planning Commission - should it decide to approve the application - shall incorporate selected measures as conditions of approval.

(F) Hardship adjustment for an otherwise unbuildable legal lot. This option applies in situations where it is impossible to construct a usable home on an existing legal lot, in a zone that allows residential uses, due to the 500-foot rimrock slope setback. All of the following standards must be met to grant a special hardship adjustment to allow construction or expansion of up to one single-family home for every five acres of restricted area required by the Natural Features Overlay District:

(1) The applicant must demonstrate that the lot has received planning approval from either Crook County or the City of Prineville and that there is insufficient buildable land on the same lot to allow the proposed construction or expansion.

(2) All other applicable standards of this chapter have been fully satisfied.

(3) The home has been sited, or the homes have been clustered, in areas with stable slopes of less than 30%.

(4) Excavation for roads, utilities and home construction has been designed and located so as to minimize:

(a) Impacts to scenic views; and

(b) Potential slide hazards and rock fall impacts, consistent with the recommendations of the required geotechnical study.

(5) The maximum impervious surface coverage resulting from each permitted house within restricted development areas shall be 2,000 square feet.

(6) The option of an adjustment under § 155.110 has been considered as a means of avoiding or minimizing impacts on restricted development areas.

(Ord. 1165, passed 11-10-09)


155.090 BARNES BUTTE SCENIC AREA.

(A) Purpose. Barnes Butte defines Prineville’s eastern boundary and serves as a scenic backdrop for the entire community. The purpose of this section is to protect this signature scenic feature while allowing for carefully planned urban development on moderate slopes (as defined in this section) inside the Urban Growth Boundary. The Natural Features Inventory identifies two levels of scenic significance (primary and secondary) that require two levels of protection.
[IMAGE]


The view from the south and west shows Barnes Butte rising abruptly from the valley as a coherent and continuous landmass.

(B) Boundaries defined. Elevation lines depicted on the Barnes Butte resource map are five-foot intervals provided by Crook County GIS. The primary boundary shall be defined by the 3,225-foot elevation line as shown on the resource map. The secondary boundary shall be defined by the 3,100-foot elevation line for the northwest, north, east and south facing boundaries. The west facing secondary boundary along the impact area shall be defined by the 3,200-foot elevation line as shown on the resource map.

(1) The points of transition from 3,100 to 3,200 elevation lines shall be defined as follows:

(a) Northern transition. At the termination point of the 3,100 elevation line (T14 R16 ~1,872 feet east from the NW corner of Section 33) move east to the termination point of the 3,200 elevation line (T14 R16 ~2,260 feet east from the NW corner of Section 33).

(b) Southern transition. At the termination point of the 3,100 elevation line (T14 R16 ~4,535 feet south and ~3,604 feet east from the NW corner of Section 33) move east to the termination point of the 3,200 elevation line (T14 R16 ~4,400 feet south and ~4,255 feet east from the NW corner of Section 33).

(C) Permitted and discretionary uses. Permitted uses in the Barnes Butte primary and secondary scenic areas are those authorized by an approved outline development plan and uses listed in § 155.040. Development is limited by development and design standards in subsection (E) of this section.

(1) Outline development plans and land divisions shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission under Type III procedure.

(2) The design and placement of individual buildings and structures in the primary and secondary scenic area shall be reviewed by the Director under Type I procedure.

(D) Special reports required. Where development is proposed within the Barnes Butte primary or secondary scenic area, the Director shall require submission of one or more of the following special reports prepared by experts in their respective fields. These reports shall be in addition to other information required for specific types of development. The Director may exempt Type I and II permit applications from one or more of these reports where the impacts are minimal and the exemption is consistent with the purpose of the Natural Features Overlay District as stated in § 155.000.

(1) Hydrology and soils report. This report shall include information on the hydrological conditions on the site, the effect of hydrologic conditions on the proposed development, the proposed development’s impact on surface and ground water flows to wetlands and streams, and any hydrological or erosion hazards. This report shall also include soils characteristics of the site, their suitability for development, carrying capacity, and erosion or slumping characteristics that might present a hazard to life and property, or adversely affect the use or stability of a public facility or utility. Finally, this report shall include information on the nature, distribution and strength of existing soils; the adequacy of the site for development purposes; and an assessment of grading procedures required to impose the minimum disturbance to the natural state. A licensed professional engineer registered in Oregon shall prepare the hydrology and soils report.

(2) Grading plan. All site development and building construction proposed within the Barnes Butte scenic area shall submit grading plans which demonstrate a general conformance to existing topography. The grading plan shall be specific to a proposed physical structure(s) or use(s) and shall include information on terrain (two-foot intervals of property), drainage, direction of drainage flow, location of proposed structures and existing structures which may be affected by the proposed grading operations, water quality facilities, finished contours or elevations, including all cut and fill slopes, and proposed drainage channels. Project designs including but not limited to locations of roads, utilities surface and subsurface devices, walls, dams, sediment basins, storage reservoirs, and other protective devices shall form part of the submission. The grading plan shall also include a construction phase erosion control plan and schedule of operations. A licensed professional civil engineer registered in Oregon shall prepare the grading and erosion control plan. The City Engineer shall review and approve the grading plan.

(3) Native vegetation report. This report shall consist of a survey of existing vegetative cover, whether it is native or introduced, and how it will be altered by the proposed development. Measures for re-vegetation with native plant species will be clearly stated, as well as methods for immediate and long-term stabilization of slopes and control of soil erosion. A landscape architect, botanist, arborist, or other qualified professional accepted by the city with specific knowledge of native plant species, planting and maintenance methods, survival rates, and their ability to control erosion and sedimentation shall prepare the vegetation report. The applicant shall be responsible for replacing any native plant species that do not survive the first two years after planting, and for ensuring the survival of any replacement plants for an additional two years after their replacement.

(E) Barnes Butte scenic area development and design standards. The following standards apply to site development and building construction in the Barnes Butte primary and secondary scenic areas, as mapped on the Natural Features Inventory. The standards in subsection (E)(4) of this section may be modified by the Planning Commission, based on required studies and a joint finding by the City Engineer and Director, that the change will reduce adverse scenic impacts without increasing risks from slide or erosion hazards.

(1) Development intensity and spacing.

(a) Unless otherwise permitted by an outline development plan approved prior to August 1, 2008, residential development shall not exceed a density of two units per gross acre in the secondary scenic area; or one unit per gross acre in the primary scenic area.

(b) For lots with frontage on primarily north-south streets (i.e., lots facing southwest, west and northwest that are visible from key viewing areas in Prineville):

1. Buildings and above ground structures shall occupy less than 50% of the cumulative width of the lot or block, as measured along the lineal street frontage; and

2. As part of any land division, building envelopes shall be placed on each lot to ensure this result.

(c) Accessory buildings and structures shall be screened with noninvasive vegetation and shall meet applicable design and development standards of this section.

(d) The maximum building coverage on any lot shall not exceed 3,500 square feet.

(2) Height limit.

(a) The maximum allowed height of any structure shall be:

1. City of Prineville (figure 155.7).

a. Thirty-five feet in the secondary scenic area.

b. Thirty feet in the primary scenic area.

2. Crook County (figure 155.7).

a. Twenty-four feet in the secondary scenic area.

b. Eighteen feet in the primary scenic area.

3. Building height shall be determined by the vertical distance from any point on the top of the roof to the natural grade directly below that point of the roof.

a. Backfilling shall not affect the building height calculation.

Figure 155.7 Method to Measure Height
[IMAGE]


(3) Slope restriction.

(a) Development on slopes of 18% or greater shall be subject to a geological analysis prepared by a licensed engineering geologist and/or geotechnical engineer and approved by the City Engineer.

(b) Except for uses permitted under § 155.040, development shall be prohibited on slopes of 25% or greater.

(4) Grading and drainage. All site development and lot grading shall be designed to follow the natural contours of the hillside while minimizing disturbance to natural topography and vegetation.

(a) Grading plans shall clearly define surface drainage controls and mitigation measures. Such measures may include vegetated swales (i.e., vegetated shallow depressions designed to catch surface drainage) and catch basins for both the construction and permanent conditions.

1. Both existing and finished grades must be represented on each site plan, and each exterior elevation submitted for review.

2. Grading plans shall include provisions for restoration of vegetation on cuts and fills. All manufactured slopes shall be planted with native, fire-resistant, drought-tolerant plantings to control erosion.

(b) Hard edges left by cut and fill operations shall be contoured to match the natural terrain, and manufactured slopes adjacent to driveways and roadways should be modulated by re-grading and landscaping to create natural appearing streetscapes.

1. The angle of any graded slope must be gradually transitioned to the angle of the natural terrain.

2. Creation of new graded slopes which are more than 25% steeper than local natural slopes shall be minimized.

(c) All grading shall employ low-impact development design strategies.

1. Graded areas shall not be larger than the area of the footprint of the house, plus that area necessary to accommodate pedestrian and vehicle circulation and parking.

2. Unless otherwise specifically approved by the City Engineer, cut and fill slopes shall be no steeper than two horizontal to one vertical and fill slopes shall not be placed on natural slopes steeper than 2:1.

(d) Cut and fill requirements are intended to ensure that new construction retains the existing landform of the site and follows natural contours. Table 155.3 below indicates the maximum graded cuts and fills permitted throughout the primary and secondary scenic area.

TABLE 155.3 MAXIMUM GRADED  CUTS AND FILLS IN THE PRIMARY RESOURCE AREA

	Site Element	Cut	Fill

	House and attached garage	8'	3'

	Accessory uses	4'	3'

(e) All fill shall be compacted to standards approved by the City Engineer.

(f) After construction, all disturbed areas shall be restored as closely as possible to their original (pre-development) state to minimize erosion.

(g) To decrease erosion and loss of wildlife habitat, post-development storm water runoff from the site must not exceed pre-development runoff. Permanent storm water controls such as vegetated swales, check dams, storm water planters, cisterns, rain barrels, and rain gardens should be installed to capture and treat runoff from the site.

(5) Driveways and parking.

(a) The maximum slope of a driveway shall not exceed 15% unless it can be demonstrated that a flatter driveway cannot be constructed without excessive grading (more than four feet of cut or three feet of fill).

(b) Driveways serving a single residence shall have a maximum width of 12 feet.

To retain existing views and minimize cuts and fills, flexible street standards allowing narrow streets, sidewalks on one side of the street, parking bays and one-way loop systems may be required and/or approved by the review authority.

(6) Materials, colors and architectural elements. Buildings including roofs and accessory structures shall use earth tone materials that complement colors found in native plants, soils and rocks in the area.

(a) Exterior windows, trim, and other exterior building materials (including gutters, downspouts, and flashing) shall be nonreflective.

1. Exterior colors shall blend with the natural vegetation.

2. Mirror-like window tinting is prohibited.

(b) The following materials are approved for use on exterior walls and trims:

1. Wood (treated with semi-transparent or solid body stains or paints).

2. Lap cement-based siding.

3. Brick, natural and cultured stone - medium to dark colors.

4. Textured masonry block must be of medium to dark colors.

5. Earth toned stucco and synthetic stucco.

(c) All exterior metals and plastics (vents, flashing, gutters, etc.) must be screened from view, painted or treated to blend in with the adjacent surrounding material.

(d) Roofs shall include a vegetated roof or be a neutral earth tone color that blends with the environment. Slate and concrete tiles, concrete and wood simulated shakes, and composition roofing are considered acceptable roofing applications. Exposed metal surfaces shall be painted to complement adjacent materials or be anodized a dark color. Wood shakes and shingles shall not be permitted due to fire danger.

(e) The slope of the main roof shall generally be oriented in the same direction as the natural slope of the terrain.

(7) Outdoor lighting. Outdoor lighting standards are intended to maintain views of the night sky above Barnes Butte.

(a) Street lights are prohibited in the primary and secondary scenic areas.

(b) Lighting shall not be directed onto adjacent property.

Figure 155.8 Lighting Standards
[IMAGE]


(8) Accessory buildings, pools, sport courts, and other.

(a) Accessory buildings shall be integrated with the natural topography of the site and shall be compatible with other buildings by use of similar forms, colors, and materials.

(b) Swimming pools, sports courts, greenhouses, hot tubs and other similar facilities are required to be screened from the public view. No structure of a temporary character (i.e., trailer, tent, shack, garage, barn or other outbuilding) shall be permitted.

(c) Water features shall be integrated as part of the landscape and have a natural appearance. Water features in front yards are prohibited, unless they are integrated into the required site drainage.

(9) Trash and utilities.

(a) Utilities. All connections from trunk lines to individual structures must be underground; exposed plumbing, electrical, and all other utilities and services are prohibited. All areas of excavation for site utility work must be restored to their natural state or landscaped. All exposed equipment shall be painted to match the adjacent exterior house color.

(b) Communication facilities. Communication facilities are not allowed within the primary area. Public agency facilities are allowed in the secondary area through a Type III review procedure provided they are within the height limit identified in subsection (E)(2)(a)(1) of this section, are indistinguishable from the surrounding area and the applicant demonstrates substantial need for the location of the facility in the proposed area.

(10) Architectural elements.

(a) The slope of the main roof shall generally be oriented in the same direction as the natural slope of the terrain.

(11) Required within recorded CC&Rs.

(a) Landscape design.

1. One native plant or tree shall be planted for every 200 square feet of disturbed lot area.

2. In the primary scenic area:

a. Formal gardens and turf areas shall be limited to locations immediately adjacent to the house; and

b. Vegetation located further than 30 feet from the primary residence shall be native and appropriate for the immediate natural habitat.

(b) Driveways and parking.

1. Homes may have no more than two attached garage bays facing in a southwest, west or northwest direction. The maximum height of a garage door is eight feet unless screened from public view.

(c) Architectural elements.

1. Skylight glazing material shall be selected to reduce glare. Clear, bronze or gray glazing is permitted. White or other colored skylights are prohibited. Flat skylights are permitted but domes shall not be allowed on any roof visible from public view.

2. Exterior structural supports and undersides of floors and decks not enclosed by walls are prohibited unless it is demonstrated that no alternative type of construction is feasible and that fire safety and aesthetic considerations have been adequately addressed.

3. The slope of the main roof shall generally be oriented in the same direction as the natural slope of the terrain.

4. Awnings shall fit window bays to blend with or augment the architectural character of the building. Awnings must be constructed of material selected to complement the body color of the building and are only allowed at ground floor elevations. No stripes or patterns shall be permitted. Earth tone metal, wood or fabrics are acceptable awning materials.

5. All exterior chimney chases surrounding flues shall be of wood, stone or brick. A chimney chase and shroud, large enough to completely cover the metal fireplace flue, shall be required. The chimney chase, flue and shroud shall be painted to match surrounding materials, eliminating the glare from the raw flue and sheet metal, as unfinished metal flues are not permitted. If a chimney chase and shroud are used on a gas fireplace vent, it too must be built and painted to the same standards as chimney chases and shrouds.

6. Flagpoles shall not exceed the height of the primary building. Flags shall not exceed 24 square feet.

7. All exterior elements of heating and/or cooling systems must be screened from the view of neighboring building sites, residences and roadways and must limit noise transmission to acceptable levels (per Department of Environmental Quality administrative rules) at adjoining properties. Materials used to screen HVAC systems shall match or complement adjacent building materials. Landscaping alone is adequate to screen HVAC systems.

8. Except for dish TV receivers and television antennas of not more than three feet in diameter, no exterior satellite receivers or transmitters, radio antennas, or other receiving device shall be placed on any building or structure.

(d) Fences and walls. Fences and walls shall be limited to building materials approved for home siding in subsection (E)(6) of this section.

1. Temporary construction fencing shall be limited to the building envelope or shall be elevated to allow for movement of small animals. Permanent chain link fences are prohibited.

2. In the primary scenic area, fences and walls shall not exceed a height of four feet measured from the highest side of the fence or wall and shall be limited to those areas where fences and walls of this height are necessary for protection of landscaping, security, or play areas.

(e) Retaining walls. Retaining walls shall blend with the natural topography and follow existing contours to the greatest extent possible.

1. Retaining walls shall not be used to create large, flat yard areas. The limited use of retaining walls may be allowed when it can be demonstrated that their use will substantially reduce the amount of grading.

2. Retaining walls that are visible from a public street shall have a veneer of natural stone, stained concrete or textured surface to help blend the wall with the natural hillside environment. Retaining walls shall be constructed of permanent materials (stone, concrete, masonry block or brick). Wood is prohibited.

3. Retaining walls shall not be higher than five feet. Where an additional retained portion is necessary due to unusual or extreme conditions (e.g., lot configuration, steep slope, or road design), the use of multiple-terraced, low elevation retaining structures is preferred.

4. Terraced retaining walls shall be separated by at least three feet and include appropriate landscaping.

5. Retaining and planter walls shall be provided with a landscaped buffer of at least five feet adjacent to the right-of-way.

6. Retaining walls shall not run in a straight continuous direction for more than 30 feet without a break, offset, or planting pocket to break up the long flat horizontal surface.

7. Landscaping shall be provided adjacent to retaining walls and shall include a combination of native trees and shrubs to screen the wall.

(f) Outdoor lighting.

1. All exterior and outdoor lighting fixtures shall use full cutoff fixtures (shielded). A full cutoff or shielded "fixture" is one that directs light downwards so that no direct light rays are emitted at more than 90 degrees from the vertical.

2. Landscape lighting shall be shielded and low lying (below four feet) and low wattage (50 watts for incandescent and fluorescent lighting, 25 watts for halogen, ten watts for metal halide, and one watt for LED lighting).

3. Lighting for purely decorative purposes is prohibited except for holiday lighting.

4. Up-lighting of trees, lighting of facades and architectural features is prohibited.

5. Security lighting shall be controlled by motion detectors.

(Ord. 1165, passed 11-10-09)


155.100 DENSITY TRANSFER (ON SAME LOT).

Residential density transfer from one portion of a lot to another may be approved by the Planning Commission under Type III procedure as prescribed in this section.

(A) Required setback areas. Resident density may be transferred from density transfer areas (protected areas of the site) to density receiving areas (buildable portions of the site).

(1) Density transfer areas include required natural feature setback areas, land with slopes of 18% or greater, buildable Barnes Butte primary and secondary scenic areas, and land within the 100-year floodplain.

(2) Density receiving areas include buildable land that is outside of:

(a) The Barnes Butte primary and secondary scenic areas;

(b) Other natural features and their respective setback or impact areas;

(c) The 100-year floodplain;

(d) Designated wetlands; and

(e) Areas with slopes of 18% or more.

(B) Density transfer limitations. The maximum gross density for the receiving area of the site shall not exceed 150% of the maximum density otherwise allowed by the underlying zoning district for that receiving area.

(1) The Planning Commission may approve lot size reductions within the receiving area as a cluster development to accommodate allowable density transfer outside the planned unit development (PUD) process.

(2) Housing types not otherwise permitted in the underlying zoning district may only be approved through the PUD (planned unit development) process.

(C) Consolidated application required. Transfer of density may only occur from transfer areas to receiving areas on sites that are subject to a consolidated development application.

(D) Recordation. As a condition of approval for density transfer, the Planning Commission shall require that the property owner(s) record:

(1) A conservation easement to the city for land within the transfer area and any adjoining natural feature on the site; and

(2) A document clearly stating the housing types and density permitted in the receiving area as a result of approved density transfer.

(Ord. 1165, passed 11-10-09)


155.110 UNDERLYING ZONE ADJUSTMENT PROCESS.

The purpose of this section is to allow for adjustments to dimensional standards of the underlying zoning district or this chapter that benefit significant natural features and thereby further the purposes of the Natural Features Overlay District. This section allows flexibility where necessary to reduce adverse impacts from development on surface water features, wildlife habitat, scenic areas, and natural hazards.

(A) Adjustment option. The Director or Planning Commission may approve adjustments to dimensional standards of the underlying zoning district or the Natural Features Overlay District as provided in this section. One or more adjustments to the dimensional standards of the underlying zoning district may be approved to allow development that meets the adjustment criteria in subsection (D) of this section.

(B) Setback and use adjustments not permitted. Adjustments or variances to this chapter’s setback or use provisions are not permitted.

(1) Adjustments to surface water feature setbacks are addressed in § 155.060.

(2) Hardship adjustments for an individual home on a lot of record in surface water and rimrock setback areas are addressed in §§ 155.060 and 155.080.

(C) Procedure. Adjustments are reviewed under the procedure type applicable to the primary application.

(D) Adjustment criteria. A special natural features adjustment may be requested where development is proposed on land within the Natural Features Overlay District. The applicant for such an adjustment must demonstrate that the following criteria are satisfied:

(1) On balance, the adjustment results in a net benefit to the impacted natural feature, as defined by the purpose section of the applicable standard from which the adjustment is proposed.

(2) The adjustment is the minimum necessary to allow or site a permitted use, while minimizing disturbance to the natural feature itself and adjoining land within the required setback areas or impact areas.

(3) Explicit consideration shall be given to:

(a) Maximizing native vegetative cover;

(b) Minimizing excavation;

(c) Minimizing adverse impacts on views;

(d) Minimizing impervious surface area; and

(e) Neighbor impact.

(4) Design and siting options have been considered to reduce the impacts of development. The Director or Planning Commission may require the applicant to specifically address options that the applicant may not have considered.

(5) Assurances are in place to guarantee that future development will not encroach further onto the natural feature itself, required setbacks or impact areas under the same ownership.

(6) The Planning Commission or Director may impose any reasonable condition necessary to mitigate impacts resulting from development on otherwise restricted development areas.

(Ord. 1165, passed 11-10-09)


155.120 SLOPE HAZARD REQUIREMENTS.

(A) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect existing and future residences of the City of Prineville and the city itself from the hazards of development on slopes greater than 18%, while allowing for efficient urban development within these areas.

(B) Slope hazard impact areas. Those areas of the City of Prineville that are on slopes 18% or greater.

(C) Permitted uses. Those uses allowed within the underlying zone and/or the Natural Features Overlay District (NFOD) as set forth in this chapter.

(D) Development standards.

(1) Any development on slopes greater than 18% shall be subject to the recommendations of a geotechnical study prepared by a registered professional engineer. The property owner shall also sign and record a waiver against the property holding the City of Prineville harmless from future damage to persons or property resulting from earthquakes, landslides, erosion or rock fall.

(Ord. 1165, passed 11-10-09)


155.130 ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES.

(A) For enforcement procedure refer to the applicable jurisdictional land use enforcement code.

(1) Crook County Enforcement Ordinance.

(2) City of Prineville Chapter 153 enforcement and remedies.

(Ord. 1165, passed 11-10-09) CHAPTER 156: RECEIVERSHIP
Section

156.01    Title, purpose, and scope; findings

156.02    Definitions

156.03    Authority

156.04    Selection of properties

156.05    Notice to interested parties and application

156.06    Selection of receivers

156.07    Powers of a receiver

156.08    Plan and estimate

156.09    Recordkeeping

156.10    Purchasing

156.11    Lien enforcement; city agency or department as receiver; foreclosure

156.01 TITLE, PURPOSE, AND SCOPE; FINDINGS.Share
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Housing Receivership Ordinance of the City of Prineville.” The purpose of this chapter is to establish the authority and procedures for the use of the Oregon Housing Receivership Act (ORS 105.420 to 105.455), and shall apply to all residential property. The remedies provided for in this chapter shall be in addition to any other remedy set out in this code. In addition to the Oregon Legislature’s findings set out at ORS 105.420, the City Council specially finds that properties in violation of the Act create an undue risk of harm to the city’s public safety officers and firefighters responding to calls at these properties, as well as neighboring citizens. The Council declares that the health, safety and welfare of citizens, public safety officers and firefighters are promoted by adopting and implementing the Housing Receivership Ordinance of the City of Prineville.

(Ord. 1260, passed 6-9-20)

156.02 DEFINITIONS.Share
ABATEMENT. The removal or correction of any condition at a property including demolition that violates a provision of a city building or housing code, as well as the making of other such improvements or corrections as are needed to effect the rehabilitation of the property or structure, but not including the closing or physical securing of the structure.

BUILDING OR HOUSING CODE. Any city law, ordinance or regulation concerning habitability or the construction, maintenance, operation, occupancy, use or appearance of any property.

INTERESTED PARTY. Any person or entity that possesses any legal or equitable interest of record in the property, including but not limited to the holder of any lien or encumbrance of record on the property.

PROPERTY. Any real property and all improvements thereon including edifices, structures, buildings, units or part thereof used or intended to be used for residential purpose including single-family, duplex, multifamily, and mixed-use structures which have one or more residential units.

(Ord. 1260, passed 6-9-20)

156.03 AUTHORITY.Share
(A) Subject to Council approval, when the City Manager finds that a property is in violation of a building or housing code, and in the exercise of reasonable discretion believes that the violation is a threat to the public’s health, safety, or welfare, the City Manager may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for the appointment of a receiver to perform an abatement.

(B) In administering the provisions of this chapter, the City Manager’s approval shall include, but is not limited to:

(1) The selection of properties, subject to Council approval;

(2) The selection of appropriate receivers, subject to Council approval; and

(3) The establishment of written rules and procedures as are deemed necessary for the administration of this chapter.

(Ord. 1260, passed 6-9-20)

156.04 SELECTION OF PROPERTIES.Share
In selecting properties where the city may seek appointment of a receiver, the City Manager shall consider those properties that have, at a minimum, the following characteristics:

(A) A violation of a building or housing code that threatens the public health, safety, or welfare; and

(B) The owner has not acted in a timely manner to correct the violations.

(Ord. 1260, passed 6-9-20)

156.05 NOTICE TO INTERESTED PARTIES AND APPLICATION.Share
(A) At least 60 days prior to the filing of an application of a receiver, the City Manager shall cause notice to be sent by certified mail to all interested parties.

(B) The notice shall give the date upon which the city has the right to file with the court for the receiver, and in addition shall:

(1) State the address and legal description of the property;

(2) List the building or housing code violations which give rise to the proposed application; and

(3) Give the name, address, and telephone number of a person who can provide additional information concerning the violations and their remedy.

(Ord. 1260, passed 6-9-20)

156.06 SELECTION OF RECEIVERS.Share
In selecting specific receivers, the City Manager shall choose the city agency or department designated by the city as being responsible for the rehabilitation of property, an urban renewal agency, or a private not-for-profit corporation, the primary purpose of which is the improvement of housing conditions within the city. In making the selection, the City Manager shall consider, at a minimum, the following:

(A) The receiver’s experience in rehabilitating and managing this type of property; and

(B) The receiver’s capacity to take on additional property management responsibilities.

(Ord. 1260, passed 6-9-20)

156.07 POWERS OF A RECEIVER.Share
A receiver appointed by the court shall have the authority to take any of the actions provided in ORS 105.435.

(Ord. 1260, passed 6-9-20)

156.08 PLAN AND ESTIMATE.Share
Within 30 days after appointment by the court, a receiver shall submit to the City Manager a written plan for abatement. The City Manager shall approve the plan before the receiver commences work on the abatement.

(Ord. 1260, passed 6-9-20)

156.09 RECORDKEEPING.Share
The receiver shall keep a record of all monies received and expended and all costs and obligations incurred in performing the abatement and managing of the property. Records shall be kept in a form as shall be agreed upon by the receiver and the City Manager, and copies shall be provided to the City Manager upon request.

(Ord. 1260, passed 6-9-20)

156.10 PURCHASING.Share
Excepting any conflict of interest policy, all abatement work done pursuant to this chapter is exempt from the provisions of the city’s contracting and purchasing code.

(Ord. 1260, passed 6-9-20)

156.11 LIEN ENFORCEMENT; CITY AGENCY OR DEPARTMENT AS RECEIVER; FORECLOSURE.Share
In accordance with ORS 105.440(2), if the costs and obligations incurred due to the abatement have not been paid, the order of the court shall be filed with the county recorder within 60 days of its filing with the court and shall thereafter constitute a lien on the property. In addition, unpaid liens shall be entered into the docket of city liens, and shall bear interest at the rate of nine percent per annum and shall begin to run from the date of entry of the lien in the lien docket. Thereafter, the city may cause the property to be sold as provided in ORS 223.505 to 223.590, or any other method provided by law.

(Ord. 1260, passed 6-9-20)

 



PARALLEL REFERENCES

References to Oregon Revised Statutes

References to 1991 Code

References to Ordinances


REFERENCES TO OREGON REVISED STATUTES

	ORS Section	Code Section

	34.010 - 34.100	34.10

	61.005 - 61.215	153.004

	Ch. 92	153.002, 153.155, 153.156, 153.157, 153.160, 153.164

	92.010 - 92.190	153.004

	92.010	153.004, 153.162

	92.010(13)	153.004

	92.012	153.156

	92.040	153.157

	92.080	153.157

	92.090	153.157

	92.090(2)(a)	153.157

	92.090(2)(b)	153.157

	92.090(2)(c)	153.157

	92.090(3)	153.164

	94.550	153.004

	94.803	153.004

	Ch. 153	70.02

	161.655	53.655

	Ch. 187	30.01

	187.010	113.01

	187.020	113.01

	Ch. 192	32.04

	Ch. 197	151.01, 153.002, 153.233

	197.015	153.259.010

	197.015.21	153.004

	197.175(2)(b)	153.157

	197.303 - 197.307	153.157

	197.307	153.095

	197.660	153.004

	203.045	153.252.020

	Ch. 215	153.002

	215.203(2)(a)	153.004

	215.503	153.252.020

	223.297 - 223.314	40.02, 40.08

	223.309	40.05

	223.610	52.011

	Ch. 227	153.002, 153.155

	227.175	153.138

	227.175(3), (5)	153.232, 153.233

	227.175(4)	153.157

	227.175(6)	153.233

	227.175(8)	153.233

	227.350	155.020

	250.255 - 250.346	35.01

	277.100	153.156

	279.055	32.25

	285C.403(3)(c)	37.108

	308.792	153.004

	308.795(2)(a)	153.004

	358.310(2)	153.004

	377.605(5)	153.004

	377.605(6)	153.004

	377.605(7)	153.004

	401.025(4)	31.05

	418.205 - 418.327	153.004

	443.400 - 443.825	153.004

	443.400 - 443.460	153.004

	443.400	153.004

	443.480 - 443.500	153.004

	443.705 - 443.825	153.004

	Ch. 446	153.083, 153.095

	446.003(26)(a)	153.004

	446.003(36)	153.004

	446.105	153.083

	446.310	153.004

	447.010 - 447.140	51.001, 51.002

	447.020	51.002

	454.225	51.104

	455.100 - 455.450	153.004

	Ch. 456	150.01

	Ch. 457	150.01

	Ch. 459	50.15, 50.19, 50.35

	459.386	50.02

	459A	50.19, 50.35

	466.005	50.02

	466.605	31.05

	Ch. 476	150.01

	599.205	153.004

	599.205(6)	153.004

	603.010(2)	153.004

	609.305	153.004

	Ch. 657A	153.004

	Ch. 801 - 822	70.02

	809.720	33.10

	811.602 - 811.610	72.01


REFERENCES TO 1991 CODE

	1991 Code Section	2000 Code Section

	1-1.1	31.01

	1-1.2	31.02

	1-1.3	31.03

	1-1.4	31.04

	1-1.5	31.03

	1-2.1	32.01

	1-2.2	32.02

	1-2.3	32.03

	1-2.4	Ch. 32

	1-2.5	32.04

	1-2.6	32.05

	1-2.7	Ch. 32

	1-2.8	32.06

	1-2.9	32.07

	1-2.10	32.08

	1-5.1	33.01

	1-5.2	33.02

	1-5.3	33.03

	1-5.4	33.04

	1-5.6	33.07

	1-5.7	33.08

	1-5.8	33.09

	1-7.1	35.01

	1-8.1	30.01

	1-8.2	30.01

	1-8.3	30.02

	1-8.4	30.14

	1-8.5	30.03

	1-8.6	30.04

	1-8.7	30.04

	1-8.8	30.06

	1-8.9	30.07

	1-8.10	30.08

	1-8.11	30.09

	1-8.12	30.10

	1-8.13	30.11

	1-8.14	30.12

	1-8.15	30.13

	1-9.1	32.10

	1-9.2	32.26

	1-10.1	36.01

	2-1.1	91.01

	2-1.2	91.02

	2-1.3	91.28

	2-1.4	91.02

	2-1.5	91.11

	2-1.6	91.12

	2-1.7	91.12

	2-1.8	91.26

	2-1.9	91.27

	2-1.10	91.28

	2-1.11	91.99

	2-4.1	Ch. 92

	2-4.2	92.35

	2-4.3	Ch. 92

	2-4.4	Ch. 92

	2-4.5	Ch. 92

	2-4.6	Ch. 92

	2-4.7	Ch. 92

	2-4.8	Ch. 92

	2-4.9	Ch. 92

	3-3.1	52.001

	3-3.2	52.002

	3-3.3	52.003

	3-3.4	52.004

	3-3.5	52.005

	3-3.6	52.006

	3-3.7	52.007

	3-3.8	52.008

	3-3.9	52.009

	3-3.10	52.010

	3-3.11	52.011

	3-3.12	52.012

	3-3.13	52.013

	3-3.14	52.014

	3-3.15	52.015

	3-3.16	52.016

	3-3.17	52.017

	3-3.18	52.018

	3-3.19	52.999

	3-3.20	52.021

	3-3.21	52.022

	3-4	52.019

	3-5.1	50.02

	3-5.2	50.02

	3-5.3	50.02

	3-5.4	50.02

	3-5.5	50.16

	3-5.6	50.17

	3-5.7	50.18

	3-5.8	50.19

	3-5.9	50.20

	3-5.10	50.21

	3-5.11	50.22

	3-5.12	50.23

	3-5.14(1)	50.36

	3-5.14(2)	50.99

	4-1.1	92.01

	4-1.2	92.02

	4-1.3	92.03

	4-1.4	92.04

	4-2.1	90.01

	4-2.2	90.02

	4-2.3	90.03

	4-2.4	90.04

	4-2.5	90.05

	4-2.6	90.05

	4-2.7	90.05

	4-2.8	90.05

	4-2.9	90.06

	4-2.10	90.07

	4-2.11	90.99

	4-3.2	110.16

	4-4.1	93.01

	4-4.2	93.10

	4-4.3	93.11

	4-4.4	93.11

	4-4.5	93.12

	4-4.6	93.13

	4-4.7	93.14

	4-4.11	93.14

	4-4.15(1)	93.14

	4-4.15(2)	93.36

	4-4.15(3)	93.36

	4-4.16	93.38

	4-4.17	93.39

	4-4.18	93.40

	4-4.19	93.41

	4-4.20	93.42

	4-4.21	93.36

	4-4.22	93.43

	4-4.31	93.55

	4-4.32	93.56

	4-4.34	93.58

	4-4.35	93.59

	4-4.45	93.02

	4-4.46	93.59

	4-4.47	93.71

	4-4.48	93.72

	4-4.49	93.73

	4-4.50	93.74

	4-4.51	93.75

	4-4.52	93.99

	4-4.53	93.99

	4-5	130.57

	4-5.5	33.05

	4-6.1	130.04

	4-6.6	130.25

	4-6.11	130.30

	4-6.16	130.30

	4-6.17	130.56

	4-6.26	130.70

	4-6.27	130.71

	4-6.28	130.72

	4-6.35 - 4-6.38	130.26

	4-6.42	130.27

	4-6.43	130.28

	4-6.44	130.16

	4-6.45	130.29

	4-6.46	130.30

	4-6.51	130.01

	4-6.52	130.02

	4-6.53	130.03

	4-6.54	130.99

	4-6.55	130.99

	4-6.56	130.04

	5-1.2	72.14

	5-1.3	72.14

	5-1.4	72.14

	5-2	71.08

	5-3.1	70.01

	5-3.2	70.02

	5-3.3	70.03

	5-3.4	70.17

	5-3.5	70.03

	5-3.6	70.16

	5-3.7	70.31

	5-3.8	70.32

	5-3.12	71.01

	5-3.13(1)	71.02

	5-3.13(2)	71.02

	5-3.14	71.03

	5-3.15	71.04

	5-3.16	71.05

	5-3.17	71.06

	5-3.21	72.10

	5-3.22	72.11

	5-3.23	72.11

	5-3.24	72.14

	5-3.25	72.26

	5-3.26	72.27

	5-3.27	72.27

	5-3.28	72.12

	5-3.29	72.13

	5-3.30	72.01

	5-3.36	73.02

	5-3.37	73.01

	5-3.38	73.01

	5-3.39	73.01

	5-3.40	73.01

	5-3.41	73.03

	5-3.45	71.08

	5-3.46	71.21

	5-3.50	71.21

	5-3.51	71.36

	5-3.52	71.37

	5-3.53	71.38

	5-3.54	71.40

	5-3.55	71.39

	5-3.56	71.07

	5-3.57	71.07

	5-3.60	72.27

	5-3.61	72.41

	5-3.62	72.42

	5-3.63	72.43

	5-3.64	72.43

	5-3.66	70.33

	5-3.71	70.17

	6-1.1	110.01

	6-1.2	110.01

	6-1.3	110.02

	6-1.4	110.02

	6-1.5	110.03

	6-4.1	37.01

	6-4.2	37.02

	6-4.3	37.03

	6-4.4	37.03

	6-4.5	37.02

	6-4.6	37.04

	6-4.7	37.05

	6-4.8	37.15

	6-4.9	37.06

	6-4.10	37.07

	6-4.11(a)	37.08

	6-4.11(b)	37.09

	6-4.11(c)	37.10

	6-4.12	37.11

	6-4.13	37.12

	6-4.14	37.13

	6-4.15	37.14

	6-4.16	37.14

	6-4.17	37.99

	6-5.1	110.16

	6-5.2	110.03, 110.16

	6-5.3	110.16

	6-5.4	110.16

	6-7.1	94.01

	6-7.2	94.02

	6-7.3	94.03

	6-7.4	94.04

	6-7.5	94.05

	6-7.6	94.99

	7-1.1	150.01

	7-1.4	150.16

	7-1.7	150.31

	7-3.1	150.02

	7-4.1	95.01

	8-2.1	150.02

	8-2.2	150.16

	8-5.1.010	152.01

	8-5.1.020	152.02

	8-5.1.030	152.03

	8-5.1.040	152.10

	8-5.1.050	152.93

	8-5.2.010	152.04, 152.05, 152.06

	8-5.2.020	152.04, 152.05, 152.06

	8-5.3.010	152.20

	8-5.4.010	152.22

	8-5.5.010	152.11, 152.14

	8-5.5.020	152.12

	8-5.5.030	152.90

	8-5.6.010	152.50

	8-5.6.020	152.51

	8-5.6.030	152.52, 152.53

	8-5.6.040	152.51

	8-5.6.050	152.60

	8-5.7.010	152.61

	8-5.7.020	152.61

	8-5.8.010	152.44

	8-5.8.020	152.40

	8-5.8.030	152.42, 152.43

	8-5.8.040	152.41

	8-5.8.060	152.46

	8-5.8.070	152.06

	8-5.8.080	152.10

	8-5.9.010	152.31

	8-5.9.020	152.31

	8-5.9.030	152.31

	8-5.9.040	152.32

	8-5.9.050	152.32

	8-5.9.060	152.32

	8-5.9.070	152.32

	8-5.9.080	152.32

	8-5.9.090	152.33

	8-5.9.100	152.33

	8-5.10.010	152.81, 152.86

	8-5.10.030	152.80

	8-5.10.040	152.92

	8-5.10.050	152.75


REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES

Link to ordinances passed but not yet codified

	Ord. No.	Date Passed	Disposition

	1	- -	Repealed by 341

	2	- -	Repealed by 341

	3	- -	Repealed by 341

	4	- -	Repealed by 341

	5	- -	Repealed by 341

	6	- -	Repealed by 341

	7	- -	Repealed by 341

	8	- -	Repealed by 341

	9	- -	Repealed by 341

	10	- -	Repealed by 341

	11	- -	Repealed by 341

	12	- -	Repealed by 341

	13	- -	Repealed by 341

	14	- -	Repealed by 341

	15	- -	Repealed by 341

	16	- -	Repealed by 341

	17	- -	Repealed by 341

	18	- -	Repealed by 341

	19	- -	Repealed by 341

	20	- -	Repealed by 341

	21	- -	Repealed by 341

	22	- -	Repealed by 341

	23	- -	Repealed by 341

	24	- -	Repealed by 341

	25	- -	Repealed by 341

	26	- -	Repealed by 341

	27	- -	Repealed by 341

	28	- -	Repealed by 341

	29	- -	Repealed by 341

	30	- -	Repealed by 341

	31	- -	Repealed by 341

	32	- -	Repealed by 341

	33	- -	Repealed by 341

	34	- -	Repealed by 341

	35	- -	Repealed by 341

	36	- -	Repealed by 341

	37	- -	Repealed by 341

	38	- -	Repealed by 341

	39	- -	Repealed by 341

	40	- -	Repealed by 341

	41	- -	Repealed by 341

	42	- -	Repealed by 341

	43	- -	Repealed by 341

	44	- -	Repealed by 155

	45	- -	Repealed by 341

	46	- -	Repealed by 318

	47	- -	Repealed by 341

	48	- -	Repealed by 341

	49	- -	Repealed by 341

	50	- -	Repealed by 341

	51	- -	Repealed by 341

	52	- -	Repealed by 139

	53	- -	Repealed by 341

	54	- -	Repealed by 341

	55	- -	Repealed by 340

	56	- -	Repealed by 340

	57	- -	Repealed by 340

	58	- -	Repealed by 168

	59	- -	Repealed by 341

	60	- -	Repealed by 341

	61	- -	Repealed by 340

	62	- -	Repealed by 341

	63	- -	Repealed by 341

	64	- -	Repealed by 341

	65	- -	Repealed by 572

	66	- -	Repealed by 275

	67	- -	Repealed by 572

	68	- -	Repealed by 341

	69	- -	Repealed by 324

	70	- -	Repealed by 341

	71	- -	Repealed by 564

	72	- -	Repealed by 340

	73	- -	Repealed by 340

	74	- -	Repealed by 341

	75	- -	Repealed by 132

	76	- -	Repealed by 341

	77	- -	Repealed by 341

	78	- -	Repealed by 341

	79	- -	Repealed by 341

	80	- -	Repealed by 340

	81	- -	Repealed by 340

	82	- -	Repealed by 187

	83	- -	Repealed by 341

	84	- -	Repealed by 341

	85	- -	Repealed by 91

	86	- -	Repealed by 199

	87	- -	Repealed by 341

	88	- -	Repealed by 340

	89	- -	Repealed by 572

	90	- -	Repealed by 340

	91	- -	Repealed by 340

	92	- -	Repealed by 572

	93	- -	Repealed by 564

	94	- -	Repealed by 340

	95	- -	Repealed by 192

	96	- -	Repealed by 155

	97	- -	Repealed by 155

	98	- -	Repealed by 340

	99	- -	Repealed by 101

	100	3-6-1894	Repealed by 340

	100	7-10-1894	Repealed by 340

	101	3-6-1895	Special - Repealing Ord.; not codified

	102	- -	Repealed by 340

	103	- -	Repealed by 340

	104	- -	Repealed by 572

	105	- -	Repealed by 572

	106	- -	Failed to pass

	107	- -	Repealed by 134

	108	- -	Repealed by 316

	109	- -	Repealed by 313

	110	- -	Repealed by 340

	111	- -	Repealed by 187

	112	- -	Repealed by 118

	113	- -	Repealed by 340

	114	- -	Repealed by 340

	115	- -	Repealed by 340

	116	- -	Repealed by 326

	117	- -	Repealed by 129

	118	3-7-1898	Special - Repealing Ord.; not codified

	119	- -	Repealed by 340

	120	- -	Repealed by 126

	121	- -	Repealed by 340

	122	- -	Repealed by 291

	123	- -	Repealed by 309

	124	- -	Repealed by 188

	125	- -	Repealed by 309

	126	6-26-1899	Special - Repealing Ord.; not codified

	127	6-27-1899	Special - Bond Issues; not codified

	127 1/2	6-27-1899	Special - Bond Issues; not codified

	128	7-7-1899	Special - Bond Issues; not codified

	129	9-27-1899	Special - Repealing Ord.; not codified

	130	- -	Repealed by 330

	131	- -	Repealed by 330

	132	- -	Repealed by 318

	133	12-5-1899	T.S.O. VII

	134	- -	Repealed by 320

	135	- -	Repealed by 311

	136	- -	Repealed by 316

	137	- -	Repealed by 340

	138	- -	Repealed by 340

	139	- -	Repealed by 340

	140	- -	Repealed by 340

	141	- -	Repealed by 340

	142	12-4-02	T.S.O. VII

	143	12-4-02	Special - Miscellaneous; not codified

	144	- -	Repealed by 568

	145	- -	Repealed by 191

	146	- -	Repealed by 157

	147	- -	Repealed by 340

	148	- -	Repealed by 185

	149	- -	Repealed by 564

	150	7-22-04	T.S.O. III

	151	- -	Repealed by 180

	152	- -	Repealed by 272

	153	- -	Repealed by 576

	154	- -	Repealed by 340

	155	- -	Repealed by 322

	156	3-6-06	T.S.O. III

	157	3-6-06	Special - Repealing Ord.; not codified

	158	- -	Repealed by 180

	159	9-11-06	T.S.O. III

	160	- -	Repealed by 272

	161	4-2-07	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	162	5-7-07	T.S.O. III

	163	- -	Repealed by 564

	164	- -	T.S.O. III

	165	- -	Repealed by 572

	166	- -	Repealed by 185

	167	12-1-08	T.S.O. III

	168	- -	Repealed by 572

	169	- -	Repealed by 572

	170	- -	Repealed by 564

	171	- -	Repealed by 572

	172	- -	Repealed by 340

	173	- -	Repealed by 188

	174	7-5-10	Special - Miscellaneous; not codified

	175	7-5-10	Special - Miscellaneous; not codified

	176	- -	Repealed by 577

	177	9-3-10	T.S.O. VII

	178	- -	Repealed by 187

	179	12-21-10	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	180	- -	Repealed by 340

	181	- -	Repealed by 577

	182	- -	Repealed by 228

	183	3-14-11	T.S.O. VII

	184	- -	Repealed by 340

	184 1/4	- -	Repealed by 340

	184 1/2	- -	Repealed by 572

	185	- -	Repealed by 328

	186	- -	Repealed by 272

	187	- -	Repealed by 577

	188	- -	Repealed by 248

	189	8-5-11	T.S.O. VII

	190	- -	Repealed by 572

	191	- -	Repealed by 219

	192	- -	Repealed by 572

	193	10-10-11	T.S.O. VII

	194	- -	Repealed by 340

	195	12-26-11	T.S.O. III

	196	- -	Repealed by 572

	197	- -	Repealed by 572

	198	- -	Repealed by 572

	199	- -	Repealed by 207

	200	- -	Repealed by 291

	201	12-14-12	T.S.O. VII

	202	- -	Repealed by 911

	203	- -	Repealed by 340

	204	6-9-13	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	205	- -	Repealed by 338

	206	- -	Repealed by 576

	207	- -	Repealed by 572

	208	10-7-13	Special - Charter Amendments; not codified

	209	- -	Repealed by 577

	210	- -	Repealed by 309

	211	3-14-14	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	212	- -	Repealed by 336

	213	5-5-14	T.S.O. III

	214	5-5-14	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	215	5-5-14	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	216	8-20-14	Special - Miscellaneous; not codified

	217	9-1-14	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	218	- -	Repealed by 338

	219	- -	Repealed by 316

	220	- -	Repealed by 572

	221	- -	Repealed by 572

	222	- -	Repealed by 338

	223	- -	Repealed by 338

	224	- -	Repealed by 336

	225	- -	Repealed by 276

	226	- -	Repealed by 239

	227	10-26-15	Special - Charter Amendments; not codified

	228	- -	Repealed by 309

	229	- -	Repealed by 340

	230	- -	Repealed by 572

	231	3-7-16	Special - Charter Amendments; not codified

	232	5-2-16	Special - Bond Issues; not codified

	233	6-6-16	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	234	7-7-16	Special - Charter Amendments; not codified

	235	9-13-16	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	236	10-3-16	Special - Miscellaneous; not codified

	237	- -	Repealed by 341

	238	- -	Repealed by 572

	239	- -	Repealed by 253

	240	- -	Repealed by 338

	241	- -	Repealed by 341

	242	11-9-16	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	243	11-17-16	Special - Charter Amendments; not codified

	244	11-17-16	Special - Charter Amendments; not codified

	245	- -	Repealed by 340

	246	1-20-17	Special - Bond Issues; not codified

	247	1-20-17	Special - Bond Issues; not codified

	248	- -	Repealed by 270A

	249	3-24-17	Special - Bond Issues; not codified

	250	4-4-17	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	251	- -	Repealed by 328

	252	11-28-17	Special - Charter Amendments; not codified

	253	- -	Repealed by 953

	254	12-12-17	Special - Bond Issues; not codified

	255	- -	Repealed by 318

	256	- -	Repealed by 930

	257	- -	Repealed by 564

	258	3-5-18	Special - Miscellaneous; not codified

	259	5-3-18	T.S.O. II

	260	- -	Repealed by 340

	261	8-6-18	T.S.O. III

	262	8-6-18	T.S.O. II

	262A	- -	T.S.O. V

	263	- -	Repealed by 265

	263A	9-25-18	Special - Charter Amendments; not codified

	264	10-17-18	Special - Charter Amendments; not codified

	264A	11-7-18	Special - Charter Amendments; not codified

	265	12-20-18	Special - Bond Issues; not codified

	266	2-4-19	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	266A	2-4-19	T.S.O. VII

	266B	2-4-19	Special - Miscellaneous; not codified

	267	8-11-19	T.S.O. VII

	268	- -	Repealed by 309

	269	4-6-20	Special - Bond Issues; not codified

	270	- -	Repealed by 340

	270A	- -	Repealed by 357

	271	- -	Repealed by 328

	271A	- -	Repealed by 930

	272	- -	Repealed by 572

	273	- -	Repealed by 572

	274	- -	Repealed by 328

	275	- -	Repealed by 911

	276	- -	Repealed by 572

	277	- -	Repealed by 334

	278	6-3-24	T.S.O. III

	279	- -	Repealed by 334

	280	8-5-24	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	281	- -	Repealed by 340

	282	4-6-26	T.S.O. VII

	283	- -	Repealed by 572

	284	10-5-26	Special - Charter Amendments; not codified

	285	- -	Repealed by 340

	286	- -	Repealed by 357

	287	- -	Repealed by 318

	288	- -	Repealed by 338

	289	- -	Repealed by 332

	290	- -	T.S.O. III

	291	- -	T.S.O. III

	292	- -	Repealed by 322

	293	- -	Repealed by 340

	294	1-7-31	T.S.O. VII

	295	- -	Repealed by 226

	296	- -	Special - Charter Amendments; not codified

	297	- -	Repealed by 340

	298	- -	Repealed by 342

	299	- -	Repealed by 318

	300	- -	Repealed by 342

	301	11-7-33	Repealed by 577

	301	3-6-34	Repealed by 930

	302	- -	Repealed by 340

	303	- -	Repealed by 340

	304	- -	Repealed by 930

	305	- -	Repealed by 970

	306	- -	Repealed by 572

	307	- -	Repealed by 572

	308	- -	Repealed by 536

	309	10-6-36	Special - Repealing Ord.; not codified

	310	- -	Repealed by 572

	311	10-6-36	Special - Repealing Ord.; not codified

	312	- -	Repealed by 572

	313	10-6-36	Special - Repealing Ord.; not codified

	314	- -	Repealed by 572

	315	- -	Superseded by 712

	316	10-6-36	Special - Repealing Ord.; not codified

	317	- -	Repealed by 572

	318	10-6-36	Special - Repealing Ord.; not codified

	319	- -	Repealed by 564

	320	10-6-36	Special - Repealing Ord.; not codified

	321	- -	Repealed by 930

	322	10-6-36	Special - Repealing Ord.; not codified

	323	- -	Repealed by 572

	324	10-6-36	Special - Repealing Ord.; not codified

	325	- -	Repealed by 572

	326	10-6-36	Special - Repealing Ord.; not codified

	327	- -	Repealed by 572

	328	10-6-36	Special - Repealing Ord.; not codified

	329	- -	Repealed by 572

	330	10-6-36	Special - Repealing Ord.; not codified

	331	- -	Repealed by 574

	332	10-6-36	Special - Repealing Ord.; not codified

	333	- -	Repealed by 568

	334	10-6-36	Special - Repealing Ord.; not codified

	335	- -	Repealed by 844

	336	10-6-36	Special - Repealing Ord.; not codified

	337	10-6-36	Special - Miscellaneous; not codified

	338	10-6-36	Special - Repealing Ord.; not codified

	339	- -	Repealed by 576

	340	- -	Special - Repealing Ord.; not codified

	341	- -	Special - Repealing Ord.; not codified

	342	- -	Special - Repealing Ord.; not codified

	343	- -	Repealed by 572

	344	- -	Repealed by 572

	345	- -	Repealed by 565

	346	- -	Repealed by 608

	347	- -	Repealed by 577

	348	- -	Repealed by 350

	349	5-3-38	T.S.O. III

	350	5-31-38	Special - Bond Issues; not codified

	351	- -	Repealed by 577

	352	- -	Repealed by 577

	353	- -	Repealed by 572

	354	7-12-38	T.S.O. VII

	355	4-4-39	T.S.O. II

	356	- -	Repealed by 572

	357	- -	Repealed by 562

	357A	3-6-40	110.01-110.03

	358	8-6-40	Special - Bond Issues; not codified

	359	8-6-40	T.S.O. II

	360	8-30-40	Special - Bond Issues; not codified

	361	8-30-40	Special - Bond Issues; not codified

	362	11-25-40	T.S.O. VII

	363	- -	Repealed by 713

	364	- -	Repealed by 483

	365	2-4-41	T.S.O. II

	366	- -	Repealed by 483

	367	- -	Repealed by 572

	368	- -	Repealed by 572

	369	- -	Repealed by 572

	370	- -	Repealed by 362

	371	6-2-42	T.S.O. II

	372	6-2-42	T.S.O. III

	373	6-2-42	Repealed by 572

	373	10-7-47	Repealed by 572

	374	- -	Repealed by 572

	375	- -	Repealed by 572

	376	5-22-44	Special - Bond Issues; not codified

	377	6-12-44	Special - Bond Issues; not codified

	378	- -	Repealed by 529

	378B	- -	Repealed by 529

	379	- -	Repealed by 572

	380	10-22-46	Special - Bond Issues; not codified

	381	11-15-46	Special - Bond Issues; not codified

	382	- -	Repealed by 572

	383	- -	Repealed by 572

	384	- -	Repealed by 713

	385	- -	Repealed by 483

	386	4-6-48	T.S.O. VII

	387	- -	Repealed by 529

	388	- -	Repealed by 572

	389	8-3-48	T.S.O. VII

	390	- -	Repealed by 577

	391	8-3-48	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	392	12-13-49	Special - Bond Issues; not codified

	392A	6-13-49	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	393	9-25-48	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	394	- -	Repealed by 572

	395	- -	Repealed by 572

	396	- -	Repealed by 730

	397	- -	Repealed by 577

	398	- -	Repealed by 529

	399	- -	Repealed by 572

	400	2-14-50	Special - Bond Issues; not codified

	401	3-14-50	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	402	2-28-50	Special - Charter Amendments; not codified

	403	4-11-50	Special - Miscellaneous; not codified

	404	6-16-50	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	405	- -	Repealed by 572

	406	- -	Repealed by 572

	407	9-12-50	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	408	- -	Repealed by 577

	409	- -	Repealed by 572

	410	- -	Repealed by 572

	411	6-12-51	T.S.O. VI

	412	6-12-51	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	412A	5-8-51	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	413	7-10-51	Special - Bond Issues; not codified

	414	- -	Repealed by 608

	415	8-14-51	Special - Bond Issues; not codified

	416	9-11-51	Special - Bond Issues; not codified

	417	9-17-51	Special - Bond Issues; not codified

	418	- -	Repealed by 529

	419	- -	Repealed by 562

	420	- -	Repealed by 562

	421	- -	Repealed by 572

	422	- -	Repealed by 551

	423	5-13-52	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	424	- -	Repealed by 562

	425	- -	Repealed by 572

	426	6-10-52	T.S.O. VI

	427	8-12-52	Repealed by Ord. 1136

	428	7-8-52	Special - Bond Issues; not codified

	429	9-19-52	Special - Bond Issues; not codified

	430	- -	Repealed by 572

	431	- -	Repealed by 572

	432	- -	Repealed by 577

	433	- -	Repealed by 438

	434	- -	Repealed by 439

	435	4-14-53	T.S.O. VII

	436	- -	Repealed by 811

	437	4-13-53	T.S.O. VII

	438	2-26-53	Special - Repealing Ord.; not codified

	439	2-26-53	Special - Repealing Ord.; not codified

	440	- -	Repealed by 911

	441	6-9-53	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	442	5-20-53	T.S.O. VII

	443	6-29-53	T.S.O. II

	444	7-14-53	Special - Bond Issues; not codified

	445	10-13-53	T.S.O. I

	446	- -	Repealed by 572

	447	- -	Repealed by 965

	448	11-10-53	T.S.O. VI

	449	- -	Repealed by 562

	450	10-13-53	T.S.O. III

	451	- -	Repealed by 572

	452	- -	Repealed by 572

	453	- -	Repealed by 572

	454	6-21-54	Special -Public Improvements; not codified

	455	6-21-54	Not codified

	456	- -	Failed to pass

	457	8-10-54	Special - Bond Issues; not codified

	458	- -	Repealed by 916

	459	- -	Repealed by 562

	460	- -	Repealed by 562

	461	5-10-55	T.S.O. III

	462	- -	Repealed by 577

	463	6-28-55	T.S.O. VII

	464	- -	Repealed by 536

	465	11-8-55	T.S.O. VII

	466	12-20-55	T.S.O. VII

	467	1-10-56	T.S.O. I

	468	3-13-56	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	469	- -	Repealed by 722

	470	- -	Repealed

	471	- -	Repealed

	472	- -	Repealed by 563

	473	- -	Repealed by 930

	474	8-14-56	Special - Bond Issues; not codified

	475	- -	Repealed by 572

	476	2-12-57	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	477	- -	Repealed by 930

	478	4-17-57	T.S.O. II

	479	6-12-57	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	480	- -	Repealed by 562

	481	8-13-57	Special - Bond Issues; not codified

	482	- -	Failed to pass

	483	- -	Repealed by 493

	483A	- -	Repealed by 562

	484	4-18-58	T.S.O. VII

	485	- -	T.S.O. I

	486	4-10-58	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	487	4-18-58	T.S.O. VI

	488	- -	Repealed by 916

	489	6-10-58	Special - Bond Issues; not codified

	490	- -	Failed to pass

	491	- -	Repealed by 571

	492	- -	Repealed by 682

	493	- -	Repealed by 714

	494	- -	Repealed by 562

	495	- -	Repealed by 623

	496	4-14-59	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	497	- -	Failed to pass

	498	- -	Repealed by 559

	499	5-12-59	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	500	5-12-59	T.S.O. I

	501	6-9-59	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	502	7-14-59	Special - Bond Issues; not codified

	503	- -	Repealed by 562

	504	8-11-59	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	505	8-25-59	Special - Bond Issues; not codified

	505A	- -	Repealed by 572

	506	10-13-59	T.S.O. VII

	507	- -	Repealed by 608

	508	9-23-59	Special - Bond Issues; not codified

	509	- -	Repealed by 930

	510	- -	Failed to pass

	511	- -	Repealed by 562

	512	- -	Repealed by 608

	513	- -	Failed to pass

	514	2-9-60	T.S.O. I

	515	2-9-60	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	516	- -	Repealed by 930

	517	- -	Repealed by 965

	518	- -	Repealed by 562

	519	3-8-60	T.S.O. I

	520	2-24-60	T.S.O. I

	521	5-10-60	T.S.O. I

	522	5-10-60	T.S.O. I

	523	6-21-60	T.S.O. III

	524	- -	Repealed

	525	8-9-60	T.S.O. I

	526	- -	Repealed by 563

	527	9-13-60	T.S.O. I

	528	9-13-60	Special - Bond Issues; not codified

	529	- -	Repealed by 562

	530	12-7-60	T.S.O. VII

	531	2-14-61	T.S.O. I

	532	- -	Repealed by 562

	533	- -	Repealed by 595

	534	- -	Repealed by 863

	535	- -	Failed to pass

	536	- -	Repealed by 734

	537	- -	Failed to pass

	538	7-10-62	T.S.O. I

	539	7-10-62	T.S.O. VII

	540	8-14-62	T.S.O. VII

	541	11-13-62	T.S.O. VII

	542	- -	Repealed by 562

	543	3-13-63	T.S.O. I

	544	6-11-63	T.S.O. III

	545	9-10-63	T.S.O. I

	546	10-8-63	T.S.O. VII

	547	10-8-63	T.S.O. I

	548	- -	Repealed by 571

	549	11-12-63	T.S.O. III

	550	2-11-64	T.S.O. I

	551	- -	Repealed by 822

	552	3-10-64	T.S.O. VII

	553	1-15-64	Special - Repealing Ord.; not codified

	554	- -	Repealed by 930

	555	- -	Repealed by 562

	556	5-12-64	T.S.O. VII

	557	- -	Repealed by 731

	558	4-22-64	T.S.O. I

	559	- -	Repealed by 618

	560	- -	Repealed by 630

	561	6-3-64	Special - Valley View Subdivision; not codified

	562	- -	Repealed by 967

	563	- -	150.26

	564	- -	Repealed by 965

	565	- -	Repealed by 715

	566	6-24-64	T.S.O. III

	567	- -	Repealed by 811

	568	- -	Repealed by 911

	569	12-4-64	T.S.O. I

	570	- -	Repealed by 954

	571	- -	Repealed by 678

	572	1-27-65	Special - Repealing Ord.; not codified

	573	4-7-65	T.S.O. VII

	574	- -	Repealed by 848

	575	7-13-65	91.01 - 91.02, 91.10 - 91.12, 91.25 - 91.28, 91.40, 91.99

	576	9-14-65	Repealed by 1144

	577	10-20-65	Special - Repealing Ord.; not codified

	578	- -	Number not used

	579	10-20-65	Ch. 92

	580	- -	Repealed by 678

	581	12-8-65	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	582	3-2-66	T.S.O. I

	583	1-26-66	T.S.O. VII

	584	4-12-66	T.S.O. I

	585	- -	Repealed by 586

	586	5-11-66	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	587	- -	Not codified

	588	- -	Repealed by 805

	589	8-3-66	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	590	8-9-66	T.S.O. VII

	591	8-9-66	T.S.O. I

	592	10-12-66	T.S.O. III

	593	11-16-66	T.S.O. VII

	594	- -	Repealed by 730

	595	- -	Repealed by 679

	596	11-16-66	T.S.O. VI

	597	12-13-66	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	598	- -	Failed to pass

	599	7-11-67	T.S.O. I

	600	- -	Repealed by 973

	601	8-9-67	T.S.O. I

	602	- -	Repealed by 608

	603	10-11-67	T.S.O. I

	604	10-18-67	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	605	2-14-68	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	606	11-27-68	T.S.O. VII

	607	- -	Repealed by 967

	608	- -	Superseded by 807

	609	6-19-68	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	610	- -	Not codified

	611	- -	Repealed by 930

	612	8-28-68	T.S.O. I

	613	- -	Repealed by 738

	614	- -	Repealed by 911

	615	10-16-68	T.S.O. I

	616	- -	Repealed by 631

	617	11-27-68	Repealed by 1158

	618	12-24-68	Special - Finances; not codified

	619	12-18-68	T.S.O. I

	620	1-15-69	T.S.O. I

	621	- -	Repealed by 665

	622	- -	Repealed by 967

	623	3-12-69	Special - Finances; not codified

	624	4-2-69	T.S.O. I

	625	4-9-69	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	626	- -	Failed to pass

	627	4-9-69	T.S.O. I

	628	- -	T.S.O. I

	629	- -	T.S.O. I

	630	4-30-69	Special - Finances; not codified

	631	4-30-69	Special - Repealing Ord.; not codified

	632	5-28-69	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	633	- -	Repealed by 954

	634	- -	Superseded by 807

	635	- -	Repealed by 930

	636	7-2-69	92.01 - 92.04

	637	7-8-69	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	638	- -	Repealed by 965

	639	8-26-69	T.S.O. I

	640	- -	Failed to pass

	641	10-28-69	T.S.O. I

	642	12-8-69	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	643	1-14-70	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	644	- -	Repealed by 967

	645	- -	Repealed by 930

	646	2-24-70	T.S.O. I

	647	3-24-70	Special - Finances; not codified

	648	- -	Repealed by 717

	649	3-10-70	T.S.O. I

	650	5-12-70	T.S.O. I

	651	5-26-70	T.S.O. I

	652	- -	Superseded by 807

	653	- -	Superseded by 807

	654	- -	Superseded by 807

	655	9-8-70	T.S.O. I

	656	11-10-70	T.S.O. VII

	657	9-22-70	T.S.O. I

	658	10-13-70	T.S.O. I

	659	10-27-70	T.S.O. I

	660	11-24-70	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	661	12-8-70	T.S.O. I

	662	1-12-71	T.S.O. I

	663	- -	Not codified

	664	1-26-71	T.S.O. VII

	665	- -	Repealed by 930

	666	3-9-71	T.S.O. I

	667	- -71	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	668	4-13-71	T.S.O. I

	669	4-13-71	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	670	- -	Repealed by 960

	671	- -	Repealed by 930

	672	11-23-71	Special - Finances; not codified

	673	7-13-71	T.S.O. I

	674	8-10-71	T.S.O. I

	675	- -	Repealed by 848

	676	9-14-71	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	677	9-14-71	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	678	- -	Repealed by 726

	679	- -	Repealed by 717

	680	- -	Repealed by 848

	681	12-14-71	T.S.O. I

	682	- -	Repealed by 733

	683	12-14-71	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	684	2-22-72	T.S.O. I

	685	1-11-72	T.S.O. I

	686	- -	Failed to pass

	687	2-22-72	Special - Finances; not codified

	688	3-14-72	T.S.O. I

	689	- -	Superseded by 807

	690	3-28-72	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	691	- -	Repealed by 852

	692	6-13-72	T.S.O. I

	693	5-23-72	Special - Finances; not codified

	694	5-23-72	Special - Finances; not codified

	695	- -	Repealed by 930

	696	8-22-72	Special - Bond Issues; not codified

	697	9-12-72	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	698	- -	Repealed by 965

	699	- -	Repealed by 967

	700	2-27-73	Special - Finances; not codified

	701	2-27-73	Special - Finances; not codified

	702	2-27-73	T.S.O. I

	703	4-24-73	T.S.O. I

	704	- -	Failed to pass

	705	- -	Repealed by 960

	706	8-14-73	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	707	12-11-73	Repealed by 1152

	708	- -	Repealed by 970

	709	- -	Failed to pass

	710	- -	Repealed by 960

	711	- -	Repealed by 967

	712	- -	Repealed by 930

	713	- -	Repealed by 893

	714	- -	Repealed by 740

	715	1-8-74	32.01 - 32.10

	716	2-12-74	T.S.O. I

	717	- -	Repealed by 853

	718	3-12-74	T.S.O. I

	719	- -	Repealed by 954

	720	- -	Not codified

	721	- -	Repealed by 953

	722	- -	Repealed by 863

	723	4-9-74	T.S.O. I

	724	5-14-74	T.S.O. I

	725	- -	Repealed by 863

	726	6-25-74	150.01, 150.30, 150.31

	727	- -	Repealed by 665 and 930

	728	- -	Failed to pass

	729	- -	Failed to pass

	730	- -	Repealed by 829

	731	- -	Repealed by 946

	732	- -	Repealed by 965

	733	- -	Repealed by 930

	734	- -	Repealed by 913

	735	9-10-74	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	736	- -	Superseded by 807

	737	10-22-74	Not codified

	738	- -	Repealed by 784

	739	- -	Failed to pass

	740	11-26-74	Superseded by 980

	741	- -	Superseded by 748

	742	4-8-75	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	743	4-22-75	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	744	- -	Failed to pass

	745	- -	Repealed by 960

	746	- -	Failed to pass

	747	8-12-75	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	748	- -	Repealed by 967

	749	- -	Repealed by 805

	750	- -	Superseded by 807

	751	- -	Superseded by 807

	752	8-12-75	T.S.O. I

	753	8-19-75	T.S.O. I

	754	8-26-75	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	755	- -	Superseded by 807

	756	12-9-75	T.S.O. I

	757	12-23-75	T.S.O. I

	758	1-13-76	T.S.O. I

	759	2-10-76	Special - Bond Issues; not codified

	760	2-14-76	T.S.O. I

	761	3-9-76	T.S.O. I

	762	4-13-76	T.S.O. I

	763	4-27-76	T.S.O. I

	764	5-11-76	T.S.O. III

	765	- -	Superseded by 805 and 807

	766	- -	Superseded by 807

	767	- -	Superseded by 807

	768	6-8-76	T.S.O. I

	769	6-22-76	T.S.O. I

	770	6-22-76	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	771	- -	Repealed by 930 and 955

	772	6-22-76	Superseded by 980

	773	- -	Superseded by 807

	774	10-12-76	T.S.O. VII

	775	- -	Repealed by 967

	776	12-14-76	T.S.O. I

	777	- -	Superseded by 807

	778	2-8-77	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	779	4-26-77	T.S.O. I

	780	5-24-77	T.S.O. I

	781	- -	Superseded by 807

	782	6-15-77	Special - Finances; not codified

	783	6-28-77	Superseded by 980

	784	- -	Repealed by 865

	785	7-5-77	Special - Finances; not codified

	786	- -	Repealed by 848

	787	7-12-77	Special - Finances; not codified

	788	7-12-77	Special - Finances; not codified

	789	- -	Repealed by 930

	790	8-9-77	150.16

	791	- -	Repealed by 955

	792	1-10-78	T.S.O. VII

	793	1-10-78	T.S.O. VII

	794	2-14-78	T.S.O. I

	795	2-28-78	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	796	- -	Repealed by 930

	797	4-11-78	T.S.O. I

	798	4-11-78	Special - Miscellaneous; not codified

	799	4-25-78	T.S.O. VII

	800	5-23-78	Special - Finances; not codified

	801	5-23-75	T.S.O. I

	802	- -	Superseded by 980

	803	6-27-78	T.S.O. I

	804	7-11-78	T.S.O. VII

	805	8-8-73	Repealed by 1057

	806	8-22-78	Special - Finances; not codified

	807	8-22-78	Repealed by 1057

	808	9-12-78	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	809	- -	Repealed by 913

	810	11-28-78	Special - Finances; not codified

	811	12-12-78	150.02

	812	- -	Not codified

	813	- -	Repealed by 1057

	814	5-8-79	T.S.O. I

	815	5-22-79	Special - Finances; not codified

	816	6-12-79	T.S.O. I

	817	- -	Failed to pass

	818	7-10-79	T.S.O. I

	819	8-22-79	Special - Finances; not codified

	820	9-25-79	Repealed by 1057

	821	10-23-79	Repealed by 1057

	822	11-13-79	T.S.O. III

	823	- -	Repealed by 930

	824	11-27-79	Repealed in part by 1057; 152.01 - 152.08, 152.20 - 150.22, 152.35 - 152.41, 152.55 - 152.58, 159.60, 152.70 - 152.80, 152.90 - 152.92, 152.99

	825	12-11-79	T.S.O. I

	826	1-22-80	T.S.O. I

	827	1-22-80	T.S.O. I

	828	- -	Repealed by 1057

	829	- -	Repealed by 966

	830	3-11-80	T.S.O. I

	831	3-11-80	T.S.O. I

	832	- -	Repealed by 930

	833	- -	Repealed by 1057

	834	- -	Repealed by 1057

	835	4-22-80	Repealed by 1088

	836	5-13-80	Special - Finances; not codified

	837	6-24-80	37.01 - 37.15, 37.99

	838	- -	Not passed

	839	7-8-80	Repealed by 1057

	840	9-17-80	Special - Finances; not codified

	841	10-14-80	Special - Finances; not codified

	842	11-25-80	Special - Finances; not codified

	843	- -	Repealed by 918

	844	3-10-81	Repealed by 1041

	845	3-10-81	Repealed by 1158

	846	- -	Repealed by 967

	847	6-9-81	Special - Finances; not codified

	848	7-28-81	110.15 - 110.16

	849	- -	Repealed by 900 and 954

	850	- -	Repealed by 911

	851	7-28-81	Repealed by 1057

	852	- -	Repealed by 967

	853	- -	Repealed by 931

	854	9-17-81	Special - Finances; not codified

	855	- -	Superseded by 980

	856	11-24-81	T.S.O. VII

	857	11-10-81	Repealed by 1057

	858	1-12-82	Repealed by 1057

	859	- -	Superseded by 980

	860	5-25-82	T.S.O. VII

	861	7-13-82	Special - Finances; not codified

	862	7-13-82	Special - Finances; not codified

	863	7-28-82	90.01 - 90.07, 90.99

	864	- -	Repealed by 966

	865	- -	Repealed by 903

	866	12-14-82	Repealed by 1127

	867	3-22-83	Repealed by 1127

	868	7-12-83	T.S.O. VII

	869	8-9-83	Repealed by 1057

	870	7-26-83	Special - Finances; not codified

	871	9-22-83	Special - Finances; not codified

	872	- -	Repealed by 883

	873	1-10-84	Repealed by 1020

	874	1-24-84	T.S.O. I

	875	7-24-84	T.S.O. I

	876	4-24-84	Repealed by 1057

	877	5-22-84	Repealed by 1057

	878	- -	Tabled

	879	7-24-84	Special - Finances; not codified

	880	7-10-84	Special - Finances; not codified

	881	11-13-84	Special - Finances; not codified

	882	12-11-84	Repealed by 1057

	883	12-11-84	72.14

	884	- -	Repealed by 910

	885	3-12-85	T.S.O. V

	886	3-26-85	Repealed by 1041

	887	5-11-76	T.S.O. III

	888	6-25-85	Repealed by 1057

	889	8-13-85	T.S.O. VII

	890	7-9-85	Special - Finances; not codified

	891	- -	Not passed

	892	7-23-85	Special - Finances; not codified

	893	10-8-85	Superseded by 981

	894	12-10-85	Repealed by 1057

	895	2-25-86	T.S.O. V

	896	2-11-86	Superseded by 981

	897	3-25-86	Special - Bond Issues; not codified

	898	- -	Not passed

	899	4-22-86	Special - Miscellaneous; not codified

	900	- -	Repealed by 954

	901	6-24-86	Special - Finances; not codified

	902	- -	Repealed by 931

	903	- -	Repealed by 934

	904	7-8-86	Special - Finances; not codified

	905	9-23-86	T.S.O. V

	906	- -	Superseded by 980

	907	- -	Not passed

	908	12-17-86	Repealed by 1057

	909	12-17-86	Repealed by 1057

	910	1-27-87	Repealed by 1153

	911	4-28-87	93.01 - 93.02, 93.10 - 93.14, 93.25, 93.35 - 93.43, 93.55 - 93.59, 93.70 - 93.75, 93.99

	912	2-10-87	Repealed by 1057

	913	- -	Repealed by 932

	914	6-9-87	Special - Finances; not codified

	915	7-14-87	Repealed by 1057

	916	7-27-87	130.57

	917	- -	Not codified

	918	1-12-88	Repealed by 1134

	919	12-8-87	Repealed by 1136

	920	3-22-88	T.S.O. V

	921	4-5-88	T.S.O. V

	922	6-28-88	T.S.O. V

	923	- -	Not passed

	924	6-28-88	Special - Finances; not codified

	925	8-9-88	Repealed by 1153

	926	- -	Not codified

	927	9-27-88	32.02

	928	10-25-88	33.01 - 33.05, 33.07 - 33.09

	929	10-25-88	T.S.O. V

	930	3-12-91	Special - Repealing Ord.; not codified

	931	2-28-89	50.01 - 50.02, 50.15 - 50.23, 50.35 - 50.36, 50.99, T.S.O. III

	932	2-14-89	Repealed by 1004

	933	3-28-89	Repealed by 1153

	934	4-25-89	Repealed by 1025

	935	4-25-89	T.S.O. V

	936	- -	Tabled

	937	6-27-89	71.08

	938	6-27-89	37.01 - 37.02

	939	7-25-89	Repealed by Ord. 1070

	940	8-22-89	130.57

	941	10-10-89	T.S.O. VII

	942	2-27-90	T.S.O. I

	943	5-8-90	Repealed by 1020

	944	8-14-90	T.S.O. V

	945	8-29-90	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	946	9-11-90	95.01

	947	9-11-90	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	948	11-13-90	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	949	12-27-90	T.S.O. V

	950	1-22-91	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	951	3-12-91	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	952	3-12-91	T.S.O. VI

	953	3-12-91	35.01

	954	3-12-91	30.01 - 30.14

	955	3-12-91	32.25 - 32.26

	956	3-12-91	Repealed by 1158

	957	3-12-91	36.01

	958	3-12-91	Superseded by 980

	959	3-12-91	Repealed by 1153

	960	- -	Special - Repealing Ord.; not codified

	961	- -	Not codified

	962	3-12-91	93.58

	963	3-12-91	92.01 - 92.04

	964	3-12-91	90.02 - 90.03, 90.99

	965	4-9-91	130.01 - 130.04, 130.15 - 130.16, 130.25 - 130.30, 130.45, 130.55 - 130.56, 130.70 - 130.72, 130.99

	966	3-12-91	Special - Repealing Ord.; not codified

	967	3-12-91	70.01 - 70.03, 70.15 - 70.17, 70.30 - 70.33, 71.01 - 71.07, 71.20 - 71.21, 71.35 - 71.40, 72.01, 72.10 - 72.13, 72.25 - 72.27, 72.40 - 72.43, 73.01 - 73.03

	968	3-12-91	Not codified

	969	3-12-91	Not codified

	970	3-12-91	94.01 - 94.05, 94.99

	971	3-12-91	110.02

	972	3-12-91	Repealed by 1136

	973	3-12-91	91.01 - 91.02, 91.10 - 91.12, 91.25 - 91.28, 91.40, 91.99

	974	3-12-91	Repealed by 1144

	975	3-12-91	Not codified

	976	6-11-91	Repealed by 1057

	977	5-28-91	130.27

	978	6-11-91	93.58

	979	11-26-91	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	980	1-28-92	51.100 - 51.105

	981	1-28-92	51.001 - 51.002, 51.015 - 51.018, 51.030 - 51.034, 51.045 - 51.054, 51.070 - 51.078, 51.085 - 51.088, 51.115 - 51.116, 51.130 - 51.131, 51.998 - 51.999

	982	1-28-92	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	983	2-25-92	T.S.O. VII

	984	3-24-92	T.S.O. V

	985	5-12-92	Special - Finances; not codified

	986	9-22-92	T.S.O. III

	987	9-22-92	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	988	10-13-92	T.S.O. I

	989	11-24-92	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	990	12-8-92	T.S.O. I

	991	1-26-93	T.S.O. I

	992	2-9-93	T.S.O. V

	993	2-9-93	T.S.O. V

	994	3-9-93	130.25

	995	4-13-93	Repealed by 1057

	996	6-8-93	Repealed by 1127

	997	6-29-93	T.S.O. I

	998	7-13-93	T.S.O. VII

	999	7-27-93	T.S.O. V

	1000	8-24-93	Repealed by 1158

	1001	11-9-93	37.02, 37.05, 37.06, 37.08

	1002	2-25-94	T.S.O. I

	1003	2-25-94	T.S.O. V

	1004	2-25-94	Special - Repealing Ord.; not codified

	1005	3-22-94	T.S.O. V

	1006	4-12-94	T.S.O. V

	1007	- -	Failed to pass

	1008	4-26-94	Repealed by 1057

	1009	4-26-94	T.S.O. I

	1010	6-14-94	Repealed by 1057

	1011	6-28-94	Repealed by 1066

	1012	7-26-94	Repealed by 1043

	1013	8-1-94	32.02

	1014	9-13-94	T.S.O. V

	1015	9-13-94	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	1016	9-27-94	Repealed by 1043

	1017	2-28-95	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	1018	2-28-95	T.S.O. V

	1019	3-14-95	71.02

	1020	3-14-95	T.S.O. III

	1021	5-23-95	T.S.O. I

	1022	9-12-95	93.57

	1023	9-12-95	T.S.O. I

	1024	9-26-95	Repealed by 1057

	1025	9-26-95	Not codified

	1026	11-14-95	T.S.O. I

	1027	11-28-95	Repealed by 1153

	1028	11- -95	51.103

	1029	1-31-96	T.S.O. V

	1030	1-31-96	T.S.O. V

	1031	2-27-96	T.S.O. I

	1032	3-26-96	33.06

	1033	4-9-96	33.04

	1034	6-11-96	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	1035	4-24-96	Special - Finances; not codified

	1036	6-11-96	Repealed by 1057

	1037	6-25-96	T.S.O. VII

	1038	7-23-96	Special - Charter Amendment

	1039	7-23-96	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	1040	1-14-97	33.20 - 33.24

	1041	3-11-97	31.15 - 31.17

	1042	5-13-97	T.S.O. I

	1043	6-10-97	Repealed by 1153

	1044	5-27-97	T.S.O. V

	1045	5-27-97	T.S.O. V

	1046	5-27-97	T.S.O. V

	1047	9-9-97	95.01 - 95.05, 95.99

	1048	10-14-97	T.S.O. I

	1049	10-28-97	T.S.O. V

	1050	10-28-97	T.S.O. I

	1051	10-28-97	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	1052	10-28-97	T.S.O. V

	1053	12-9-97	T.S.O. VII

	1054	1-5-98	Repealed by 1057

	1055	2-24-98	T.S.O. IV

	1056	3-10-98	T.S.O. V

	1057	3-24-98	Repealed by 1137

	1058	4-28-98	90.07

	1059	7-28-98	T.S.O. I

	1060	8-11-98	T.S.O. VI

	1061	8-25-98	T.S.O. I

	1062	- -	Tabled

	1063	12-9-98	Repealed by 1180

	1064	1-26-99	30.09

	1065	3-9-99	T.S.O. IV

	1066	3-23-99	92.50 - 92.56

	1067	5-25-99	T.S.O. V

	1068	6-22-99	T.S.O. VII

	1069	8-10-99	T.S.O. V

	1070	10-26-99	Repealed by 1183

	1071	9-14-99	T.S.O. VII

	1072	11-9-99	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	1073	11-23-99	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	1074	11-23-99	T.S.O. V

	1075	11-23-99	T.S.O. V

	1076	2-8-00	Not codified

	1077	3-14-00	Repealed by 1149

	1078	3-14-00	T.S.O. III

	1079	4-11-00	T.S.O. V

	1080	4-25-00	Special - not codified

	1081	6-13-00	35.02

	1082	6-27-00	37.02

	1083	8-22-00	38.01 - 38.10, 38.99

	1084	8-22-00	37.02

	1085	8-22-00	T.S.O. III

	1086	12-28-00	Replaced by 1111

	1087	11-28-00	Repealed by 1180

	1088	1-8-01	Repealed by 1132

	1089	1-8-01	T.S.O. VII

	1090	2-27-01	T.S.O. V

	1091	3-13-01	T.S.O. V

	1092	3-27-01	Repealed by 1153

	1093	10-23-01	T.S.O. V

	1095	11-13-01	T.S.O. VII

	1096	3-26-02	T.S.O. III

	1097	8-27-02	T.S.O. IV

	1098	3-26-02	Repealed by 1158

	1099	6-25-02	93.13

	1100	10-30-02	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	1101	12-10-02	Special - Public Improvements; not codified

	1102	3-13-03	113.01 - 113.04

	1103	5-13-03	51.104

	1104	5-13-03	Repealed by 1180

	1105	8-12-03	37.02

	1106	9-9-03	T.S.O. VII

	1107	2-10-04	T.S.O. V

	1108	12-9-03	93.57

	1109	3-9-04	Repealed by 1173

	1110	1-13-04	T.S.O. V

	1111	5-25-04	40.01 - 40.12

	1112	5-11-04	Special - fees; not codified

	1113	6-22-04	Repealed by 1153

	1114	7-27-04	Repealed by 1153

	1115	7-27-04	T.S.O. V

	1116	8-24-04	Repealed by 1153

	1117	11-23-04	Special - rezoning; not codified

	1118	10-26-04	50.01, 50.02, 50.15 - 50.23, 50.35, 50.36, 50.99

	1119	11-23-04	41.01 - 41.16

	1120	3-22-05	T.S.O. III

	1121	4-26-05	T.S.O. III

	1122	5-24-05	38.05

	1123	8-23-05	T.S.O. VII

	1125	- -	Failed to pass

	1126	10-11-05	T.S.O. IV

	1127	8-22-06	111.01 - 111.08, 111.99

	1128	5-23-06	40.05

	1129	7-11-06	T.S.O. V

	1130	8-8-06	T.S.O. VI

	1131	12-27-05	T.S.O. V

	1132	1-24-06	Repealed by 1198

	1133	2-28-06	40.05

	1134	3-28-06	Special - Repealing Ord.; not codified

	1135	9-26-06	110.15 - 110.17

	1136	9-12-06	112.01 - 112.18, 112.99; repealing Ords. 427, 919, 972

	1137	11-28-06	Repealed by 1180

	1138	1-9-07	152.06; repealing 152.59

	1139	11-14-06	93.57

	1140	12-12-06	52.045

	1141	1-9-07	T.S.O. VII

	1142	1-9-07	50.01, 50.02, 50.15 - 50.23, 50.35, 50.36, 50.99

	1143	4-10-07	154.01

	1144	7-24-07	92.15 - 92.23

	1145	7-24-07	T.S.O. I

	1146	8-28-07	31.05

	1147	9-25-07	T.S.O. III

	1148	11-13-07	T.S.O. I

	1149	2-26-08	39.01 - 39.14; repealing Ord. 1077

	1150	2-26-08	Repealed by 1180

	1151	5-13-08	Special - rezoning; not codified

	1152	3-11-08	92.35 - 92.49; repealing Ord. 707

	1153	6-10-08	52.001 - 52.022, 52.999; repealing Ords. 910, 925, 933, 959, 1027, 1043 and 1092

	1154	7-8-08	30.08

	1155	8-26-08	T.S.O. III

	1156	1-27-09	Repealed by 1180

	1157	10-14-08	Special - rezoning; not codified

	1158	10-28-08	31.01 - 31.04; repealing Ords. 617, 845, 956, 1000 and 1098

	1159	12-9-08	Special - rezoning; not codified

	1160	12-9-08	131.01 - 131.04, 131.98, 131.99

	1161	1-13-09	32.01 - 32.08

	1162	1-13-09	T.S.O. VII

	1163	5-26-09	T.S.O. VI

	1164	8-11-09	T.S.O. VII

	1165	11-10-09	Ch. 155

	1166	12-08-09	Repealed by 1180

	1167	1-12-10	Special - Transportation Systems Plan; not codified

	1168	- -	Tabled

	1169	2-9-10	96.01 - 96.10, 96.99

	1170	4-27-10	T.S.O. VI

	1171	4-27-10	152.01 - 152.06, 152.10 - 152.14, 152.20 - 152.22, 152.30 - 152.33, 152.40 - 152.48, 152.50 - 152.53, 152.60, 152.61, 152.65, 152.66, 152.70, 152.71, 152.75, 152.80, 152.81, 152.85, 152.86, 152.90 - 152.94

	1172	5-11-10	T.S.O. III

	1173	5-25-10	Repealed by 1190

	1174	- -	Tabled

	1175	9-28-10	31.25 - 31.27

	1176	9-14-10	T.S.O. VII

	1177	1-11-11	Special - Wastewater Facility Plan; not codified

	1178	2-22-11	42.01 - 42.05

	1179	5-26-11	Repealed by 1198

	1180	6-14-11	Ch. 153

	1181	6-28-11	Special - Finances; not codified

	1182	7-12-11	Special - rezoning; not codified

	1183	10-25-11	Ch. 151

	1184	12-13-11	T.S.O. III

	1185	12-13-11	31.15, 31.16, 153.259

	1186	12-13-11	153.004, 153.037, 153.083

	1187	1-10-12	T.S.O. VII

	1188	1-24-12	Special - Transportation Systems Plan; not codified

	1189	4-10-12	T.S.O. III

	1190	5-22-12	Repealed by 1203

	1191	6-26-12	T.S.O. III

	1192	6-26-12	T.S.O. III

	1193	8-14-12	Special - rezoning; not codified

	1194	9-25-12	153.157, 153.160

	1195	12-18-12	Special - development agreement; not codified

	1196	8-27-13	93.58

	1197	5-28-13	Special - urban growth boundary expansion; not codified

	1198	5-28-13	T.S.O. III; repealing Ords. 1132 and 1179

	1199	8-27-13	Special - rezoning; not codified

	1200	10-8-13	Special - urban growth boundary expansion; not codified

	1201	11-26-13	Special - Transportation System Plan; not codified

	1202	4-22-14	Special - moratorium on medical marijuana facilities; not codified

	1203	4-22-14	33.10

	1204	5-27-14	37.101 - 37.107

	1205	6-24-14	Special - Transportation System Plan; not codified

	1206	7-8-14	T.S.O. VI

	1207	10-28-14	37.200 - 37.213

	1208	12-9-14	153.004, 153.009, 153.014, 153.015, 153.016, 153.017, 153.020, 153.035, 153.038, 153.040, 153.049, 153.062, 153.063, 153.075, 153.083, 153.085, 153.096, 153.097, 153.115, 153.138, 153.139, 153.161, 153.191, 153.194, 153.195, 153.251.050, 153.254.010, 153.254.070, 153.255.030, 153.255.040

	1209	12-17-14	38.01 - 38.99

	1210	12-17-14	Special - rezoning; not codified

	1211	2-24-15	T.S.O. VI

	1212	3-31-15	Ch. 153A

	1213	6-23-15	Ch. 97

	1214	6-23-15	Special - bond issuance; not codified

	1215	6-23-15	Ch. 153B

	1216	7-14-15	T.S.O. III

	1217	9-22-15	93.57

	1218	10-13-15	33.20 - 33.24

	1219	11-24-15	Special - development agreement; not codified

	1220	1-28-16	37.101 - 37.109

	1221	2-9-16	Special - urban growth boundary expansion; not codified

	1222	3-28-17	Special - Comprehensive Plan; not codified

	1223	8-11-16	Ch. 153C

	1224	8-23-16	T.S.O. III

	1225	9-27-16	Ch. 132

	1226	11-7-16	Special - rezoning; not codified

	1227	12-13-16	T.S.O. III

	1228	1-24-17	Special - rezoning; not codified

	1229	2-28-17	152.41, 152.61, 153.004, 153.014, 153.031, 153.035, 153.036, 153.037, 153.080, 153.083, 153.094, 153.095, 153.232, 153.233, 153.252.020, 153.254.060, 153.255.040, 153.255.110, 153.258.030, 153.258.040, 153.259.010

	1230	3-28-17	T.S.O. VII

	1231	3-28-17	T.S.O. VII

	1232	10-24-17	Special - Airport Master Plan; not codified

	1233	10-24-17	Special - rezoning; not codified

	1234	11-28-17	Special - development agreement; not codified

	1235	3-13-18	T.S.O. VII

	1236	4-24-18	90.01, 90.02, 90.04

	1237	4-24-18	Special - Water System Master Plan; not codified

	1238	5-22-18	Special - rezoning; not codified

	1239	5-22-18	Special - Wastewater Master Plan; not codified

	1240	6-12-18	Ch. 53

	1241	7-24-18	Ch. 98

	1242	8-7-18	Special - development agreement; not codified

	1243	8-7-18	Special - development agreement; not codified

	1244	8-28-18	T.S.O. III

	1245	9-11-18	T.S.O. VI

	1246	9-25-18	T.S.O. VI

	1247	10-23-18	T.S.O. VII

	1248	11-27-18	153.083, Ch. 153C

	1249	11-27-18	153.037

	1250	4-9-19	72.41, 72.44

	1251	4-9-19	93.11, 93.40, 93.56, 93.59, 93.70, 93.71, 93.72, 93.73, 93.74, 93.75, 93.99


Ordinances Pending Codification

 The following ordinances have not been codified yet. Click on the ordinance number to view the changes. Only codifiable ordinances can be viewed.

(No uncodified ordinances at this time.)	4-9-19	72.41, 72.44 -->


Ordinances Pending Codification

 The following ordinances have not been codified yet. Click on the ordinance number to view the changes. Only codifiable ordinances can be viewed.

(No uncodified ordinances at this time.)	4-9-19	72.41, 72.44 -->


TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES

Table

I.    ANNEXATIONS

II.    CONTRACTS

III.    FRANCHISES

IV.    INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENTS

IV.    PROPERTY TRANSACTIONS

VI.    STREET NAME CHANGES

VII.    STREET VACATIONS AND DEDICATIONS


TABLE I: ANNEXATIONS

	Ord. No.	Date	Description

	—	- -	Property in Crook County

	445	10-13-53	New territory in Section 6, Township 15 South, Range 16 East; tract of land in Section 6, Township 15 South, Range 16 East

	467	1-10-56	Property know as the East 40 feet of tract number 12, tracts adjoining Newsom's Third Addition

	485	- -	—

	500	5-12-59	Property known as the East 40 feet of tract number 12, tracts adjoining Newsom's Third Addition

	514	2-9-60	Parcel of land in Crook County, metes and bounds description

	519	3-8-60	Parcel of land in Section 5, Township 15 South, Range 16 East

	520	2-24-60	Election annexation, Section 5, Township 15 South, Range 16 East, metes and bounds description

	521	5-10-60	Property in Section 32, Township 14 South, Range 16 East

	522	5-10-60	Property in Section 32, Township 14 South, Range 16 East

	525	8-9-60	Lot 6, Block 1, Valley View Addition

	527	9-13-60	Lot 3, Block 2, Valley View Addition

	531	2-14-61	Parcel of land in Section 5, Township 15 South, Range 16 East

	538	7-10-62	Lots 10, 11 and 12, Block 1, Tyler's Addition; Lots 1,2,3 and South half of Lot 4, Block 2, Tyler's Addition

	543	3-13-63	Lot 4, Block 1, Valley View Addition

	545	9-10-63	Lots 7, 8 and 9, Block 1, Tyler's Addition

	547	10-8-63	Portion of Lots 7, 8 and 9, Block 13, Oregon and Western Addition; portion of Lots 6 and 7, Block 14, Oregon and Western Addition

	550	2-11-64	Portion of Lots 5 and 6, Block 14, Oregon and Western Addition

	558	4-22-64	Valley View Subdivision

	569	12-4-64	First and Second Fairview Subdivision

	582	3-2-66	Portion of East Riverside Addition

	584	4-12-66	Portion of Townsite Company's First Addition (First Baptist Church)

	591	8-9-66	Block 4, Lots 1 and 2, Johnson's Subdivision

	599	7-11-67	Northwest Townsite Company's First Addition, Block 16, portions

	601	8-9-67	First and Second Fairview Subdivision (dispenses with election)

	603	10-11-67	First and Second Fairview Subdivision

	612	8-28-68	Portion of land directly west of First Fairview Subdivision

	615	10-16-68	Portion of north half of Section 6, Township 15 S, Range 16 EWM

	619	12-18-68	Portion of Tax Lot 8, Township 15 S, Range 16 EWM (election dispensed with)

	620	1-15-69	Portion of Tax Lot 8, Township 15 S, Range 16 EWM

	624	4-2-69	Portion of Section 6, Township 15 S, Range 16 EWM (election dispensed with)

	627	4-9-69	Portion of Section 32, Township 14 S, Range 16 EWM (election dispensed with)

	628	- -	—

	629	- -	—

	639	8-26-69	Metes and bounds territory (hearing)

	641	10-28-69	Declaration of annexation (see Ord. 639)

	646	2-24-70	Hearing - metes and bounds territory

	649	3-10-70	Territory abutting south side of SE Fifth Street

	650	5-12-70	Withdrawal of annexed territory from Crook County Vector Control District and Ochoco District Zone II Rural Fire Protection District

	651	5-26-70	Withdrawal of annexed territory from Crook County Vector Control District and Ochoco District Zone II Rural Fire Protection District

	655	9-8-70	Metes and bounds (hearing)

	657	9-22-70	Mason's Subdivision and Tax Lots 60, 61, 62 and 63, Map No. 5A1516 (hearing)

	658	10-13-70	Territory adjacent to and east of McKay Road

	659	10-27-70	Declaration of annexation (see Ord. 657)

	661	12-8-70	Metes and bounds (6.07 acres) (hearing)

	662	1-12-71	Declaration of annexation (see Ord. 661)

	666	3-9-71	Withdrawal from Crook County Vector Control District and Ochoco District Zone II Rural Fire Protection District (hearing)

	668	4-13-71	Withdrawal from Crook County Vector Control District and Ochoco District Zone II Rural Fire Protection (see Ords. 658, 659 and 662)

	673	7-13-71	Metes and bounds (hearing)

	674	8-10-71	Territory contiguous to east city limits south of Highway No. 26 and west of Combs Flat Road

	681	12-14-71	Withdrawal from Crook County Vector Control District and Ochoco Zone II Fire District (hearing)

	684	2-22-72	1.2 acres, metes and bounds (hearing)

	685	1-11-72	Withdrawal of territory annexed by Ord. 674

	688	3-14-72	Territory east of N. Main St. and abutting territory annexed by Ord. 658

	692	6-13-72	Metes and bounds (election)

	702	2-27-73	NW 1/4 of SE 1/4 of S5, T15S, R16E, W.M. (hearing)

	703	4-24-73	Declaration of annexation (see Ord. 702)

	716	2-12-74	Hudspeth and Laughlin Road territory (hearing)

	718	3-12-74	Declaration of annexation (see Ord. 716)

	723	4-9-74	Withdrawal of territory annexed by Ord. 718 from Crook County Vector Control District and Crook County Zone II Fire District (hearing)

	724	5-14-74	Declaration of withdrawal (see Ord. 723)

	752	8-12-75	Metes and bounds (hearing)

	753	8-19-75	Metes and bounds (see Ord. 752) (election)

	756	12-9-75	Withdrawal of territory annexed by Ord. 753 from Crook County Vector Control District and Crook County Zone II Fire District

	757	12-23-75	Withdrawal of territory (see Ord. 753) (hearing)

	758	1-13-76	Withdrawal of territory (see Ord. 753)

	760	2-14-76	Tax Lots 10300 and 10402, SW 1/4 S5, T15S, R16E, W.M. (hearing)

	761	3-9-76	Declaration of annexation (see Ord. 760)

	762	4-13-76	Withdrawal of territory annexed by Ord. 761 from Crook County Vector Control District and Crook County Zone II Fire District (hearing)

	763	4-27-76	Withdrawal of territory (see Ord. 762)

	768	6-8-76	Tax Lots 200, 300, 400, 500, 501 and 502, Assessor's Map 15-16-6BB

	769	6-22-76	Declaration of annexation (see Ord. 768)

	776	12-14-76	Clarification of Ord. 769

	779	4-26-77	Withdrawal of territory annexed by Ord. 769 from Crook County Vector Control District and Crook County Zone II Fire District (hearing)

	780	5-24-77	Declaration of withdrawal (see Ord. 779)

	794	2-14-78	Declaration of annexation, metes and bounds description

	797	4-11-78	Withdrawal of territory annexed by Ord. 794 from Crook County Vector Control District and Crook County Zone II Fire District (see Ord. 794)

	801	5-23-78	Declaration of annexation of territory west of First Fairview Subdivision, north of Lynn Blvd., and east of South Main Street

	803	6-27-78	Withdrawal of territory annexed by Ord. 801 from Crook County Vector Control District and Crook County Zone II Fire District (see Ord. 801)

	814	5-8-79	Portions of Laughlin Road (hearing)

	816	6-12-79	Declaration of annexation (see Ord. 814)

	818	7-10-79	Declaration of annexation of island portions of Harding Street, Hudspeth Road and Juniper Street

	825	12-11-79	Amends Ord. 818

	826	1-22-80	Declaration of annexation of island territory in the Hudspeth Enclave

	827	1-22-80	Declaration of annexation of island territory in the Les Schwab Enclave

	830	3-11-80	Withdrawal of territory annexed by Ord. 826 from Crook County Vector Control District and Crook County Zone II Fire District

	831	3-11-80	Withdrawal of territory annexed by Ord. 827 from Crook County Vector Control District and Crook County Zone II Fire District

	874	1-24-84	Sets time and place for public hearing concerning annexation into a certain portion of west Sixth Street

	875	7-24-84	Declaration of annexation of west Sixth Street

	942	2-27-90	Withdrawal of territory from Crook County Vector Control and Zone II Fire Districts

	988	10-13-92	Annexation of property into Urban Growth Boundary for use with Crook County Fairgrounds

	990	12-8-92	Annexation of property into Urban Growth Area and extending the Urban Growth Boundary to provide services to Les Schwab Park

	991	1-26-93	Withdrawal of golf course property from the Crook County Vector Control and the Zone II Fire Districts

	997	6-29-93	Addition to Urban Growth Boundary of those lands lying southerly of Lamonta Road and north of the City Industrial Park, more particularly described as Tax Assessor Map 14 South, 15 East, 25D, TL 1600 and 1700

	1002	2-25-94	Withdrawal of certain identified real properties from the Crook County Vector Control and Zone II Fire Districts

	1009	4-26-94	Addition to Urban Growth Boundary to include certain properties located southwest of the city and commonly identified as the City-Council Airport Development Area

	1021	5-23-95	Withdrawal of certain identified real properties from the Crook County Vector Control and Zone II Fire Districts

	1023	9-12-95	Withdrawal of certain identified real properties from the Crook County Vector Control and Zone II Fire Districts

	1026	11-14-95	Withdrawal of certain identified real properties from the Crook County Vector Control and Zone II Fire Districts

	1031	2-27-96	Withdrawal of certain identified real properties from the Crook County Vector Control and Zone II Fire Districts

	1042	5-13-97	Withdrawal of certain identified real properties from the Crook County Vector Control and Zone II Fire Districts

	1048	10-14-97	Withdrawal of certain identified real properties from the Crook County Vector Control and Zone II Fire Districts

	1050	10-28-97	Withdrawal of certain identified real properties from the Crook County Vector Control and Zone II Fire Districts

	1059	7-28-98	Withdrawal of certain identified real properties from the Crook County Vector Control and Zone II Fire Districts

	1061	8-25-98	Withdrawal of certain identified real properties from the Crook County Vector Control and Zone II Fire Districts

	1145	7-24-07	Tax Lots 1504, 1224

	1148	11-13-07	Tax Lots 100, 116, 300, 2900, 7101, 7200, 7300


TABLE II: CONTRACTS

	Ord. No.	Date	Description

	259	5-3-18	Lease and option to purchase railroad equipment, with contracting party being Oregon-Washington Railroad and Navigation Co. and Oregon Trunk Co.

	262	8-16-18	Railway operation funds, with contracting party being Railway Commission

	355	4-4-39	Electric light service, with contracting party being Pacific Power & Light

	359	8-6-40	Electric power, with contracting party being Pacific Power & Light

	365	2-4-41	Electric power line, with contracting party being the United States of America

	371	6-2-42	Cross city railway with ditches, etc., with contracting party being the United States of America

	443	6-29-53	Electric power, with contracting party being Pacific Power & Light

	478	4-17-57	Improvement of Main Street, with the contracting party being the State of Oregon


TABLE III: FRANCHISES

	Ord. No.	Date	Description

	150	7-22-04	Granting to Deschutes Telephone Company a telephone franchise

	156	3-6-06	Granting to Geo. Summers a telephone franchise

	159	9-11-06	Granting to Pacific States Telephone & Telegraph a telephone franchise

	162	5-7-07	Granting to Bear Creek Telephone Co. a telephone line and pole erection franchise

	164	- -	—

	167	12-1-08	Granting to McKay Creek Telephone Company a telephone line and pole erection franchise

	195	12-26-11	Granting to Lookout Mountain Telephone Company a telephone line and pole erection franchise

	213	5-5-14	Granting to H.S. Cram a water supply franchise

	261	8-6-18	Granting to Standard Oil Company a franchise to locate storage tanks

	278	6-3-24	Granting to Union Oil Company a franchise to locate storage

	290	- -	—

	291	- -	—

	349	5-3-38	Granting to Ochoco Lumber Company a franchise to operate a railroad spur

	372	6-2-42	Granting to J.B. McLain a franchise for passenger buses

	450	10-13-53	Granting to Pacific Telephone and Telegraph Company a telephone and telegraph franchise

	461	5-10-55	Granting to Prineville Community TV, Inc. a television franchise

	523	6-21-60	Granting to Cascade Natural Gas Corporation a gas franchise

	544	6-11-63	Granting to Pacific Power & Light Company a franchise for street lighting

	549	11-12-63	Granting Pacific N.W. Bell Telephone Company a telephone and telegraph franchise

	566	6-24-64	Granting to Pacific N.W. Bell Telephone Company a franchise to operate telephone booths at various locations in the city

	592	10-12-66	Granting to Cascade Natural Gas Corporation a gas franchise

	764	5-11-76	Granting to Crestview Cable TV a cable television franchise

	822	11-13-79	Granting to Pacific Power and Light Company a franchise for electric light and power lines for a term of 20 years

	873	1-10-84	Granting to Pacific N.W. Bell Telephone Company a communications franchise for a term of ten years

	887	5-11-76	Granting to Crestview Cable TV a cable television franchise

	931	2-28-89	Granting to Priveville Disposal, Inc. an exclusive franchise for solid waste management in the city for continuing six-year terms

	943	- -	—

	986	9-22-92	Granting to California Oregon Broadcasting, Inc., dba Crestview Cable Television, a cable television franchise for a term expiring 1-1-2002

	1020	3-14-95	Granting to U S West Communications, Inc. a communications franchise for a term of ten years; repealing Ords. 873 and 943

	1078	3-14-00	Granting to Pacificorp an electric light and power franchise for a term of five years

	1085	8-22-00	Amending cable TV franchise Ord. No. 986

	1088	1-8-01	Granting to Cascade Natural Gas Corporation a gas franchise; repealing Ord. No. 835 (Repealed by 1132)

	1096	3-26-02	Amends Ord. 1078

	1120	3-22-05	Extending Ord. 1078 through May 31, 2005

	1121	4-26-05	Granting an electric utility franchise to PacifiCorp

	1132	1-24-06	Granting to Cascade Natural Gas Corporation a natural and/or artificial gas distribution system franchise; repealing Ord. 1088 (Repealed by 1198)

	1147	9-25-07	Granting to Bend Cable Communications LLC, dba Bend Broadband, a franchise to operate and maintain fiber optic facilities

	1155	8-26-08	Granting to Quantum Communications LLC a franchise to construct, operate and maintain a data communications service facility and provide telecommunication services

	1172	5-11-10	Granting to PacificCorp, dba Pacific Power, an electric utility franchise and general utility easement

	1179	5-26-11	Extending Ord. 1132 through June 30, 2013 (Repealed by 1198)

	1184	12-13-11	Extending Ord. 986 through January 1, 2017, and removing Section 11 thereof

	1189	4-10-12	Granting to Central Electric Cooperative, Inc., an electricity and electric service franchise

	1191	6-26-12	Amends Ord. 1189

	1192	6-26-12	Granting to Prinetime Internet Solutions, LLC a franchise to construct, operate and maintain a data communications service facility and provide telecommunication services

	1198	5-28-13	Granting to Cascade Natural Gas Corporation a nonexclusive gas distribution franchise; repealing Ords. 1132 and 1179

	1216	7-14-15	Granting an electric utility franchise and general utility easement to PacifiCorp

	1224	8-23-16	Amending Ord. 1155 granting a nonexclusive franchise to Quantum Communications and allowing assignment of the franchise to Lightspeed Networks, Inc.

	1227	12-13-16	Granting California Oregon Broadcasting, Inc., an Oregon corporation D/B/A Crestview Cable Communications, the right and privilege to operate a cable system

	1244	8-28-18	Granting Zayo Group, LLC THE right and privilege to provide and operate a telecommunications business


TABLE IV: INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENTS

	Ord. No.	Date	Description

	1055	2-24-98	Establishment of Crook County-City of Prineville Airport Commission

	1065	3-9-99	Ratifying the creation of the Central Oregon Law Enforcement Services

	1097	8-27-02	Setting forth the means for enforcement of rules and regulations for the Crook County Airport as established by the Airport Commission

	1126	10-11-05	Ratifying an amendment to an Intergovernmental Agreement Creating Central Oregon Cities Organization to include the cities of Sisters, Prineville, Maupin and Metolius


TABLE V: PROPERTY TRANSACTIONS

	Ord. No.	Date	Description

	262-A	- -	Property exchange for right-of-way, with the contracting party being the H. Messenger Estate

	885	3-12-85	Transfers property owned by city to Crook County Parks and Recreation District

	895	2-25-86	Sells city property to Pioneer Cut Stock, Inc.

	905	9-23-86	Authorizes sale of city property to Sam and Cleta Puckett

	920	3-22-88	Authorizes sale of city property to Prineville Economic Promotions, Inc.

	921	4-5-88	Authorizes sale of city property to Ranger Millwork, Inc.

	922	6-28-88	Authorizes sale of city property to Clear Pine Mouldings

	929	10-25-88	Authorizes sale of city property to New Systems Ventures

	935	4-25-89	Authorizes sale of city property to Crook County

	944	8-14-90	Authorizes sale of city property to Carson Oil Co. Inc.

	949	12-27-90	Authorizes sale of city property to Bob and Karen Caudle

	984	3-24-92	Authorizes transfer of city property, being lots 11 and 12 of Block 10 of Hidden Springs, to Crook County Parks and Recreation District

	992	2-9-93	Sells city property in the industrial park, being Parcel 1 of Partition Plat No. 1992-23 according to the Partition Plat filed 12-11-92 as MF No 106855 to Robert Milligan; and Parcel 2 of the same to Allen B. Kvarme

	993	2-9-93	Sells city property in the industrial park, being Lot 2 of the Prineville Industrial Park Subdivision to Tony M., Alvin A. and Maritin L. Espinola

	999	7-27-93	Sells city property near industrial park, being Parcel 2 of Partition Plat No. 1993-14 according to the plat filed 7-1-93 as MF #109947, to Loren and Debbie Masten

	1003	2-25-94	Sells city property to New Systems Ventures, being parcels of land that are a part of the West portion of Parcel 2 of Partition Plat 1993-22 lying in the SE 1/4 SE 1/4 of Section 25 Township 14 South, Range 15 East, Willamette Meridan

	1005	3-22-94	Sells city property in the industrial park, to Frank and Alana Porfily

	1006	4-12-94	Transfers city property to Crook County for Habitat for Humanity, being a parcel of land in Lots 1 and 2, Block 10 of Amended Plat of Newsom's Additions; Newsom's First Addition, a duly recorded subdivision plat being in the SW 1/4, Sec 32, T 14, S., R 16I., WM

	1014	9-13-94	Sells city property to New System Ventures, being the North and South portions of Parcel 1 of Partition Plat No. 1992-22

	1018	2-28-95	Sells city property to Ronald E. Johnson, being a portion of Lot 1 of the Prineville Industrial Park Subdivision

	1029	1-31-96	Sells city property to Dale P. and Catherine E. Tompkins

	1030	1-31-96	Sells city property to RYCO Manufacturing, Inc.

	1044	5-27-97	Sells city property to Stephen Dynice , being Lots 4 and 5 of Baldwin Industrial Park

	1045	5-27-97	Sells city property to Bobby Kennedy II and Terry Larimer, being Lot 21 of Baldwin Industrial Park

	1046	5-27-97	Sells city property to Michael and Diane Webb and Kelli Utterback, being Lot 22 of Baldwin Industrial Park

	1049	10-28-97	Sells city property to Vincent Batha, being Lot 19 of Baldwin Road Industrial Park

	1052	10-28-97	Sells city property to Calvin D. and Jeanette A. Craig, being Lot 18 of Baldwin Road Industrial Park

	1056	3-10-98	Sells city property to Aircraft Rubber Manufacturing, being Lot 20 of Baldwin Road Industrial Park

	1067	5-25-99	Sells city property to Vince Batha, being Lots 1-3 and 6-16 of Baldwin Road Industrial Park

	1069	8-10-99	Transfering Lot 12 of Block 10 of Hidden Springs Subdivision to Ernest S. Engstrom and Milton F. Shrum

	1074	11-23-99	Selling real property in Baldwin Road Industrial Park to Rodney L. Stevens Equipment Sales and Service, LLC

	1075	11-23-99	Selling real property in Baldwin Road Industrial Park to Bobby F. Kennedy II

	1079	4-11-00	Selling real property in Hidden Springs Subdivision to Ronald Halvorson and Deborah Halvorson

	1090	2-27-01	Transferring city railroad property in exchange for easements and declaring an emergency

	1091	3-13-01	Selling Lot 23 of Baldwin Road Industrial Park to Tri-County Builders Corporation

	1093	10-23-01	Selling real property in Baldwin Road Industrial Park to Herb L. Pearce and Kimberly C. Pearce

	1107	2-10-04	Transferring real property to Crook County Parks and Recreation District

	1110	1-13-04	Selling real property described as Crook County Tax Assessor's Map 1516 6AD Tax Lots 2400, 2500, and 2601 to Central Oregon Regional Housing Authority

	1115	7-27-04	Selling real property to King's Auto, LLC

	1129	7-11-06	Sale of real property to Anthony Jones

	1131	12-27-05	Sale of real property to Felix Capo


TABLE VI: STREET NAME CHANGES

	Ord. No.	Date	Description

	411	6-12-51	Sunset Lane to Lookout Avenue

	Ochoco Drive and Majors Road to Ochoco Avenue

	Deer Street Drive to Ewen Street

	South First Place and that part of South Second Street lying west of Main Street to Southwest Second Street

	That part of South Third Street lying west of Main Street to Southwest Third Street

	That part of South Fourth Street lying west of Main Street to Southwest Fourth Street

	South Fifth Place to Southwest Fifth Street

	426	6-10-52	A Street to Main Street

	West B Street to Beaver Street

	West C Street to Claypool Street

	West D Street to Deer Street

	West E Street to Ewen Street

	West F Street to Fairmont Street

	East B Street to Belknap Street

	East C Street to Court Street

	East D Street to Dunham Street

	East E Street to Elm Street

	East F Street to Fairview Street

	426	6-10-52	East G Street to Garner Street

	East H Street to Holly Street

	East I Street to Idlewood Street

	East J Street to Juniper Street

	That part of First, Second, Third, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, Seventh, Eighth, Ninth and Tenth Streets lying west of Main Street to West First, West Second and the like

	That part of First, Second, Third, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, Seventh, Eighth, Ninth and Tenth Streets lying east of Main Street to East First, East Second and the like

	448	11-10-53	Pine Avenue and Loper Road to Loper Avenue

	487	4-18-58	Park Boulevard to Harwood Street

	Unnamed street to be known as West Sixth Street

	596	11-16-66	South Second Street to South East Second Street

	South Third Street to South East Third Street

	South Fourth Street to South East Third Street

	952	3-12-91	Harding Road to North Combs Flat Road

	1060	8-11-98	Sunrise Lane to NE Sunrise Street

	1130	8-8-06	Last section of NE Hudspeth Road to NE Hudspeth Lane

	1163	5-26-09	NW Big Guy Lane to NW Peony Lane

	1170	4-27-10	SW Vitesse Avenue to SW Connect Way

	1206	7-8-13	SW Crestview Road to SW Crestview Lane

	1211	2-24-15	Unnamed alley to NE Apollo Alley

			Unnamed alley to NE Colleen Alley

	1245	9-11-18	Private road to SW Airway Road

			Private road to SW Fireline Road

	1246	9-25-18	SW Social Loop and portion of SW Connect Way to SW Connect Loop


TABLE VII: STREET VACATIONS AND DEDICATIONS

	Ord. No.	Date	Description

	133	12-5-1899	Vacation of a portion of Fourth Street

	142	12-4-02	Vacation of the alley in Block 7, Monroe Hodges Plat

	177	9-3-10	Vacation of First Street between A and D Streets

	183	3-14-11	Vacation of a portion of D Street

	189	8-5-11	Vacation of East G Street between Second and Third Streets and the alley between East G and East H Streets

	193	10-10-11	Vacation of a portion of First Street

	201	12-14-12	Dedication of a portion land on the line of East E Street between Fifth and Sixth Streets

	266A	2-4-19	Vacation of a portion of land to extend Main Street

	267	8-11-19	Vacation of Sixth Street between A and B Streets

	282	4-6-26	Vacation of Second Street between East F and East H Streets

	294	1-7-31	Vacation of East D Street between Second and Third Streets

	354	7-12-38	Vacation of a portion of Prineville Heights Addition; vacation of a portion of Tenth Street; vacation of several unnamed streets

	362	11-25-40	Vacation of the street located on the east side of Block 1, Noble's Addition

	386	4-6-48	Vacation of two streets and three alleys in Ochoco Heights

	389	8-3-48	Vacation of Eighth Street from Fairmont to Glenwood Streets; vacation of the alley in Block 1 of Yancey's Addition

	435	4-14-53	Vacation of a portion of Ochoco Avenue

	437	4-13-53	Vacation of a portion of East Fourth Street

	442	5-20-53	Vacation of a portion of the alley in Block 2, Second Addition

	463	6-28-55	Vacation of a portion of the plat of Noble's Addition

	465	11-8-55	Vacation of the alley between Lots 10 and 11, Block 5, Ochoco Heights

	466	12-20-55	Vacation of East Ninth Street between North Court Street and North Elm Street and a portion of North Dunham Street

	484	4-18-58	Vacation of a portion of East Second Street

	506	10-13-59	Vacation of South Third Street and the alley between Holly Street and Idlewood Street

	530	12-7-60	Vacation of the alley in Block 13, Monroe Hodges Plat

	539	7-10-62	Vacation of the alley between South Fairview and South Garner Streets

	540	8-14-62	Vacation of the alley between South Third and South Fourth Streets

	541	11-13-62	Vacation of the east 80 feet of the alley in Block 3, Monroe Hodges Plat

	546	10-8-63	Vacation of a portion of East Eighth Street between North Elm and North Fairview Streets

	552	3-10-64	Vacation of the alley in Block 1, Third Addition

	556	5-12-64	Vacation of the west 12 inches of Main Street from West First to West Second Street

	573	4-7-65	Vacation of a portion of North Fairview Street

	583	1-26-66	Vacation of a portion of SW Fifth and a portion of the plat of the East Riverside Addition

	590	8-9-66	Vacation of the alley in Block 5, First Addition

	593	11-16-66	Vacation of the alley in Block 6, Fifth Addition

	606	11-27-68	Vacation of the alley in Block 1, Second Addition; vacation of the alley between Block 1 of Second Addition and Block 19 of Monroe Hodges Plat

	656	11-10-70	Vacation of a portion of the alley adjoining Lot 1, Block 1, Pace's First Addition

	664	1-26-71	Vacation of a portion of the alley adjoining Lot 1, Block 1, Pace's First Addition; repeals Ord. 656

	774	10-12-76	Vacation of the alley between SE Fourth Street and SE Fifth Street, Block 14, Oregon and Western Addition

	792	1-10-78	Vacation of a portion of North Belknap Street south of the railroad right-of-way, Newsom's Addition

	793	1-10-78	Vacation of a portion of Loper Avenue abutting Lots 51 and 52, Ochoco Heights, and Block 8, Loma Vista Subdivision

	799	4-25-78	Vacation of a portion of the alley between W 2nd. St. and W 3rd St., Pace's First Addition

	804	7-11-78	Vacation of the north 10 feet of Loper Avenue, abutting Block 8, Loma Vista Subdivision

	856	11-24-81	Vacation of the north 100 feet of North Fairview Street, north of East Eighth Street

	860	5-25-82	Vacation of a portion of the alley located in Block 3 of the original Monroe Hodges Plat forming southerly boundary of the east 50 feet of Lot 2

	868	7-12-83	Vacation of a portion of the alley west of Lot 1 of Block 1 of the second Fairview Subdivision

	889	8-13-85	Vacation of the alley running north south along the west boundary of Pace's First Subdivision connecting W. Second and W. Third Street

	941	10-10-89	Vacation of the roads and easements in Prineville Acres and Northwest Townsite Company; First Addition

	983	2-25-92	Vacation of the west five feet of Del Rio Avenue between Loper Avenue and Ochoco Avenue

	998	7-13-93	Vacation of the alleyway lying immediately north of Lots 4, 5 and 6, in Block 21, of Monroe Hodges Plat

	1037	6-25-96	Vacation of the northerly most portion of North Elm Street located in the north portion of the intersection of Elm Street and Loper Avenue

	1053	12-9-97	Vacation of that portion of the east-west alley between West Third and Fourth Streets and Deer and Harwood Streets bordering the south property boundaries of Lots 3,4 and 5 of Block 2 of Barron's First Addition

	1068	6-22-99	Vacation of that portion of F Street of Newsom's Fourth Addition lying northerly of the southerly right-of-way of the rye grass irrigation ditch

	1071	9-14-99	Vacating the westerly most 150+ feet of the east- west alley between West 3rd and 4th Streets and Deer and Harwood Streets and adjoining Lots 12 through 18 of Block 5 of Barron's First Addition

	1089	1-8-01	Vacation of that portion of S.E. 4th Street east of S.E. Idlewild Street an average of 39.65 feet and that portion of S.E. Juniper Street north of S.E. Fifth Street an average of 118.75 feet and bordered on both sides by property vested to Norm Cooper

	1095	11-13-01	Vacation of that portion of the Northern most 107.46 feet of the alley located north of S.E. Fifth Street along the east boundary of Lot 1 of Block 1 of the Hidden Springs subdivision

	1106	9-9-03	Vacating certain portions of NE Dunham Street, NE Fairview Street, NE Fifth Street, NW Beaver Street, NW Sixth Street, NE Garner Street, and certain portions of public alleys thereto related

	1123	8-23-05	Vacating certain portions of NW Locust Street, and NE Holly Street

	1141	1-9-07	Vacating all of SE Hodia Ct

	1162	1-13-09	Vacating alley in Block 10, Second Addition

	1164	8-11-09	Vacating a portion of NE 4th Street

	1176	9-14-10	Vacating a portion of NW Connect Way

	1187	1-10-12	Vacating a portion of NW Connect Way and renaming remaining portion SW Social Loop

	1230	3-28-17	Vacating NE Dunham Street between NE 2nd Street and E 1st Street

	1231	3-28-17	Vacating a portion of the alley between NE 2nd Street and E 1st Street from NE Court Street to NE Dunham Street

	1235	3-13-18	Vacating a portion of SW Connect Way and SW Social Loop

	1247	10-23-18	Vacating an unimproved portion of NE Cougar Loop in Deer Ridge Subdivision Phase 1



-----------------------------

The Code of Prineville is current through Ordinance 1251, passed April 9, 2019.

Disclaimer: The City Recorder's Office has the official version of the Code of Prineville. Users should contact the City Recorder's Office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited above.

City Website: http://www.cityofprineville.com/ City Telephone: (541) 447-5627

Code Publishing Company 