CITY OF SWEET HOME, OREGON
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2020 S-7 Supplement contains:
local legislation current through Ord. 1289, passed 2020
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
SWEET HOME CHARTER
Be it enacted by the city of Sweet Home, Linn County, Oregon:
CHAPTER I
NAME, BOUNDARIES, POWERS AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 1. Name and Boundaries.
   The City of Sweet Home, Linn County, Oregon shall, upon the taking effect of
this charter, continue to be a municipal corporation under the name of the City
of Sweet Home.
   The city includes all territory within its boundaries as they now exist or
are legally modified. The city will maintain as a public record an accurate and
current description of the boundaries.
Section 2. Powers of the City.
   Subject only to limitations provided in this charter, the city shall have
all rights, powers, privileges and immunities now or hereafter granted either
expressly or impliedly to municipalities by the constitution, statues and
common law of the state, as fully as though each of such rights, powers,
privileges and immunities were specifically stated in this charter.
   The enumeration of or reference to particular rights, powers, privileges and
immunities in this charter shall not be construed to be exclusive. This charter
shall be liberally construed to the end that the city may have all necessary
powers for the conduct of its municipal affairs, as contemplated by the
municipal home rule provision of the constitution and laws of the state.
CHAPTER II
FORM OF GOVERNMENT
Section 3. Council and Mayor.
   Except as otherwise provided in this charter, all powers of the city shall
be vested in a council of seven members nominated and elected from the city at
large.
   At each biennial general election, four councilors shall be elected. The
three receiving the highest number of votes shall each hold office for four
years, and the one receiving the number of votes next to the three highest
shall hold office for two years. Tie votes shall be determined by lot.
   At its first meeting of the new term after each biennial general election,
the council shall elect from its membership a chairperson  who shall be mayor
for a term of two years.
   The mayor and councilors in office at the time of adoption of this charter
shall continue in office until the expiration of their respective terms, with
powers and duties as provided in this charter.
Section 4. City Attorney, Manager and Municipal Judge.
   The council shall appoint and keep in office a city attorney, city manager
who shall also serve as the city recorder, and a municipal judge, who shall
hold office subject to the discretion of the council and may be removed by the
council with or without cause.
Section 5. Other City Officers and Employees.
   The city manager shall appoint a treasurer, a chief of police and such other
officers and employees of the city as the council deems necessary, and may
remove any of them at any time with or without cause. The council may by
resolution require any officer to fill and perform the duties of two or more
offices.
Section 6. Salaries.
   The council shall fix the compensation of all city officers and employees.
Section 7. Bonds of Officers, Employees and Contractors.
   If ordinances require, every person appointed to an office or place of
public employment in the city or entering into a contact with the city shall
give the city a bond for the faithful performance of his/her duties. Nothing in
this section, however, shall detract from the effect of
Section 20.
CHAPTER III
ELECTIONS
Section 8. Regulation of Elections.
   Except as this charter provides otherwise and as the council provides
otherwise by ordinance relating to elections, the general law of the state
shall apply to the conduct of all city elections, recounts of the returns
therefrom, and contest thereof. Any qualified elector who has resided in the
city at least one year may be nominated for the council or for mayor.
Section 9. Special Elections.
   The council may by resolution or ordinance order a special election and
provide the time, manner and means for holding it. At least 10 days notice
shall be given of each special election.
Section 10.Commencement of Terms of Office.
   The term of office of each person elected to office at a regular city
election shall commence on the first Monday of January following the election. 
In the case of an election to fill an existing vacancy in office, the person
elected shall enter upon his/her office immediately.
Section 11.Oath of Office.
   Each officer, before entering upon the duties of his/her office, shall take
an oath that he/she will support the constitution and laws of the United States
and the state, and that he/she will faithfully perform the duties of his/her
office.
CHAPTER IV
VACANCIES
Section 12.Vacancies in Office Generally.
   An office shall be deemed vacant upon the incumbent's death, insanity,
conviction of a felony, resignation, removal from the city or absence from the
city for a period of 30 days without the consent of the council in case of the
mayor, manager, municipal judge or councilor, or without the consent of the
manager in case of officers appointed by the manager; upon the incumbent's
ceasing to possess the qualifications necessary for office; or upon the failure
of the person elected or appointed to an office to qualify therefore on or
before the day of his/her term of office commences; and in case of the mayor or
a councilor, upon his/her absence from meetings of the council for 60 days
without the consent of the council.
Section 13. Manner in Which Vacancies Shall Be Filled.
   Vacancies in office filled by election or by appointment by the council
shall be filled by appointment by the council at any regular or special
meeting, and the person so appointed shall serve the full unexpired term and
until his/her successor is chosen and qualified. Vacancies in offices filled by
appointment by the manager shall be filled by appointment by the manager. An
officer appointed to fill a vacancy shall within 24 hours after his/her
appointment qualify for office, and unless he/she does so, the office shall be
considered vacant. During the temporary absence of any officer from the city
for any cause his/her office may be filled temporarily in the manner provided
for filling vacancies in office.
CHAPTER V
THE COUNCIL
Section 14. Council Meetings.
   The council shall provide for the time and place of its regular meetings and
adopt rules and regulations for the government of its members and proceedings.
It shall hold at least one regular meeting each month. Special meetings of the
council may be called by the mayor, either upon his/her own motion or upon the
request of at least three members of the council, and held at any time, upon
verbal or written notice to all members of the council then in the city.
Special meetings of the council may also be held by the common consent of all
members of the council.
Section 15.Quorum.
   A majority of council members is a quorum to conduct business, but a smaller
number may meet and adjourn from time to time to compel the attendance of
absent members in the manner provided by ordinance. The council shall keep a
journal of its proceeding, and on the call of two members shall the yeas and
nays to be taken and entered in the journal upon any question before it except
a motion to adjourn. The proceedings of the council shall be public.
Section 16. Mayor’s Duties at Council Meetings.
   The Mayor shall be chairperson of the council and shall preside over its
deliberations. He/she shall have authority to preserve order, enforce the rules
of council and determine the order of business, subject to the rules of the
council. He/she may vote as a councilor.
Section 17. President Pro Tem.
   At its first meeting in the new term after each biennial election, the
council shall elect from its membership, a president pro tem for a term of two
years. The president pro tem shall perform the duties of the mayor in the
absence of the mayor.
Section 18. Vote Required.
   The concurrence of a majority of a quorum shall be required to determine any
matter before the council except as provided otherwise in this charter.
CHAPTER VI
POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE CITY OFFICERS
Section 19. Mayor.
   The mayor shall appoint the various committees provided for under the rules
of the council or otherwise and shall fill all vacancies in committees of the
council from that body. He/she shall sign all ordinances passed by the council
within three days after their passage. He/she shall sign all instruments and
writings authorized by this charter, the laws of the state or the council. In
the absence of the mayor, such instruments shall be signed by the president pro
tem of the council. All orders on the city treasurer shall be signed by two of
the three following named city officers, being the mayor, the city manager and
the city treasurer.
Section 20. Manager.
   (a)   Qualifications. The manager shall be the administrative head of the
city government. He/she shall be chosen by the council without regard to
political consideration and solely with reference to his/her executive and
administrative qualifications.
   Before entering upon his/her duties, the manager shall file with the mayor
an official bond for faithful performance thereof, payable to the city in the
sum of $10,000,  the premium of which shall be paid by the city. The bond shall
be to the satisfaction of the council, and the approval of the mayor shall be
endorsed thereon.
   (b)    Term. The manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term, but may
be removed with a vote of four members of the council.  Upon any vacancy
occurring in the office of the manager subsequent to the first appointment
hereunder, the council shall, at its next meeting, adopt a resolution of its
intention to appoint a manager, and no such appointment shall be made until at
least four weeks after adoption of the resolution. The council shall appoint a
manager within a reasonable time after the adoption of the resolution of
intention.
   (c)    Powers and duties. The powers and duties of the manager shall be:
      (1)   To see that all ordinances are enforced.
      (2)   To appoint all heads of departments and other city officers and
employees, and remove them at pleasure, and to have general supervision and
control over them, except as otherwise provided in this charter. All such
appointments shall be made upon the basis of merit and fitness alone.
      (3)   To see that the provisions of all franchises, leases, contracts,
permits and privileges granted by the city are fully observed, and to report to
the council any violations thereof.
      (4)   To attend all meetings of the council unless excused therefrom by
three councilors or by the mayor.
      (5)   To act as purchasing agent for all departments of the city. All
purchases shall be made in accordance with the council approved city purchasing
policy.
      (6)   To examine or cause to be examined, without notice, the official
conduct of any officer, assistant, deputy, clerk or employee in any of the
departments of city government, except councilors.
      (7)   To keep the council advised to the needs of the city.
      (8)   To prepare and submit to the budget committee the annual budget
estimate and such reports as may be required by that body.
      (9)   To submit to the council an annual report of all departments of the
city and such other reports as the council may require.
      (10)   To prepare or cause to be prepared plans and specification for
work coming under his/her supervision which the council orders, and to provide
such plans and specifications in sufficient number and in ample time to give
full opportunity for all contractors who desire to bid thereon to do so.
      (11)   To have control, subject to such ordinances as may from time to
time be adopted, for all public utilities owned or operated by the city.   
      (12)   To have general supervision over all city property and its use by
the public or city employees.
      (13)   To appoint such advisory boards as he/she may deem desirable to
advise on, assist him/her in his/her work; but the members of such boards will
receive no compensation as such board members.
      (14)   To perform such other duties as may be required by this charter or
as the council may require of him/her.
      (15)   From time to time, in order to facilitate the prompt, economical
and efficient dispatch of city business, to organize the work of the
departments under his/her control, to assign assistants, deputies, and
employees from any office or department of the city government to perform work
or service in connection with any other office or department thereof, or to
work in more than one said offices or departments thereof; provided, that no
such change shall affect the powers or duties of any elective officer to the
city.
      (16)   To serve as the city recorder and such to be clerk of the council,
keep an accurate record of its proceedings in a book provided for that purpose,
and countersign all instruments and writings by this charter or by the laws of
the state or the city.
   (d)   Seats at Council Meetings. The manager and such other officers of the
city as may be designated by vote of the council shall be entitled to seats
with the council, but shall have no vote therein. The manager shall have the
right to take part in the discussion of all matters coming before council.
   (e)   Manager Pro Tem. During the absence of the manager from the city,
during his/her temporary disability to act as manager, or during the interim
when the council is seeking a manager, the council shall appoint a manager pro
tem who shall possess the powers and discharge the duties of the manager during
such absence or disability only; provided, however that a manager pro tem shall
have no authority to appoint or remove any city officer or employee except with
the approval of five members of the council. No manager pro tem shall hold his/
her position for more than six months. No appointment of a manager pro tem
shall be consecutively renewed.
In case of the absence of the manager or the manager pro tem from council
meetings, the council shall appoint a clerk of the council pro tem.
   (f)    Interference in Administration. No member of the council shall in any
manner, directly or indirectly, by suggestion or otherwise, attempt to
influence or coerce the manager in the making of any appointment or removal, or
the purchase of supplies, or attempt to exact any promise relative to any
appointment from any candidate for manager, or discuss, directly or indirectly,
with any such candidate, the matter of appointments to any city office or
employment. Any violation of the foregoing provisions of this section shall
work a forfeiture of the office of the offending member of council, may be
removed therefrom by the council or by any court of competent jurisdiction;
provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall be construed as
prohibiting the council, while in open session, discussing with or suggesting
to the manager, fully and freely, anything pertaining to city affairs and for
the best interest of the city. Neither the manager nor any person in the employ
of the city shall take any part in securing, or shall contribute any money
toward, the nomination or election of any candidate for the municipal office.
   (g)   Ineligible Persons. No person related to the manager by consanguinity
or affinity within the third degree shall hold any appointive office or
employment with the city.
Section 21. Municipal Judge.
   The municipal judge shall be the judicial officer of the city. He/she shall
hold within the city a court known as the municipal court for the City of Sweet
Home, Linn County, Oregon. The court shall be open for the transaction of the
judicial business at times specified by the council. All areas within the city
shall be within the territorial jurisdiction of the court. The municipal judge
shall exercise original and exclusive jurisdiction of all offenses defined or
authorized by ordinances of the city. He/she shall have authority to issue
process for the arrest of any person accused of an offense against the
ordinance of the city, to commit any such person to jail or admit him/her to
bail pending trial, to issue subpoenas, to compel witnesses to appear and
testify in court on the trail of any cause before him/her, to compel obedience
to such subpoenas, to issue any process necessary to carry into effect the
judgments of the court, and to punish witnesses and others for contempt of
court. When not governed by ordinances or this charter, all proceedings in the
municipal court for the violation of the city ordinance shall be governed by
the applicable general laws of the state governing justices of the peace and
justice courts.
   Notwithstanding this section of this charter, the council may provide for
the transfer of power and duties of the municipal court to the appropriate
state court of the State of Oregon.
Section 22. Other Officers.
   The council shall fix the powers and duties of all appointive offices other
than those provided for in this charter.
CHAPTER VII
ORDINANCES
Section 23. Enacting Clause.
   The enacting clause of all ordinances hereafter passed shall be “The City of
Sweet Home does ordain as follows.”
Section 24. Introduction, Reading and Passage.
   Every ordinance shall be fully and distinctly read in open council meeting
on one day and shall be read by title only on two different days previous to
being put upon its final passage provided that the council may have the
ordinance fully and distinctly read at any reading thereof; provided, however,
that any ordinance may be introduced and read the first time at any meeting and
may upon a unanimous vote of all the members of council present at the meeting
be read a second time by title only and placed upon its passage at the meeting
held on a separate and successive day.
Section 25. When Ordinances Take Effect and Publication Thereof.
   Each ordinance passed by the council shall take effect on the thirtieth day
after its passage; provided, that when the council deems it expedient or in
case of emergency, an ordinance may provide a different time when it shall take
effect, or that it shall take effect immediately. All ordinances shall be
posted for 10 days after passage in three or more conspicuous places in the
city.
CHAPTER VIII
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
Section 26. Power of Condemnation and Purchase.
   The city shall have power to acquire by purchase, gift, devise or
condemnation any property either within or without its corporate boundaries for
any municipal purpose, for the purpose of (a) protecting, preserving and
facilitating an improvement or (b) bringing about such development of property
along or in the vicinity of an improvement as will make such development
harmonious with and adjusted to the improvement or (c) any combination of such
purposes; to acquire by condemnation property in excess of that needed for the
actual improvement and to sell or lease such excess property with building and
use restrictions and conditions to make its development harmonious with and
adjusted to adjacent public improvements. The necessity for the taking of any
property by the City of Sweet Home shall be determined by the council and shall
be declared by a resolution which shall describe such property as nearly as may
be and stating the use to which it is to be devoted. The city shall have power
to provide for the payment of all or any part of the cost of land or other
property acquired for public use of the construction, reconstruction, repair,
operation or maintenance of any structure or work in the nature of a public
facility or improvement, including a public utility and of any other public
work or service, by levying and collecting special assessments upon property
specially benefited.
Section 27. Special Assessment.
   The method and procedure for determining the amount of the assessments, the
spread and apportionment of the amount of the assessments, and the boundary and
location of the property, lots, district or area to be assessed; for the making
and approval of the plans and specifications; for the notices of property
owners and other interested parties; for the hearings, for the composition,
organization and procedure of boards of revision or appraisal; for the levy of
the assessments; for the creation of a lien; and for any and all other
determinations, steps, measures, resolutions, ordinances and actions in
relation to the assessments shall be governed by either (a) the provisions of
the special assessment statutes of the state or (b) the provisions of a general
ordinance setting forth such method and procedure, which general ordinance may
be enacted by council and shall be subject to amendment or repeal.
Section 28. Improvements.
   Street, sewer, sidewalk and such other improvements as may be deemed
necessary by the council may be made on the motion of the council or on
petition of a majority of the property owners interested. Remonstrance of two-
thirds of the front footage of property owners concerned shall operate to
defeat such motion of petition and the same may not again be considered by the
council for a period of six months.
Section 29. Savings Clause.
   All ordinances, resolutions, policies, procedures, contracts and regulations
heretofore passed by the city, in force when this charter takes effect, if not
inconsistent with it, shall remain in full force after it takes effect and
until they are amended or repealed by the council.
Section 30. City to Retain Rights and Be Subject to Liabilities in Existence at
Time This Charter Takes Effect.
   No right vested in the city and no liability which it has incurred under
this charter, prior charters, and any revisions and amendments thereof and laws
of the state shall be impaired or discharged by adoption of this charter,
except as this charter otherwise provides.
Section 31. Limitations on Indebtedness.
   City indebtedness may not exceed the debt limits imposed by state law. A
charter amendment is not required to authorize city indebtedness.
Section 32. Repealing Clause.
   All charter provisions adopted before this charter takes effect are
repealed.
Section 33. Severability.
   The terms of this charter are severable. If any provision is held invalid by
a court, the invalidity does not affect any other part of the charter.
Adopted by electorate on November 4, 2014; effective January 1, 2015.
CHARTER INDEX
ATTORNEY, CITY
   Appointment,
Sec. 4
BONDS
   Manager, city,
Sec. 20
   Requirements,
Sec. 7
BOUNDARIES, CITY
   Designated,
Sec. 1
CHARTER
   Effect of code adoption,
Sec. 30
   Repealing clause,
Sec. 32
COUNCIL
   Election, organization,
Sec. 3
   Meetings chairperson,
Sec. 16
   President pro tem,
Sec. 17
   Quorum,
Sec. 15
   Special meetings,
Sec. 14
   Time, place,
Sec. 14
   Voting,
Sec. 18
ELECTIONS
   Generally,
Sec. 8
   Nomination, eligibility,
Sec. 8
   Oath of office,
Sec. 11
   Special elections,
Sec. 9
   Term of office, commencement,
Sec. 10
FORM OF GOVERNMENT
   Designated,
Ch. II
IMPROVEMENTS, PUBLIC
   Condemnation or purchase of property,
Sec. 26
   Initiation,
Sec. 28
   Special assessments,
Sec. 27
JUDGE, MUNICIPAL
   Appointment,
Sec. 4
   Powers, duties,
Sec. 21
MANAGER, CITY
   Appointment,
Sec. 4
   Powers, duties,
Sec. 20
MAYOR
   Election,
Sec. 3
   Powers, duties,
Sec. 19
NAME, CITY,
Sec. 1
OFFICERS, CITY
   Appointment, removal authority,
Secs. 4,
5
   Bond, see BONDS
   Grounds,
Sec. 12
   Oath of office,
Sec. 11
   Powers, duties,
Ch. VI
   Salaries,
Sec. 6
   Vacancy in office, filling,
Sec. 13
ORDINANCES
   Effective date, publication,
Sec. 25
   Enacting clause,
Sec. 23
   Existing ordinances to continue,
Sec. 29
   Introduction, reading, passage,
Sec. 24
   Savings clause,
Sec. 29
POWERS OF CITY
   Generally,
Sec. 2
REPEALING CLAUSE,
Sec. 32
TITLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
      Chapter
         
1.01.   CODE ADOPTION
         
1.04.   CITY SEAL
CHAPTER 1.01:  CODE ADOPTION
Section
   
1.01.010   Adoption.
   
1.01.020   Title—Citation—Reference.
   
1.01.030   Reference applies to all amendments.
   
1.01.040   Title, chapter and section headings.
   
1.01.050   Reference to specific ordinances.
   
1.01.060   Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code.
   
1.01.070   Effect of code on past actions and obligations.
   
1.01.080   Constitutionality.
   
1.01.090   Original ordinance status.
§ 1.01.010  ADOPTION.
   There is adopted the “Sweet Home Municipal Code”, as now and hereafter
compiled, edited and published for the City of Sweet Home by American Legal
Publishing Corporation, Cincinnati, Ohio and any subsequent publishing company
hired by the City of Sweet Home for said purpose.
(Ord. 1240, § 1, 2015; Ord. 1046, 1992)
§ 1.01.020  TITLE—CITATION—REFERENCE.
   This code shall be known as the Sweet Home Municipal Code and it shall be
sufficient to refer to the code as the Sweet Home Municipal Code or SHMC in any
prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at
law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to,
amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an
addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the Sweet Home Municipal
Code. Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and
subsections of the Sweet Home Municipal Code and such references shall apply to
that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the code.
(Ord. 1046, 1992)
§ 1.01.030  REFERENCE APPLIES TO ALL AMENDMENTS.
   Whenever a reference is made to this code as the Sweet Home Municipal Code
or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the City of Sweet Home,
Oregon, codified herein, the reference shall apply to all amendments,
corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made.
(Ord. 1046, 1992)
§ 1.01.040  TITLE, CHAPTER AND SECTION HEADINGS.
   Title, chapter and section headings contained in the Sweet Home Municipal
Code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the
scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section
hereof.
(Ord. 1046, 1992)
§ 1.01.050  REFERENCE TO SPECIFIC ORDINANCES.
   The provisions of the Sweet Home Municipal Code shall not, in any manner,
affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with,
ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and
which are included within the Sweet Home Municipal Code, but the reference
shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions within the Sweet
Home Municipal Code.
(Ord. 1046, 1992)
§ 1.01.060  ORDINANCES PASSED PRIOR TO ADOPTION OF THE CODE.
   The last ordinance included in the Sweet Home Municipal Code was Sweet Home
Ord.       , passed                             . The following ordinances,
passed subsequent to Ord.          , but prior to adoption of this code, are
hereby adopted and made a part of the Sweet Home Municipal Code:              
   .
(Ord. 1046, 1992)
§ 1.01.070  EFFECT OF CODE ON PAST ACTIONS AND OBLIGATIONS.
   The adoption of the Sweet Home Municipal Code does not affect prosecutions
of ordinance violations committed prior to the effective date of this code,
does not waive any fee or penalty due and unpaid on the effective date of this
code and does not affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit posted, filed
or deposited pursuant to the requirements of any ordinance.
(Ord. 1046, 1992)
§ 1.01.080  CONSTITUTIONALITY.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of the Sweet Home
Municipal Code is, for any reason, held to be invalid or unconstitutional, the
decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of the Sweet
Home Municipal Code.
(Ord. 1046, 1992)
§ 1.01.090  ORIGINAL ORDINANCE STATUS.
   Any original ordinance that is or shall be passed by the Council of the City
of Sweet Home shall be in full force and effect as stated therein. The Sweet
Home Municipal Code facilitates their usage and, if necessary, the original
ordinance may be referred to and used to accomplish the necessary function,
prosecution or abatement.
(Ord. 1046 1992)
CHAPTER 1.04:  CITY SEAL
Section
   
1.04.010   City seal.
§ 1.04.010  CITY SEAL.
   The seal of the city shall be circular in form and shall have engraved
around the outside circle the following words all in capital letters: “City of
Sweet Home Oregon”. It shall also have engraved upon the face “Incorporated
1893” and with a small diagram in the center of the face.
(Ord. 222, 1952)
TITLE 2: ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
      Chapter
         
2.04.   CITY COUNCIL
         
2.08.   LOCAL CONTRACT REVIEW BOARD
         
2.10.   CITY COMMITTEES
         
2.12.   LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
         
2.20.   CITY PLANNING COMMISSION
         
2.44.   MUNICIPAL COURT
         
2.48.   PERSONNEL SYSTEM
         
2.52.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
         
2.56.   (RESERVED)
         
2.60.   POLICE DEPARTMENT POLICIES
CHAPTER 2.04:  CITY COUNCIL
Section
   
2.04.010   Regular meetings.
   
2.04.020   Elections officer.
   
2.04.030   Nominations.
   
2.04.040   Qualification for Council member.
§ 2.04.010  REGULAR MEETINGS.
   The City Council may adopt rules by resolution for the governance of its
members and proceedings which are titled rules of the City Council and can be
referred to as Council rules. A set of Council rules will be available at Sweet
Home City Hall.
(Ord. 1271, 2018; Ord. 1253, 2016; Ord. 761, 1979; Ord. 340, 1958; Ord. 190,
1951)
§ 2.04.020  ELECTIONS OFFICER.
   The City Manager is the ex-officio City Recorder and is also the Chief
Elections Officer of the city.
(Ord. 949, 1986)
§ 2.04.030  NOMINATIONS.
   Only a qualified elector under state law who has resided in the city at
least one year immediately before the election may be nominated for the Council
by one of the following methods.
   A.   A petition to make such a nomination shall be signed by not less than
ten, nor more than 20, electors. No elector shall sign more than one such
petition and, should an elector do so, his or her signature shall be void as to
the petition or petitions last filed. The petitions shall be filed not earlier
than 100 days, nor later than 64 days, before the election date. Each candidate
shall have the signatures of the electors on his or her petition verified by
the County Elections Officer, prior to filing the petition with the City
Elections Officer.
   B.   A declaration of candidacy shall be signed and a fee set by Council
resolution shall be paid to the city at the time of filing. The declaration of
candidacy shall be filed not earlier than 100 days, nor later than 64 days,
before the election date.
   C.   A write-in vote at the time of the election as allowed by state law.
(Ord. 1240, §§ 3, 4, 2015; Ord. 1050, 1992; Ord. 949, 1986; Ord. 1282, § 1,
2020)
§ 2.04.040  QUALIFICATION FOR COUNCIL MEMBER.
   Only a qualified elector under state law who has resided in the city at
least one year immediately before an appointment to Council may be a Council
member.
(Ord. 1240, § 5, 2015)
CHAPTER 2.08:  LOCAL CONTRACT REVIEW BOARD
Section
   
2.08.010   Designated.
   
2.08.020   City Council—Authority.
§ 2.08.010  DESIGNATED.
   Pursuant to O.R.S. 279A.060, the City Council is designated as the Local
Contract Review Board for the city. Relative to contract concerns of the city,
and not as a limit thereon, the Board shall have all the powers granted under
state law to a local contract review board.
(Ord. 1203, § 1, 2008; Ord. 659, 1976)
§ 2.08.020  CITY COUNCIL—AUTHORITY.
   The City Council, acting as the Local Contract Review Board, shall adopt
rules to govern public contracts of the city.
(Ord. 1203, § 1, 2008; Ord. 659, 1976)
CHAPTER 2.10:  CITY COMMITTEES
Section
   
2.10.010   Establishment.
   
2.10.020   Membership.
   
2.10.030   Terms of office.
   
2.10.040   Rules of committee.
   
2.10.050   Powers and duties.
§ 2.10.010  ESTABLISHMENT.
   There are established the following committees to serve at the pleasure and
in service to the City Council: Park And Tree Committee.
(Ord. 1263, § 1, 2017; Ord. 1274, § 1, 2019)
§ 2.10.020  MEMBERSHIP.
   A.   Each Committee listed in §
2.10.010 shall consist of seven voting members appointed by the Mayor with
members confirmed by the City Council.
   B.   Each Committee may have up to three non-voting ex-officio members who
are appointed by the Mayor.
   C.   Each Committee shall have a Chairperson elected by the Committee and a
Vice-chairperson elected by the Committee who shall have the same authority as
the Chairperson when the Chairperson is absent.
   D.   Not more than two of the voting members of a Committee shall be non-
residents of the city. A non-resident member must reside within the boundaries
of the Sweet Home School District No. 55. The non-resident provision does not
apply to any current member of a committee, board or commission that is being
reorganized hereby.
   E.   If a vacancy occurs during a term of office the Mayor may appoint a
City Council member or non-council member with confirmation by the City Council
to serve for the duration of the term of office on the Committee.
(Ord. 1263, § 1, 2017)
§ 2.10.030  TERMS OF OFFICE.
   A.   This section shall not apply to an ex-officio member of a Committee.
   B.   The term of office of each committee member is four years or until a
successor is appointed and confirmed as set forth above.
   C.   The term of office of each committee member shall be staggered so that
the terms of not more than three committee members will expire in the same
year.
   D.   Notwithstanding subsection B. of this section the committee members of
the first Committee appointed and confirmed shall draw lots for the length of
their terms of office so that three members shall serve two years.
(Ord. 1263, § 1, 2017)
§ 2.10.040  RULES OF COMMITTEE.
   A.   The Committee shall take minutes of its meetings and submit copies of
its minutes to the City Council and shall prepare and submit such reports as
from time to time may be requested of it by the City Council or other city
committees, boards or commissions.
   B.   In all cases not specifically provided for herein or in city charter,
ordinance or rule, the Committee shall be governed by the law and precedents
laid down in the then current edition of Robert's Rules Of Order.
   C.   A majority of committee members is a quorum to conduct business and the
concurrence of a majority of a quorum shall be required to determine any matter
before the Committee.
   D.   Voting members of a Committee shall receive no compensation for
services rendered. The Committee may receive gifts, bequests or devises of
property to carry out any of the purposes of the Committee. Gifts of any real
or personal property or funds donated to the Committee and accepted by the
governing body shall be administered in accordance with each gift's terms and
all property or funds shall be held in the name of the city.
   E.   A Committee shall be an advisory committee and shall have no executive
or administrative powers or authority and this chapter shall not be construed
as depriving elected or appointed officials of the city of any power they may
have under the laws of the state, charter or ordinances of the city.
   F.   Any member who misses two consecutive meetings without a leave of
absence granted by the Chairperson will be asked to step down and a new member
will be appointed and confirmed as set forth above to fill the vacancy.
   G.   The minutes of the Committee shall be included in the City Council
packets.
   H.   All annual reports of a Committee for the City Council shall be
presented before April 1, of each year.
(Ord. 1263, § 1, 2017)
§ 2.10.050  POWERS AND DUTIES.
   Park and Tree Committee. The powers and duties of the Park And Tree
Committee shall be as follows:
   A.   To conduct an inventory of existing street trees, including historical
trees and public properties in need of beautification and plantings and present
a written report to the City Council of its findings;
   B.   To develop and recommend to the City Council, for its adoption, a
master list of trees suitable for planting within the city. The list shall be
reviewed annually, a copy of which shall be kept on file in the office of the
City Recorder for public information;
   C.   To develop and recommend to the City Council, for its adoption,
ordinances and policies for the planting, care, maintenance, replacement and
protection of trees throughout the city;
   D.   To act in an advisory capacity to the Planning Commission with respect
to landscape design, suitable plantings, protection of natural vegetation and
street tree requirements;
   E.   To submit recommendations to the City Council regarding the
beautification of public properties and rights-of-way;
   F.   To promote public knowledge and acceptance of the value of tree
planting and maintenance programs and requirements;
   G.   To develop a capital development program for each fiscal year, to
include acquisition of new land and/or development of existing property for
parks and other recreation areas;
   H.   To recommend recreation programing needs to be produced by the city;
   I.   To recommend an operating budget to carry out the recreation program as
outlined for the forthcoming fiscal year; and
   J.   To preform additional duties and studies as may be required from time
to time by the City Council.
   K.   To meet a minimum of four meetings a year, beginning with the month of
December, which meeting should be devoted to the development of the next year's
capital and recreation programs.
(Ord. 1263, § 1, 2017; Am. Ord. 1274, § 2, 2019)
CHAPTER 2.12:  LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
Section
   
2.12.010   Library—Established.
   
2.12.020   Library Board.
   
2.12.030   Board organization.
   
2.12.040   Library Board—General powers.
   
2.12.050   Acceptance of gifts for library purposes.
   
2.12.060   Internal administrative policies and procedures.
   
2.12.070   Prohibited actions and penalties.
§ 2.12.010  LIBRARY—ESTABLISHED.
   A.   A public library is established for the city under the provisions of
O.R.S. 357.400 to 357.621.
   B.   The public library shall be financed through the use of General Fund
monies, revenue obtained from the operation of the library, grants, gifts,
donations and bequests received and designated to be used for library purposes
and any tax levies that may be authorized by the electors.
   C.   The Sweet Home Public Library shall be the public agency responsible
for providing and making freely accessible to all residents in the city library
and information services suitable to persons of all ages.
(Ord. 983, 1989)
§ 2.12.020  LIBRARY BOARD.
   A.   The Sweet Home Public Library Board is created. The Board shall consist
of five members to be appointed by the City Council.
   B.   The term of office of the Board members shall be four years and their
terms shall commence on July 1 in the year of their appointment. The terms of
office shall be staggered so that the terms of not more than two Board members
will expire in the same year. Of the first five Board members appointed, one
member shall initially hold office for one year, one for two years, one for
three years and two for four years. At the expiration of the term of any
members of the Board, the City Council shall appoint a new member or may
reappoint a member for a term of four years. If a vacancy occurs during a term
of office, the governing body shall appoint a new member for the balance of the
unexpired term.
   C.   Members of the Board shall receive no compensation for their services,
but may be reimbursed for expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.
(Ord. 983, 1989)
§ 2.12.030  BOARD ORGANIZATION.
   A.   The Library Board shall elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson.
   B.   The Library Director shall be an ex-officio member and shall serve as
Secretary to the Board and keep the record of its actions.
   C.   Three appointed members of the Board shall constitute a quorum.
   D.   The Board may establish and amend rules and regulations for its
government and procedure consistent with the laws of the state and with the
Charter, ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the city.
   E.   The Board shall meet at least once a month and at such other times as
it may provide by its rules.
(Ord. 983, 1989)
§ 2.12.040  LIBRARY BOARD—GENERAL POWERS.
   The Library Board shall be an advisory board and shall have no executive or
administrative powers or authority and this chapter shall not be construed as
depriving elected or appointed officials of the city of any power they may have
under the laws of the state or the Charter of the city. The Board shall have
powers and duties as follows.
   A.   Upon request by the City Manager, the Library Board may assist in the
interview process of selecting and appointing a library director. The City
Manager, as the fiscal and administrative agent for the library, shall have
primary responsibility for library personnel, including recruitment, selection,
classification and pay and supervision.
   B.   The Library Board shall make recommendations to the City Council about
rules and policies for the efficient and effective operation of the library,
its services and programs.
   C.   The Library Board shall approve the budget request prepared by the
Library Director for submittal to the Budget Committee.
   D.   The Library Board shall make recommendations for the acceptance, use or
expenditure of any real or personal property or funds donated to the library
under §
2.12.050.
   E.   The Library Board shall make recommendations for the selection of sites
for public library buildings or for location of library facilities.
   F.   The Library Board shall approve an annual report to the state library
and to the City Council submitted in a timely manner on a form supplied by the
state library.
   G.   The Library Board shall develop and recommend to the City Council long-
range plans for library service, consistent with city priorities and with
state, regional and national goals for libraries.
(Ord. 983, 1989)
§ 2.12.050  ACCEPTANCE OF GIFTS FOR LIBRARY PURPOSES.
   Gifts of any real or personal property or funds donated to the library and
accepted by the governing body shall be administered in accordance with each
gift’s terms and all property or funds shall be held in the name of the city.
(Ord. 983, 1989)
§ 2.12.060  INTERNAL ADMINISTRATIVE POLICIES AND PROCEDURES.
   The City Manager shall be the fiscal and internal administrative agent for
the Sweet Home Public Library and the library shall operate in conformance with
city administrative procedures, including those pertaining to the following:
   A.   Personnel, including recruitment, selection, classification and pay for
library personnel;
   B.   Receipt, disbursement and accounting for monies;
   C.   Maintenance of general books, cost accounting records and other
financial documents;
   D.   Budget administration; and
   E.   Operation and maintenance of equipment and buildings.
(Ord. 983, 1989)
§ 2.12.070  PROHIBITED ACTIONS AND PENALTIES.
   A.   O.R.S. 357.975 and O.R.S. 357.990 are to be consulted and used to
process the willful detention of library property.
   B.   The Library Director is an enforcement officer to write citations under
O.R.S. 153.005 for violations of this section and state law.
(Ord. 1240, § 6, 2015; Ord. 983, 1989)
CHAPTER 2.20:  CITY PLANNING COMMISSION
Section
   
2.20.010   Establishment.
   
2.20.020   Membership.
   
2.20.030   Terms of office.
   
2.20.040   Vacancies and removal.
   
2.20.050   Presiding members.
   
2.20.060   Staff and consultation services—Expenses.
   
2.20.070   Meetings.
   
2.20.080   Conflict of interest.
   
2.20.090   Powers and duties.
§ 2.20.010  ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is established a City Planning Commission for the city.
(Ord. 652, 1975)
§ 2.20.020  MEMBERSHIP.
   A.   The Planning Commission shall consist of seven voting members to be
appointed by the City Council. These members shall not be officials or
employees of the city. Not more than two of the members shall be non-residents
of the city. To be eligible for appointment, non-city members must reside
within the boundaries of Sweet Home School District No. 55.
   B.   In addition to the members appointed by the City Council, the City
Manager and the City Engineer shall serve as ex-officio non-voting members of
the Planning Commission.
   C.   No more than two of the voting members may engage principally in the
buying, selling or developing of real estate for profit as individuals, or be
members of any partnership, or officers or employees of any corporation, that
engages principally in the buying, selling or developing of real estate for
profit. No more than two of the members appointed by the City Council shall be
engaged in the same kind of business, trade or profession.
(Ord. 652, 1975)
§ 2.20.030  TERMS OF OFFICE.
   The term of office of voting members of the Planning Commission shall be
four years, except that the following procedure shall be used for initial
appointments. At the first meeting of the Planning Commission, the seven
appointed members shall choose their term of office by lot as follows: one for
one year; two for two years; two for three years; and two for four years. The
Planning Commission shall immediately thereafter notify the City Council in
writing of the allotment.
(Ord. 652, 1975)
§ 2.20.040  VACANCIES AND REMOVAL.
   Appointments to fill vacancies shall be for the remainder of the unexpired
term. A member may be removed by the City Council, after hearing, for
misconduct or non-performance of duty. A member who is absent from two
consecutive meetings without the permission of the Planning Commission
Chairperson is rebuttably assumed to be in non-performance of duty and the City
Council shall declare the position vacant unless finding otherwise following
the hearing.
(Ord. 652, 1975)
§ 2.20.050  PRESIDING MEMBERS.
   At its first meeting of each calendar year, the Planning Commission shall
elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson to serve one-year terms. The
Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson shall be eligible for reelection and shall be
elected from among the voting members of the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 652, 1975)
§ 2.20.060  STAFF AND CONSULTATION SERVICES—EXPENSES.
   A.   The City Manager shall provide the Commission with a secretary who
shall keep an accurate record of Planning Commission proceedings.
   B.   The city shall provide the Planning Commission with such other staff
and consultation services as is deemed necessary by the Planning Commission and
City Council.
   C.   The expenses of the Planning Commission and those incurred by staff and
consultants to the Commission shall be met by such funds as are budgeted by the
City Council for such purposes.
   D.   Members of the Planning Commission shall receive no compensation, but
shall be reimbursed only for duly authorized expenses.
(Ord. 652, 1975)
§ 2.20.070  MEETINGS.
   A.   Four members of the Planning Commission appointed by the City Council
shall constitute a quorum.
   B.   The Planning Commission may make and alter rules and regulations for
its government and procedure consistent with the laws of the state and with the
Charter and ordinances of the city.
   C.   The Planning Commission shall meet at least once a month, at such time
and place as may be fixed. All meetings of the Planning Commission shall be
open to the public.
   D.   Meetings other than at regularly-scheduled times may be announced at a
prior meeting and thereby be made a part of the meeting records. Special
meetings may be called at any time by the Chairperson, or by three members, by
notice served upon each member of the Planning Commission at least 24 hours
before the time specified for the proposed meeting. Notice of a previously
unannounced meeting shall be provided to the news media at least 24 hours prior
to the meeting.
(Ord. 652, 1975)
§ 2.20.080  CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
   A.   A member of the Planning Commission shall not participate in any
Planning Commission proceeding or action in which any of the following has a
direct or substantial interest:
      1.   The member or his or her spouse, brother, sister, child, parent,
father-in-law, mother-in-law;
      2.   Any business in which he or she is then serving or has served within
the previous two years; or
      3.   Any business with which he or she is negotiating for or has an
arrangement or understanding concerning prospective partnership or employment.
   B.   Any actual or potential interest shall be disclosed at the meeting of
the Commission where the action is being taken.
(Ord. 652, 1975)
§ 2.20.090  POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The duties of the Planning Commission shall include the following.
   A.   The Planning Commission shall base its decisions relating to land use,
public facilities, transportation, housing and related matters on the city
General Plan as now or hereafter constituted.
   B.   The Planning Commission shall conduct an overall review of the city
General Plan every odd-numbered year and recommend to the City Council
amendments to the plan.
   C.   The Planning Commission shall recommend, after public hearing, to the
City Council specific amendments to the city General Plan that may be proposed
from time to time by the public, the Planning Commission or the City Council.
The amendments shall be based upon further studies or changed community
priorities or conditions.
   D.   The Planning Commission shall formulate and recommend to the City
Council various programs, policies and ordinances intended to implement the
city’s General Plan.
   E.   The Planning Commission shall prepare, or cause to have prepared,
various studies and plans related to community or neighborhood development
problems, issues and needs.
   F.   The Planning Commission shall review the annual capital improvement
program for submittal to the City Council.
   G.   On request, the Planning Commission shall review and submit
recommendations to the City Council regarding city boundary changes or any
public program for the acquisition and development of public facilities and
transportation.
   H.   The Planning Commission shall review and take final action on all
proposed subdivisions.
   I.   The Planning Commission shall conduct public hearings, prepare and
maintain accurate minutes and records of these hearings and perform such other
duties relating to the city’s land use control ordinances, including zoning and
subdivision regulations, as may be prescribed by state law and city ordinance.
   J.   At the request of the City Council, the Planning Commission shall
perform other duties related to some aspect of community planning and
development.
   K.   The Planning Commission shall submit an annual report to the City
Council, by October 1 of each year, on the activities of the Planning
Commission.
   L.   The Planning Commission shall forward copies of the minutes of its
proceedings to the City Council on a monthly basis.
   M.   The Planning Commission shall encourage cooperation and coordination
with public and semipublic agencies, civic and private organizations and other
individuals and groups having an interest in the development of the city and
its surrounding area.
   N.   The Planning Commission shall also have all the powers which are now,
or may hereafter be, given to it, under the general laws of the state or the
Charter or ordinances of the city.
(Ord. 652, 1975)
CHAPTER 2.44:  MUNICIPAL COURT
Section
   
2.44.010   Proceedings.
   
2.44.020   Authority.
§ 2.44.010  PROCEEDINGS.
   Except as otherwise provided by the Constitution and statutes of the state
and the Charter of the city, all proceedings in the Municipal Court shall be
governed and regulated by the general laws of the state applicable to justice
courts in like or similar cases.
(Ord. 260, 1953)
§ 2.44.020  AUTHORITY.
   The Municipal Judge may issue search warrants, inspection warrants and
impound warrants to facilitate the enforcement of city ordinances, including
any abatement processes therein. This source of authority is in addition to any
other source of authority that the Municipal Court may have in issuing the
warrants.
(Ord. 979, 1988)
CHAPTER 2.48:  PERSONNEL SYSTEM
Section
   
2.48.010   Title.
   
2.48.020   Purpose.
   
2.48.030   Adoption and amendment of rules.
   
2.48.040   Administration of rules.
§ 2.48.010  TITLE.
   The title of this chapter shall be, “The Personnel Ordinance of the City of
Sweet Home”.
(Ord. 643, 1974)
§ 2.48.020  PURPOSE.
   This chapter is adopted to establish an equitable and uniform procedure for
dealing with personnel matters; to attract to municipal service and to retain
the best and most competent persons available; to assure that appointments and
promotions of employees will be based on merit and fitness; and to provide a
reasonable degree of job security for qualified employees.
(Ord. 643, 1974)
§ 2.48.030  ADOPTION AND AMENDMENT OF RULES.
   Personnel rules shall be adopted and amended by resolution of the City
Council. The rules shall provide means to recruit, select, develop and maintain
an effective and responsive work force and shall include policies and
procedures for employee hiring and advancement, training and career
development, job classification, salary administration, retirement, fringe
benefits, discipline, discharge and other related activities. All appointments
and promotions shall be made in accordance with the personnel rules without
regard to sex, race, color, age, religion or political affiliation; and,
furthermore, shall be based on merit and fitness.
(Ord. 643, 1974)
§ 2.48.040  ADMINISTRATION OF RULES.
   The City Manager shall be responsible for:
   A.   Administering all the provisions of this chapter and of the personnel
rules not specifically reserved to the City Council; and
   B.   Preparing or causing to be prepared and recommending to the City
Council personnel rules and revisions and amendments to the rules.
(Ord. 643, 1974)
CHAPTER 2.52:  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
Section
   
2.52.010   Purposes.
   
2.52.020   “Emergency” defined.
   
2.52.030   Emergency Program Manager.
   
2.52.040   Powers and duties of the Emergency Program Manager.
   
2.52.050   Emergency Operations Planning Team.
   
2.52.060   Powers and duties of the Emergency Operations Planning Team.
   
2.52.070   Emergency organization—composition.
   
2.52.080   Expenditures.
   
2.52.090   Violations—penalties.
§ 2.52.010  PURPOSES.
   The declared purposes of this chapter are to:
   A.   Provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the
protection of persons and property within this city in the event of an
emergency; the direction of the emergency management organization; and the
coordination of the emergency functions of this city with all other public
agencies, corporations, organizations and affected private persons; and
   B.   Implement the provisions of O.R.S. Chapter 401.
(Ord. 1147, § 1, 2002)
§ 2.52.020  “EMERGENCY” DEFINED.
   As used in this chapter, EMERGENCY means any human-made or natural event or
circumstance causing or threatening loss of life, injury to person or property,
human suffering or financial loss, and includes, but is not limited to, fire,
explosion, flood, severe weather, drought, earthquake, volcanic activity,
spills or releases of oil or hazardous material, as defined in O.R.S. 466.605,
contamination, utility or transportation emergencies, disease, blight,
infestation, crisis influx of migrants unmanageable by the county, civil
disturbance, riot, sabotage, terrorist actions, including employment of weapons
of mass destruction and war.
(Ord. 1203, § 5, 2008; Ord. 1147, § 2, 2002)
§ 2.52.030  EMERGENCY PROGRAM MANAGER.
   The City Manager is designated as the City of Sweet Home Emergency Program
Manager.
   A.   The Emergency Program Manager may appoint an Emergency Management
Coordinator to serve as his or her deputy and to coordinate the preparation of
the Emergency Management Plan and operation of the city’s Emergency
Communications Center.
   B.   The city’s Emergency Program Manager shall be responsible for the
development of the city’s Emergency Plan which shall provide for the effective
mobilization of all of the resources of the city, both public and private, to
meet any condition constituting a local emergency and shall provide for the
organization, powers and duties, services and staff of the emergency
organization. The plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the
City Council.
(Ord. 1147, § 3, 2002)
§ 2.52.040  POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE EMERGENCY PROGRAM MANAGER.
   The Emergency Program Manager is empowered to:
   A.   Request the City Council to proclaim the existence or threatened
existence of a “state of emergency” or to issue such proclamation if the City
Council is not reasonably available. Whenever the Emergency Program Manager
proclaims a state of emergency, the City Council shall take action to ratify
the proclamation within seven days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no
further force or effect;
   B.   Request the County Board of Commissioners to proclaim a “state of
emergency” and provide needed resources when, in the opinion of the Emergency
Program Manager, the locally-available resources are inadequate to cope with
the emergency;
   C.   Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of the city
for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter;
   D.   Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of
the emergency organization of this city and resolve questions of authority and
responsibility that may arise between them;
   E.   Represent the city in all dealings with the public or private agencies
on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined in this chapter; and
   F.   In the event of the proclamation of a “state of emergency” as provided
in this section, the proclamation of a “state of emergency” by the Governor or
the existence of a “state of war emergency”, the Emergency Program Manager is
empowered, to the extent lawfully permissible:
      1.   To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably
related to the protection of life and property as affected by the emergency;
provided, however, the rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest
practicable time by the City Council;
      2.   To obtain vital supplies, equipment and such other properties found
lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the city
for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same
for public use;
      3.   To require emergency services of any city officer or employee and,
in the event of the proclamation of a “state of emergency” in Linn County or
the existence of a “state of war emergency”, to command the aid of as many
citizens of this community as he or she deems necessary in the execution of his
or her duties; the persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits and
immunities as are provided by state law for registered emergency service
workers;
      4.   To requisition necessary personnel or material of any city
department or agency; and
      5.   To execute all of his or her ordinary power as City Manager, all of
the special powers conferred upon him or her by this chapter or by resolution
or emergency plan pursuant hereto adopted by the City Council, all powers
conferred upon him or her by O.R.S. Chapter 401, by any agreement approved by
the City Council and by any other lawful authority.
(Ord. 1147, § 4, 2002)
§ 2.52.050  EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLANNING TEAM.
   The Emergency Operations Planning Team is created and shall consist of at
least six representatives as designated by the city’s Emergency Program
Manager.
(Ord. 1147, § 5, 2002)
§ 2.52.060  POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLANNING TEAM.
   The Emergency Operations Planning Team shall, under the supervision of the
Emergency Program Manager, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency
program of the city and shall have such other powers and duties as may be
assigned by the Emergency Program Manager.
(Ord. 1147, § 6, 2002)
§ 2.52.070  EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION—COMPOSITION.
   All officers and employees of the city together with those volunteer forces
enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations and
persons who may, by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed
into service under the provisions of this chapter, charged with duties incident
to the protection of life and property in the city during the emergency, shall
constitute the emergency organization of the city.
(Ord. 1147, § 7, 2002)
§ 2.52.080  EXPENDITURES.
   Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including
mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct
protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city.
(Ord. 1147, § 8, 2002)
§ 2.52.090  VIOLATIONS—PENALTIES.
   It shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000 and
imprisonment with a maximum of 30 days or both, for any person, during an
emergency to:
   A.   Willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of an emergency
organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued
pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him or
her by virtue of this chapter;
   B.   Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant
to this chapter, if the act is of such nature as to give, or be likely to give,
assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives and property of inhabitants of
the city or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof; and
   C.   This section is not intended to, nor shall it prevent a peace officer
from enforcing O.R.S. 162.247, Interfering With a Peace Officer.
(Ord. 1147, § 9, 2002)
CHAPTER 2.56:  (RESERVED)
CHAPTER 2.60:  POLICE DEPARTMENT POLICIES
Section
   
2.60.010   Police Inventory and Search Policy adopted.
   
2.60.020   Vehicle inventory search.
§ 2.60.010  POLICE INVENTORY AND SEARCH POLICY ADOPTED.
   Policy 902, inclusive, of the Sweet Home Police Department Policy Manual is
hereby adopted. These policies pertain to searches of those in police custody.
(Ord. 1223, § 1, 2011)
§ 2.60.020  VEHICLE INVENTORY SEARCH.
   Policy 510.6 of the Sweet Home Police Department Policy Manual is hereby
adopted.  This policy pertains to the inventory of vehicles towed or impounded
by the Sweet Home Police Department.
(Ord. 1223, § 2, 2011)
TITLE 3: REVENUE AND FINANCE
      Chapter
         
3.04.   GENERAL OBLIGATION IMPROVEMENT WARRANTS
         
3.08.   CITY DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY
         
3.12.   PURCHASING SYSTEM
         
3.16.   LOCAL IMPROVEMENT AND SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
         
3.20.   LIEN FORECLOSURE PROPERTY SALES
         
3.24.   TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
         
3.28.   ADVANCE FINANCING OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
         
3.30.   PROCEDURE FOR PROCESSING CLAIMS OF COMPENSATION
         
3.34.   MARIJUANA SALES TAX
CHAPTER 3.04:  GENERAL OBLIGATION IMPROVEMENT WARRANTS
Section
   
3.04.010   Authorization.
   
3.04.020   Maturity dates.
   
3.04.030   Interest rate.
§ 3.04.010  AUTHORIZATION.
   Each series of general obligation improvement warrants to be issued by the
city shall be authorized by resolution of the Council.
(Ord. 776, 1979)
§ 3.04.020  MATURITY DATES.
   The resolution shall fix the maturity dates of the warrants, which shall be
on or before two years after the date of issuance.
(Ord. 776, 1979)
§ 3.04.030  INTEREST RATE.
   The resolution shall fix the interest rate to be paid on the warrants. The
warrants shall bear interest from the date of issuance to the time when called
for payment.
(Ord. 776, 1979)
CHAPTER 3.08:  CITY DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY
Section
   
3.08.010   Possession of property.
   
3.08.020   Treatment of lost property.
   
3.08.030   City surplus property.
   
3.08.040   Treatment of seized, confiscated, evidential and stolen property.
   
3.08.050   Treatment of abandoned property.
   
3.08.060   Treatment of unclaimed property.
   
3.08.070   Treatment of dangerous or perishable property or animals.
   
3.08.080   Storage of vehicles.
   
3.08.090   Stolen vehicles.
   
3.08.100   Removal, preservation and custody—Costs.
   
3.08.110   Disposition of seized vehicles.
   
3.08.120   Applicability.
   
3.08.130   Scope.
   
3.08.140   Surrender to true owner.
   
3.08.150   Sale procedure.
   
3.08.160   Certificate of title.
   
3.08.170   Transfer to the city or destruction by the city.
   
3.08.180   Good faith sale or disposition.
   
3.08.190   Context.
§ 3.08.010  POSSESSION OF PROPERTY.
   Whenever a city employee takes possession of any personal property, whether
abandoned, seized, confiscated, stolen, lost, unclaimed or evidential, the city
employee so taking the personal property shall cause notice thereof to be given
to the Police Department and the property shall be disposed of as this chapter
or other city ordinances or city procedures concurrent therewith direct, at the
expense and risk of the owner or person lawfully entitled to possession
thereof, until their rights are waived or terminated hereunder.
(Ord. 1036, § 2Z10, 1991; Ord. 960, 1986)
§ 3.08.020  TREATMENT OF LOST PROPERTY.
   If the city takes possession of any found money or goods, the same shall be
processed and disposed of as follows:
   A.   If any money or goods valued at less than $100 is found and delivered
to the city, the owner of the money or goods being unknown, the Police
Department shall post on the bulletin board in the main corridor of the City
Hall of the city notice of the finding. The notice shall be so posted for 30
consecutive days and shall state the general description of the money or goods
found and the final date before which the money or goods shall be returned to
the finder or placed in the General Fund of the city.
   B.   All money or goods not identified and claimed within 60 days from the
date of delivery to the city shall be returned to the person who delivered the
money or goods to the city. If the person cannot be located or is a police
officer, then the money or property shall be turned over to the city,
liquidated where necessary, and deposited in the General Fund of the city.
   C.   If the money or goods have a value of $100 or more, they shall be
disposed of as set forth in O.R.S. 98.005 et seq. For money or goods taken into
the possession of the city only, the decision of whether or not the value of
the money and goods is $100 or more is to be made by the Chief of Police or an
officer acting in his or her stead.
   D.   This section shall not be interpreted to mean that the city must take
possession of any money or goods and possession shall not attach to the city
because a police officer or other city employee looks at or inspects the money
or goods. If a police officer or other city employee finds lost property of a
value of $25 or more, on or in the course of his or her employment, the city
shall not be considered the finder thereof unless the employee’s supervisor
(unless a supervisor himself or herself) authorizes the taking of possession by
the city. If no authorization is given, the employee shall be treated as any
other finder of lost property. But if the city does take possession of any lost
money or goods, with a value of $25 or more, the city shall then be considered
the finder thereof, unless the city, in writing, states that it is not to be
considered the finder. The city, as finder, shall have all the right, title and
interest of the original finder and the original finder or any person who
represents him or her or is acting for him or her shall be deemed to have
waived any claim to the property.
(Ord. 1036, § 2Z11, 1991; Ord. 960, 1986)
§ 3.08.030  CITY SURPLUS PROPERTY.
   CITY SURPLUS PROPERTY means any personal property belonging to or owned by
the city which has been determined by the City Manager or his or her designate
to be of no further use to the city. Any surplus property is to be disposed of
as set out in §
3.08.150 unless, contrary to the state law, city ordinance, Council resolution
or rule or the best interest of the city.
(Ord. 1203, § 6, 2008; Ord. 960, 1986)
Cross-reference:
   Similar provisions, see
Chapter 2.08
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see O.R.S. 279A.005
§ 3.08.040  TREATMENT OF SEIZED, CONFISCATED, EVIDENTIAL AND STOLEN PROPERTY.
   Seized, confiscated, evidential and stolen property shall be disposed of as
follows:
   A.   Firearms that fall under the purview of O.R.S. 166.282 shall be
disposed of in accordance therewith;
   B.   Seized or confiscated gambling devices shall be disposed of as set
forth in O.R.S. 167.162;
   C.   Seized, confiscated or evidential property under the jurisdiction of
the court shall be returned to the owner thereof, destroyed, sold, placed in
use by the city, or otherwise disposed of at the direction of the court that
has jurisdiction of the incident or case in which the property is being held;
   D.   Stolen property that falls under the purview of O.R.S. 142.010, to and
including 142.060, shall be disposed of as set forth therein. The O.R.S.
142.010, to and including O.R.S. 142.060, are incorporated by reference into
this chapter as now enacted or hereafter amended, but where the statutes refer
to county, the reference shall be changed to city; and
   E.   Notwithstanding subsections A. through E. of this section any seized,
confiscated, evidential or stolen property that is under the purview of the
subsections but not disposed of thereby, and all other seized, confiscated,
evidential and stolen property shall be made available for return to the owner
thereof, if known, after all procedural and legal processes are finished; if
unknown, or the owner does not avail himself or herself of the property, the
property shall be treated as unclaimed property under this chapter.
(Ord. 1203, § 7, 2008; Ord. 960, 1986)
§ 3.08.050  TREATMENT OF ABANDONED PROPERTY.
   Abandoned property shall be disposed of as unclaimed property under the
provisions of this chapter. But abandoned property with a value of less than
$25 does not have to be held the 30-day period before it is disposed of, nor do
the police have to try and find or give notice to the owner thereof before
disposition is made of the property.
(Ord. 1203, § 8, 2008; Ord. 1036, § 2Z12, 1991; Ord. 960, 1986)
Statutory reference:
   Abandoned boats, see O.R.S. 830.907 to 830.927
§ 3.08.060  TREATMENT OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY.
   A.   Unclaimed property is all property that is under the purview of this
chapter that is not otherwise disposed of by this chapter or provisions
thereof. Unclaimed property shall be disposed of in accordance with §§
3.08.150 or
3.08.170 except money or negotiable instruments need not be sold as provided in
§
3.08.150, but all other provisions in this chapter that are applicable to the
money or negotiable instruments shall apply to them, and after the procedural
and legal processes are finished under this chapter, the money or negotiable
instruments shall be deposited in the General Fund of the city and shall be
treated as if sold under §
3.08.150. All unclaimed property shall be held by the city for not less than 30
days before disposition thereof.
   B.   However, before the disposition, if an owner is known, he or she shall
be given notice at least 30 days before disposition of his or her property,
either personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to his or her
last known address. The notification shall be complete upon the personal
service of the notice or the mailing of the certified letter. If the owner is
unknown, the police shall make inquiry to ascertain the ownership of any
unclaimed property, and if the owner is found, then abide by the above
provisions for unclaimed property. If the property has a value of less than
$100, the police can fulfill the inquiry provisions of this section by posting
on the bulletin board on the main floor of City Hall a list of unclaimed
property to be sold at least 30 days before disposition thereof. Unclaimed
property that has a value of less than $25 not redeemed by the owner may be
disposed of by the city (without selling it under §
3.08.150) in a manner most advantageous to the city, including throwing it
away.
(Ord. 960, 1986)
§ 3.08.070  TREATMENT OF DANGEROUS OR PERISHABLE PROPERTY OR ANIMALS.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any property coming
into the possession of the city which is determined to be imminently dangerous
or perishable property, or an animal other than a dog, may be disposed of
immediately, without notice, in such manner as is determined to be in the
public interest.
(Ord. 960, 1986)
§ 3.08.080  STORAGE OF VEHICLES.
   After all procedural and legal processes are finished, any vehicle not
returned to its owner or to a person who has a right to possession thereof,
shall be disposed of as if it were a vehicle that had been taken into custody
pursuant to O.R.S. 819.110, and the persons involved shall have all the rights
and duties created by O.R.S. 819.110, 819.140, 819.150, 819.160, 819.185,
819.190, 819.200, 819.210 and 819.215. However, O.R.S. 819.160 shall apply from
the time the vehicle is towed, notice shall be given to the owner and secured
party at their last known address before final disposition of the vehicle and
its contents for all costs incurred by the city for towing, storage and
processing of the vehicle and its contents.
(Ord. 1240, § 8, 2015; Ord. 1203, § 9, 2008; Ord. 1036, §2Z14(1), 1991; Ord.
992, 1989)
§ 3.08.090  STOLEN VEHICLES.
   Notwithstanding §
3.08.080, if the vehicle is a stolen vehicle, it shall be disposed of in
accordance with the procedures set out in O.R.S. 142.010 to and including
O.R.S. 142.060, where in conflict with those set out in §
3.08.080. Where O.R.S. 142.010 et al., refer to county, the reference shall be
changed to city and dealt with accordingly.
(Ord. 992, 1989)
§ 3.08.100  REMOVAL, PRESERVATION AND CUSTODY—COSTS.
   All costs and expenses incurred in the removal, preservation and custody of
the vehicle and its contents shall be paid by the person who receives the
vehicle before the vehicle is returned or released, but in no case shall the
person be required to pay storage charges for a period in excess of 60 days.
When the vehicle or its contents is in the possession of the city, the city
shall have the right to keep the property until the costs and expenses are
paid.
(Ord. 992, 1989)
§ 3.08.110  DISPOSITION OF SEIZED VEHICLES.
   A.   If no bids are entered for the vehicle or its contents at the sale, or
if the highest bid entered is less than the costs incurred by the city, the
city may enter a bid on behalf of the city in an amount equal to such costs
and, if so bid by the city, the property shall become the property of the city
as compensation for the costs incurred or, if of no use or value to the city,
shall be disposed of in such manner as the City Manager directs.
   B.   If any vehicle or contents are sold or disposed of in accordance with a
certain provision of this chapter and it is later discovered that the vehicle
or contents should have been sold or disposed of under another provision of
this chapter, or another ordinance or statute, the sale or other disposition
shall nevertheless be valid if due process was followed in the sale or
disposition. Contents of a vehicle may be disposed of hereunder, but the city
may also dispose of the contents by following the procedures for unclaimed
property set out in
Chapter 3.08 as now enacted or hereafter amended.
(Ord. 992, §§ 5, 6, 1989)
§ 3.08.120  APPLICABILITY.
   Sweet Home Municipal Code §§
3.08.080 to
3.08.110 shall apply to all vehicles (excluding bicycles) not otherwise
disposed of by the law that come into the hands of the city which includes
vehicles (excluding bicycles) seized by the city’s Police Department. Sweet
Home Municipal Code §§
3.08.080 to
3.08.110 shall apply to all vehicles (excluding bicycles) that are under the
purview of Sweet Home Municipal Code §§
3.08.080 to
3.08.110 that are now or hereafter in possession of the city.
(Ord. 992, 1989)
§ 3.08.130  SCOPE.
   This chapter shall apply to all personal property coming into the possession
of the city that is now or hereafter in possession of the city, except where
other specific ordinances or state statutes apply to the situation or property
and the good faith sale described hereunder shall apply to the ordinances and
statutes.
(Ord. 1036, § 2Z13, 1991; Ord. 960, 1986)
§ 3.08.140  SURRENDER TO TRUE OWNER.
   After property under this chapter is taken into possession and after all
procedural and legal processes are finished, but before waiver of rights, sale
or other disposition of the property under or pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter, the owner or person lawfully entitled to possession may reclaim
the same upon application to the Police Department, submission of satisfactory
proof of ownership or right to possession, and payment of charges and expenses,
if any, incurred in the storage, preservation and custody of the property.
(Ord. 960, 1986)
§ 3.08.150  SALE PROCEDURE.
   A.   The city shall sell at public auction the property that is currently
ready for sale under the provisions of this chapter. Property can be sold by
the item or in lots, and if to be sold in lots, the property can be held and
sold when a lot is accumulated. Notice of the sale shall be given once by
publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least ten days
before the date of sale and by posting the notice in three public places in the
city at least ten days before the sale, giving the time and place of sale and
generally describing the property to be sold. The description need not be by
item, but can be category. PUBLIC AUCTION is defined herein to include a public
auction as held on “e-bay” or similar site.
   B.   All sales of such property shall be for cash to the highest bidder;
provided, however, that, any person appearing at or prior to the sale and
proving ownership or right of possession thereto shall be entitled to reclaim
the property upon the payment of the charges and expenses incurred by the city
in the storage, preservation and custody of the property and a proportionate
share of the costs of advertising the same for sale.
   C.   If no bids are entered for the property, or if the highest bid entered
is less than the costs incurred by the city, the city may enter a bid on behalf
of the city in an amount equal to such costs and, if so bid by the city, the
property shall become the property of the city as compensation for the costs
incurred or, of no use or value to the city, shall be disposed of in such
manner as the City Manager directs.
   D.   The proceeds of a sale shall be first applied to payment of the cost of
the sale and the expense incurred in the preservation, storage and custody of
the property; and the balance, if any, shall be credited to the General Fund in
the city.
   E.   The sales shall be without the right of redemption.
(Ord. 1203, § 10, 2008; Ord. 960, 1986)
§ 3.08.160  CERTIFICATE OF TITLE.
   At the time of the payment of the purchase price, the city shall execute a
certificate of sale in duplicate, the original to be delivered to the
purchaser, and a copy to be kept on file in the office of the Finance Director
or City Manager, which certificate shall contain the date of sale, the
consideration paid, a brief description of the property and a stipulation that
the city does not warrant the condition or title of the property, and if
defective or invalid, the liability of the city is limited to the return of the
purchase price. The certificate of sale shall be substantially the following
form:
 
CERTIFICATE OF SALE
This is to certify that under the provisions of Ordinance No.                    and pursuant to due notice of time and
place of sale, I did on the              day of                  ,               , sell at public auction to          
     for the sum of $            cash, he being the highest bidder, and that being the highest sum bid therefor, the
following described personal property, to-wit:                                                                        
                                                                                     [Brief description of property]  
                                                                                                                       
                       and in consideration of the payment of the said purchase price, receipt whereof is hereby
acknowledged, I have this day delivered to said purchaser the foregoing property. The City of Sweet Home assumes no
responsibility as to the condition or the title of the above-described property. In case this sale shall for any reason
be invalid, the liability of the City is limited to return of the purchase price.
Dated this                                      day of                                        ,                       
 
Name                                                                                                                  
       
Title                                                                                                                  
         
FOR THE CITY OF SWEET HOME
 
   Notwithstanding the above procedures for certificate of sale, other
documents may be used to transfer title that accomplish the same result.
(Ord. 1203, § 11, 2008; Ord. 960, 1986)
§ 3.08.170  TRANSFER TO THE CITY OR DESTRUCTION BY THE CITY.
   In lieu of a sale of unclaimed property or property being treated as
unclaimed property, under the foregoing provisions of this chapter, the City
Manager may transfer the unclaimed property or property being treated as
unclaimed property to the city for use by the city or any governmental agency,
after the notice provisions applying to the property have been complied with,
or authorize destruction of the property if for the public welfare, without
notice.
(Ord. 960, 1986)
§ 3.08.180  GOOD FAITH SALE OR DISPOSITION.
   If any personal property is disposed of in accordance with a certain
provision of this chapter and it is later discovered that the property should
have been sold or disposed of under another provision of this chapter, the sale
or other disposition shall nevertheless be valid if the sale or disposition was
done in good faith and without malice.
(Ord. 960, 1986)
§ 3.08.190  CONTEXT.
   As used in this chapter, the singular includes the plural and the masculine
includes the feminine.
(Ord. 960, 1986)
CHAPTER 3.12:  PURCHASING SYSTEM
Section
   
3.12.010   Public contracts and purchasing.
§ 3.12.010  PUBLIC CONTRACTS AND PURCHASING.
   A.   The City Manager shall prepare and maintain rules of procedure
appropriate for use by the city governing bid procedures, proposals,
advertisements, the awarding of bids and proposals, retainage, claims, liens,
bid security, payment and performance bonds, surplus property, exceptions,
personal service contracts and other matters involving public contracts, and
may devise and publish forms for use therewith.
   B.   The City Manager shall review and update those rules, periodically, and
each time the state’s Attorney General adopts a modification to the model rules
to determine whether any modifications need to be adopted by the city to ensure
compliance with statutory changes.
(Ord. 1167, 2005)
CHAPTER 3.16:  LOCAL IMPROVEMENT AND SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
Section
Article I. Generally
   
3.16.010   City Report—Appointment of Viewers—Recommendations.
   
3.16.020   Notices—Objections and claims.
   
3.16.030   Hearings—Estimated assessments—Increase in proposed
assessments—Connection charge in lieu of assessment—Initiation of project.
   
3.16.040   Assumption of portion of cost by city.
   
3.16.050   Time of assessments—Assessment ordinance.
   
3.16.060   Lien recording—Collection of assessments.
   
3.16.070   Deficit assessment.
   
3.16.080   Rebate.
   
3.16.090   Abandonment of proceedings.
   
3.16.100   Curative provisions.
   
3.16.110   Bonding of improvements.
   
3.16.120   Appeal.
   
3.16.130   Reassessment—Appeals.
Article II. Senior Citizens
   
3.16.140   Purpose.
   
3.16.150   Definitions.
   
3.16.160   Qualifications.
   
3.16.170   Deferral of assessments
   
3.16.180   Investigation of status of land.
   
3.16.190   Assessment to be a lien.
   
3.16.200   Election.
ARTICLE I. GENERALLY
§ 3.16.010  CITY REPORT—APPOINTMENT OF VIEWERS—RECOMMENDATIONS.
   Whenever the Council shall deem it expedient to construct, alter, repair or
improve any streets, sidewalks, curbing or gutter, or any sanitary sewer or
storm drain, or to construct, alter, improve, repair or extend any water mains,
lateral or other water pipe lines, or any other improvement provided for by
O.R.S. 223.205, 223.387 and 223.805 to 223.880 and 223.930, for which it is
anticipated special assessments will be levied, it shall direct the City
Manager to have prepared a plat of the project and a description of each lot,
tract or parcel of land, or portion thereof, specially benefitted thereby, the
description to be either a legal description or a reference to a recorded deed
containing the legal description, with the name of the owner or owners and
other persons who he or she may find to have any interest in the property; a
description of the boundaries of the district benefitted and to be assessed for
the improvement, the description to be either a legal description or a map
clearly showing the boundaries of the project district; and an estimate of the
probable cost of the project, which estimate shall include legal,
administrative and engineering costs attributable to the project. Thereupon,
the City Council shall forthwith appoint, by resolution, three freeholders, who
are qualified electors of the city, as viewers, who shall investigate the plat
and report and shall make recommendations to the Council with regard to the
project together with a just estimated assessment of the benefits to the
property that they determine to be specially benefitted by the project. The
City Recorder shall act as Clerk for the viewers.
(Ord. 1286, § 1, 2020; Ord. 1036, § 2R, 1991; Ord. 505, § 1, 1966)
§ 3.16.020  NOTICES—OBJECTIONS AND CLAIMS.
   After the filing of the viewers’ report, the Recorder shall cause a notice
to be published for a period of two successive publications in the city’s
official newspaper stating that the report is on file in his or her office
subject to examination, giving the date when the same was filed, the estimated
probable cost of the proposed improvement, a statement of the properties
proposed to be assessed therefor and identifying the district, and notifying
all persons interested to present their objections to the report, if any they
have, and that the objections, if any there be, will be heard by the Council on
a date specified in such notice, not less than ten days after the date of the
first publication of the notice. Similar notices shall be sent to the owner of
each parcel of property benefitted, the notices to be sent by registered or
certified mail.
(Ord. 505, § 2, 1966)
§ 3.16.030  HEARINGS—ESTIMATED ASSESSMENTS—INCREASE IN  PROPOSED
ASSESSMENTS—CONNECTION CHARGE IN LIEU OF ASSESSMENT—INITIATION OF PROJECT.
   After the public hearing and after hearing any objections, if the Council
finds the viewers’ report to be reasonable and just, it may, by ordinance,
establish the improvement district and may direct and order the work to be
done. If it appears to the Council that the estimated benefits assessed are
unreasonable, unjust or improper in any respect, it shall make what it may deem
to be a reasonable, just and proper estimated assessment of benefits, and for
that purpose it may require a supplementary or further report from the City
Manager and/or viewers. When the Council, after the hearing, shall have
ascertained what it deems to be a fair, just and proper estimated assessment of
benefits, it may pass an ordinance specifying in detail the estimated
assessments, which ordinance may be passed at any time after the hearing
hereinbefore specified. But if the Council deems it just and proper to increase
the amount of any proposed estimated assessment against any parcel of land
embraced in the viewers’ report, it shall fix a time for a further hearing with
respect to the increase, cause the Recorder to send a notice by registered or
certified mail to each person who is the owner of, or interested in, the
property thus affected, stating what is proposed with respect to the property
and giving the date of the further hearing. After the hearing, the Council may
pass an ordinance establishing the improvement district and ordering the work
to be done in the manner provided by §
3.16.040.
(Ord. 1036, § 2S, 1991; Ord. 505, § 3, 1966)
§ 3.16.040  ASSUMPTION OF PORTION OF COST BY CITY.
   When, in the opinion of the Council, on account of topographical or physical
layout, unusual or excessive public travel or other character of work involved,
or when the Council otherwise believes the situation warrants it, it may
contribute what it deems a fair proportion of the cost of the improvement from
funds of the city; and the amount to be assessed to the property specially
benefitted shall be proportionately reduced. The City Council may provide that
certain portions of the projects may be met by funds of the city, with the
balance to be paid by special assessments.
(Ord. 505, § 5, 1966)
§ 3.16.050  TIME OF ASSESSMENTS—ASSESSMENT ORDINANCE.
   The City Council shall determine whether assessments are to be levied before
the construction work is begun, based on the estimate of assessments, whether
the assessments shall be levied after the work is completed and based on actual
cost. If assessments are levied after the work is completed, based on actual
cost, an ordinance shall be approved by the Council setting forth the actual
costs to be assessed to each property.
(Ord. 505, § 7, 1966)
§ 3.16.060  LIEN RECORDING—COLLECTION OF ASSESSMENTS.
   A.   The Council, in the assessment ordinance, shall direct the recorder to
enter in the docket of city liens a statement of the respective amounts of
benefits assessed upon each parcel lot or parcel of land with the names of the
owners thereof. Upon each entry in the lien docket, the amounts so entered
shall be a lien upon the respective lots, tracts and parcels of land against
which the same are placed. The liens shall be first and prior to all other
liens that the law of Oregon will allow them to be against the property.
   B.   If the Council deems it more expedient, for the purpose of avoiding the
necessity of a deficit assessment or rebate as hereinafter provided for when
assessments are levied before the project is completed, it may delay the
adoption of the ordinance and resolution until the completion of the project
and the actual cost thereof and the amount of each assessment is known. The
city may proceed to foreclose any lien to which it shall be entitled under this
chapter 30 days after the same shall have been entered in the lien docket and
arrangements are not made for payment thereof, or becomes delinquent, as
provided for foreclosure of liens in O.R.S. 223.505 to 223.650.
(Ord. 1286, §§ 2, 3, 2020; Ord. 505, § 8, 1966)
§ 3.16.070  DEFICIT ASSESSMENT.
   If the Council has the project done after assessments are levied, and if it
be found afterwards that the amount previously assessed was insufficient to
defray the expenses of the project, the Council may, by resolution, declare the
deficit, and order the preparation of proposed deficit assessment, and set a
public hearing date. The Recorder shall give notice thereof and of the hearing
of objections thereto as above prescribed with reference to the original
report, and the Council upon the hearing shall make a just and equitable
deficit assessment. The deficit assessment shall be consolidated with the
assessment in the lien docket.
(Ord. 505, § 9, 1966)
§ 3.16.080  REBATE.
   If the assessments are levied before the project is done, and if, upon the
completion of the project, it is found that the sum assessed therefor upon any
property is more than sufficient to pay the cost thereof, the Council must
ascertain and declare the same, and when so declared it must be entered as in
case of a deficit in the docket of city liens, and thereafter the person who
paid the surplus, or his or her legal representative, shall be entitled to the
payment of the same by a warrant on the City Treasurer.
(Ord. 505, § 10, 1966)
§ 3.16.090  ABANDONMENT OF PROCEEDINGS.
   The Council shall have full power and authority to abandon and rescind
proceedings for projects hereunder at any time prior to the final consummation
of the proceedings.
(Ord. 505, § 11, 1966)
§ 3.16.100  CURATIVE PROVISIONS.
   No such assessment shall be invalid by reason of a failure to give, in any
report, in the proposed assessment, in the ordinance creating the district
making the assessment, in the final assessment ordinances, in the lien docket
or elsewhere in the proceedings, the name of the owner of any lot, tract or
parcel of land or the name of any person having an interest therein or by a
mistake in the name of any such person or the entry of a name other than the
name of the owner or other person having an interest in the property, or by
reason of any error, delay, omission, irregularity or other act, jurisdictional
or otherwise, in any of the proceedings or steps hereinbefore specified, unless
it appears that reasonable notice has not been given of the hearing upon the
proposed assessment or that the assessment as made, insofar as it affects the
person complaining, is unfair and unjust, and the Council shall have power and
authority to remedy and correct all such matters by suitable action and
proceedings.
(Ord. 1286, § 4, 2020; Ord. 505, § 12, 1966)
§ 3.16.110  BONDING OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   The provisions of O.R.S. 223.205 to 223.295 (which is known as the Bancroft
Bonding Act) are adopted and made a part hereof by reference, except that the
unpaid assessments shall bear interest at a rate to be determined by the City
Council in its assessment ordinances.
(Ord. 1036, § 2T, 1991; Ord. 794, § 1, 1980; Ord. 505, § 13, 1966)
§ 3.16.120  APPEAL.
   Any person feeling aggrieved by assessments made, as provided in this
chapter may, within 30 days from the making of the assessment by the Council,
appeal therefrom to the Circuit Court of the State of Oregon for Linn County.
Any number of persons interested may join in the appeal and the only question
to be determined by the appeal shall be the question of the amount of the
assessment. The notice of appeal shall be served upon the Mayor, Recorder or
City Attorney. The appeal shall be heard and determined and the judgment
thereon rendered and enforced so far as practicable in the same manner as an
action at law. The of the judge or verdict of the jury shall be a final and
conclusive determination of the matter of the assessment, except with respect
to the city’s right of reassessment as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 1286, § 5, 2020; Ord. 505, § 14, 1966)
§ 3.16.130  REASSESSMENT—APPEALS.
   A.   Whenever an assessment for any local improvement which has been or may
hereafter be made by the city has been or shall be hereafter set aside,
annulled, declared or rendered void, or its enforcement refused by any court of
this state, or any federal court, having jurisdiction therein, whether directly
or by virtue of any decision of the court, or when the Council shall be in
doubt as to the validity of the assessment or any part thereof, the Council may
by ordinance make a new assessment or reassessment of the lots, blocks or
parcels of land which have been benefitted by the improvement to the extent of
their respective and proportionate shares of the full value thereof.
   B.   The reassessment shall be based upon the special and peculiar benefit
of the improvement to the respective parcels of land assessed at the time of
its original assessment. Interest thereon from the date of delinquency of the
original assessment may be added at the discretion of the Council. The
reassessment shall be made in an equitable manner, as nearly as may be in
accordance with the law in force at the time it is made. But the Council may
adopt a different plan of apportionment of benefits when, in its judgment, this
is essential to secure an equitable assessment.
   C.   The proceedings required by this chapter to be had prior to the making
of the original assessment shall not be required to be taken within the intent
of this section.
   D.   Such reassessment shall be made and shall become a charge upon the
property upon which the same is laid, notwithstanding the omission, failure or
neglect of any officer, body or person to comply with the provisions of this
chapter connected with or relating to the improvement and assessment and
notwithstanding that the proceedings of the Council or any officer, contractor
or other person connected with the work may have been irregular, or defective,
whether the irregularity be jurisdictional or otherwise.
   E.   The Council shall by resolution declare the district that will be
benefitted by the improvement for which the reassessment is made, and shall
appoint a time and place not less than 20 days distant when it will meet for
the purpose of making the reassessment. The Recorder shall give notice to the
property owners within the reassessment district of the time and place fixed by
the Council for making the reassessment in the manner provided for the original
assessment, except that four successive published notices shall be given as
required by O.R.S. 223.430. At the time appointed therefor, unless at such time
the Council shall adjourn until a future time or day for such purpose or
appoint another time therefor, and in such event at such adjourned for further
appointed meeting, the Council shall proceed to make such reassessment in the
manner prescribed. The Council, in making the reassessment, shall give an
opportunity to any property owner within the assessment district to appear and
be heard in reference thereto. After having made the reassessment, the Council
shall declare the same by ordinance and the same shall be a final determination
of the regularity, validity and correctness of the reassessment except as
herein otherwise provided. The reassessment shall be entered in the docket of
city liens and shall be enforced and collected in like manner as ordinary
assessments for local improvements are enforced and collected under this
chapter. All sums paid upon the former assessment shall be credited to the
property on account of which the same were paid as of the date of the payment.
   F.   The fact that the city may have sold any such property on the former
assessment, or purchased the same for the amount thereof, shall not preclude
the enforcement or collection of the reassessment.
   G.   Any person or persons may appeal to the Circuit Court of the State of
Oregon for the County of Linn upon reassessment against any property owned by
him or her, or in which he or she has an interest, in the same manner as
provided for appeals in §
3.16.120 and the appeal shall be subject to the provisions of §
3.16.120.
(Ord. 505, § 15, 1966)
ARTICLE II. SENIOR CITIZENS
§ 3.16.140  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this article is to permit qualified senior citizens to have
deferred the special assessments that may be levied against their residences
for improvements.
(Ord. 1286, § 6, 2020; Ord. 745, § 1, 1978)
§ 3.16.150  DEFINITIONS.
   A SENIOR CITIZEN is a person who is 65 years of age or more at the time that
the deferral of payment is granted.
(Ord. 745, § 2, 1978)
§ 3.16.160  QUALIFICATIONS.
   To qualify for this senior citizens’ assessment and charges deferral
program:
   A.   The property to be assessed or served must be owned by a senior
citizen; or, if owned by a husband and wife, then only one of them needs to be
a senior citizen;
   B.   The property to be assessed or served must be the residence of the
senior citizen; and
   C.   The senior citizen shall have a gross annual income not to exceed 133%
of the then current annual SSI federal payment amount (rounded to the nearest
whole dollar) and if he or she is married, then their joint gross annual income
shall not exceed 120% of said SSI amount. The gross annual income shall include
the gain or loss from the sale or exchange of property and from the operation
of a farm or business and shall include all other income. The gross annual
income for the calendar year in which the application is made shall be
estimated and shall be the amount used to determine whether or not the
applicant is qualified. The current monthly income, the prospect for income in
the calendar year, the gross annual income during the previous calendar year
shall all be considered in estimating the gross annual income. The City Manager
may require such information from the applicant as the City Manager deems
necessary to make the estimate and the City Manager shall then determine the
gross annual income of the applicant and whether or not he or she qualifies.
(Ord. 1286, §§ 7, 8, 2020; Ord. 1036, § 2U, 1991; Ord. 745, § 3, 1978)
§ 3.16.170  DEFERRAL OF ASSESSMENT.
   To the extent that funds are conveniently available to the city, a qualified
senior citizen may choose to have deferred the special assessment for
improvements that is to be or has been levied against his or her residence. The
assessment may be deferred, even if a part thereof has been paid. The
assessment shall bear interest at the rate of 7% per annum from the date that
the assessment is levied against the residence and until paid, and shall become
due when the property ceases to be the residence of the senior citizen or his
or her spouse. This may be by reason of the sale or rental of the property, or
the death of both the senior citizen and his or her spouse, or for any other
reason whatsoever.
(Ord. 1286, § 9, 2020; Ord. 745, § 4, 1978)
§ 3.16.180  INVESTIGATION OF STATUS OF LAND.
   As frequently as appears appropriate, the City Manager shall review the
county records relating to deferred special assessment and shall also make such
investigations as appear appropriate to learn of any other material changes in
the status of the subject land.
(Ord. 1286, § 10, 2020; Ord. 745, § 5, 1978)
§ 3.16.190  ASSESSMENT TO BE A LIEN.
   Any assessment that is deferred by the terms of this Article II shall become
a lien on the land just as though this Article II had not been adopted. When
the assessment becomes due by the terms of §
3.16.170 of this Article II, it may be enforced and collected as though it had
not been deferred.
(Ord. 1286, § 11, 2020; Ord. 745, § 6, 1978)
§ 3.16.200  ELECTION.
   A qualified senior citizen, who elects to have an assessment deferred
pursuant to the provisions of this Article II, shall enter into a contract with
the city, as may be required by the city.
(Ord. 1286, § 12, 2020; Ord. 745, § 7, 1978)
CHAPTER 3.20:  LIEN FORECLOSURE PROPERTY SALES
Section
   
3.20.010   Generally.
§ 3.20.010  GENERALLY.
   When the city sells real property at a lien foreclosure sale, a purchaser
buys the property and the property is redeemed. The redemption shall be done by
making applicable and applying the provisions of O.R.S. 223.565 to the
redemption.
(Ord. 1036, § 2Z5, 1991; Ord. 896, § 1, 1983)
CHAPTER 3.24:  TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
Section
   
3.24.010   Title and purpose.
   
3.24.020   Definitions.
   
3.24.030   Tax imposed.
   
3.24.040   Collection of tax by Local Tax Trustee.
   
3.24.050   Short-term rental housing platform fees.
   
3.24.060   Exemptions.
   
3.24.070   Registration of operator—Form and contents—Executions—Certification
of authority.
   
3.24.080   Returns and remittances.
   
3.24.090   Penalties and interest.
   
3.24.100   Deficiency determinations—Fraud—Evasion—Local Tax Trustee delay.
   
3.24.110   Reserved.
   
3.24.120   Redeterminations.
   
3.24.130   Refunds.
   
3.24.140   Administration.
   
3.24.150   Transient Occupancy Tax Appeal Board—Procedure.
   
3.24.160   Remedies, collections and liens.
   
3.24.170   Violation.
   
3.24.180   Appeals to City Council.
§ 3.24.010  TITLE AND PURPOSE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Transient Lodging Tax Ordinance of the
City of Sweet Home”. The taxes, interest and penalties collected shall be
placed in the General Fund of the city to be used for public purposes of the
city.
(Ord. 1268, § 1, 2017; Ord. 1137, § 1, 2001; Ord. 1022, § 1, 1990)
§ 3.24.020  DEFINITIONS.
   Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this
section govern the construction of this chapter.
   ACCRUAL ACCOUNTING. The operator enters the rent due from an occupant on his
or her records when the rent is earned whether or not it is paid.
   BOOKING SERVICE. Any reservation and/or payment service provided by a person
or entity that facilitates a short-term rental transaction between a host and a
prospective occupant, and for which the person or entity collects or receives,
directly or indirectly through an agent or intermediary, a fee in connection
with the reservation and/or payment services provided for the short-term rental
transaction. Booking services include directly or indirectly accepting,
receiving or facilitating payment, whether or not the person or entity is the
ultimate recipient of the payment, including through Application Programming
Interfaces (APIs) or other computerized devices where third-party providers
receive information about a transaction and collect funds for the transient
lodging occupancy from an occupant.
   CASH ACCOUNTING. The operator does not enter the rent due from an occupant
on his or her records until rent is paid.
   HOST. The owner or person who resides at the short-term rental or has been
designated by the owner or resident of the short-term rental and who rents out
the short-term rental for transient lodging occupancy either directly or
through the use of a hosting platform.
   HOSTING PLATFORM. A person or entity that participates in the short-term
rental business by collecting or receiving a fee for booking services through
which a host may offer a transient lodging facility. Hosting platforms usually,
though not necessarily, provide booking services through an online platform
that allows a host to advertise the transient lodging through a website
provided by the hosting platform and provides a means for the hosting platform
to conduct a transaction by which prospective occupants arrange transient
lodging and payment whether occupant pays rent directly to the host or to the
hosting platform.
   LOCAL TAX TRUSTEE. The operator, hosting platform or designee thereof that
accepts, receives or facilitates the payment directly from the occupant,
whether or not the operator or hosting platform is the ultimate recipient of
the payment.
   OCCUPANCY. The right to the use or possession of any space in transient
lodging for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes for less than 30 days.
   OCCUPANT. Any individual who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy
in transient lodging for a period of 30 consecutive calendar days or less,
counting portions of calendar days as full days.
   OPERATOR.
      1.   Any person who provides transient lodging for occupancy to the
general public for compensation. Furnishing accommodations can be done via
employees, contractors, agents or any other person allowed to process
reservations and accept payment for the transient lodging on behalf of the
transient lodging provider; or
      2.   Any person who facilitates the reservations of an accommodation and
collects the payment for the transient lodging reservation from the occupant;
or
      3.   Any transient lodging provider, transient lodging intermediary or
transient lodging tax collector as defined in O.R.S. 320.300.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, limited liability
company, limited liability partnership, association, social club, fraternal
organization, fraternity, sorority, public or private dormitory, joint stock
company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee,
syndicate or any other group or combination acting as a unit.
   RENT. The consideration paid or payable by an occupant for the occupancy of
space in transient lodging valued in money, goods, labor, credits, property or
other consideration. If a separate fee is charged for services, goods or
commodities and the fee is optional, that fee is not included in rent.
   SHORT-TERM RENTAL. A house, duplex, multi-plex, apartment, condominium,
houseboat, trailer or other residential dwelling unit where a person rents
guest bedrooms or the entire residential dwelling unit for transient lodging
occupancy. Generally, a short-term rental is zoned residential or has a
building occupancy that only allows for residential use.
   TAX ADMINISTRATOR. The Finance Director of the City of Sweet Home.
   TAX (TLT). The transient lodging tax.
   TRANSIENT LODGING or TRANSIENT LODGING FACILITIES. Any structure, or any
portion of any structure which is occupied or intended or designed for
transient occupancy for 30 days or less, for dwelling, lodging or sleeping
purposes, and includes any motel, inn, tourist home or house, hotel, studio
hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, public or
private dormitory, fraternity, sorority, public or private club, bed and
breakfast, space in manufactured home park, space in mobile home park, space in
trailer park, space in recreational vehicle park, or similar structure
including space or portions thereof so occupied; provided, the occupancy is for
temporary human occupancy.
(Ord. 1268, § 2, 2017; Ord. 1137, § 2, 2001; Ord. 1022, § 2, 1990)
§ 3.24.030  TAX IMPOSED.
   A.   Effective July 1, 1990, each occupant shall pay a tax (TLT) in the
amount of 6% of the rent. The occupant shall pay the TLT with the rent to the
Local Tax Trustee. TLT amounts shall be rounded down to the nearest cent. The
Local Tax Trustee shall maintain records of all rent charged and TLT payments
received. If rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the TLT
shall be paid by the occupant to the Local Tax Trustee with each installment
unless the occupant pays the entire amount with the first payment.
   B.   Bills, receipts or invoices provided to occupants shall list the city
TLT separately and must accurately state the amount of tax. All amounts list as
TLT on invoices, bills or receipts must be reported as TLT and, after
collection, must be turned over to the city.
   C.   No Local Tax Trustee shall advertise that the TLT or any part of the
TLT will be assumed or absorbed by the Local Tax Trustee, or that it will not
be added to the rent, or that any part of it will be refunded, except in the
matter provided by this chapter.
(Ord. 1268, § 3, 2017; Ord. 1137, § 3, 2001; Ord. 1022, § 3, 1990)
§ 3.24.040  COLLECTION OF TAX BY LOCAL TAX TRUSTEE.
   A.   Every Local Tax Trustee shall collect the TLT at the time rent is paid,
unless an exemption applies. If payment is by credit card for purposes of this
section payment is made at the time credit card information is provided to
Local Tax Trustee not when the Local Tax Trustee ultimately receives credit for
the transaction. While holding the payment in trust for the city, a Local Tax
Trustee may commingle the tax proceeds with the Local Tax Trustee's funds, but
the Local Tax Trustee is not the owner of tax proceeds. Local Tax Trustees may
choose to file returns and remit payment based on amounts accrued but not
collected. The Local Tax Trustee is liable for any TLT that should have been
collected from the occupant, except in cases of nonpayment of rent by the
occupant.
   B.   Upon request of the city, Local Tax Trustees must provide all physical
addresses of transient lodging facilities within the city limits and the
related contact information, including the name and mailing address, of the
general manager, agent, owner, host or other responsible person for the
location.
   C.   Operators who receive any portion of the rent and hosting platform that
provide booking service are jointly and severally liable for the tax.
(Ord. 1268, § 4, 2017; Ord. 1137, § 4, 2001; Ord. 1022, § 4, 1990)
§ 3.24.050  SHORT-TERM RENTAL HOUSING PLATFORM FEES.
   A hosting platform for short-term rentals may collect a fee for booking
services in connection with short-term rentals only when those short-term
rentals are lawfully registered as operators with the city and possess a
certificate of authority at the time the short-term rental is occupied.
(Ord. 1268, § 5, 2017; Ord. 1022, § 5, 1990)
§ 3.24.060  EXEMPTIONS.
   No tax imposed under this chapter shall be imposed upon:
   A.   A dwelling unit in a hospital, health care facility, long-term care
facility or any other residential facility that is licensed, registered or
certified by the Oregon Department of Human Services or the Oregon Health
Authority;
   B.   A dwelling unit in a facility providing treatment for drug or alcohol
abuse or providing mental health treatment;
   C.   A dwelling unit, the consideration for which is funded through a
contract with a government agency and the purpose of which is to provide
emergency or temporary shelter;
   D.   A dwelling unit at a nonprofit youth or church camp, nonprofit
conference center or other nonprofit facility; or
   E.   A dwelling unit that is leased or otherwise occupied by the same person
for a consecutive period of 30 days or more during the year. The requirements
of this subsection are satisfied even if the physical dwelling unit changes
during the consecutive period, if:
      1.   All dwelling units occupied are within the same facility; and
      2.   The person paying consideration for the transient lodging is the
same person throughout the consecutive period.
(Ord. 1268, § 6, 2017; Ord. 1022, § 6, 1990)
§ 3.24.070  REGISTRATION OF OPERATOR—FORM AND CONTENTS—EXECUTIONS—CERTIFICATION
OF AUTHORITY.
   A.   Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator in
the City of Sweet Home shall register with the Tax Administrator.
   B.   Operators engaged in business at the time the ordinance codified in
this chapter is adopted must register not later than 30 days after passage of
the ordinance codified in this chapter. Operators starting business after this
chapter is adopted must register within 15 calendar days after commencing
business. The privilege of registration after the date of imposition of the tax
shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of
tax regardless of registration. The registration form shall be signed by the
operator and shall set forth the name under which an operator transacts or
intends to transact business, the location of his or her place or places of
business and such other information to facilitate the collection of the tax as
the Tax Administrator may require.
   C.   The Tax Administrator shall, within 15 days after registration, issue
without charge a certificate of authority to collect the TLT. The obligation to
collect the TLT is imposed once rent for transient lodging is paid, even if the
registration form has not been filed or if the certificate has not been issued.
If rent transaction is facilitated online, the certificate of authority must be
able to be viewed by the occupant by clicking a link to the certificate of
authority at a reasonable place during the payment transaction.
   D.   Certificates shall be non-assignable and nontransferable, and shall be
surrendered to the Tax Administrator when the business is sold or transferred
or when a lodging facility ceases to operate at the location specified form.
Each certificate issued to an operator for a specific lodging facility shall be
prominently displayed at the lodging facility and includes:
      1.   The name of the operator;
      2.   The address of the transient lodging facility;
      3.   The date the certificate was issued;
      4.   The certificate number as assigned by the Tax Administrator; and
      5.   The amount of city authorized lodging tax as a percentage.
(Ord. 1268, § 7, 2017; Ord. 1022, § 7, 1990)
§ 3.24.080  RETURNS AND REMITTANCES.
   The tax imposed by this chapter shall be paid by the occupant to the
operator at the time that rent is paid. The taxes collected by any operator are
due and payable to the Tax Administrator as follows:
   A.   Local Tax Trustees shall submit a completed tax return form to the Tax
Administrator on or before the last day of the month following the end of each
calendar quarter, reporting the amount of tax due during the quarter and
accompanied by remittance of all tax collected.
   B.   Remittances are delinquent if not made by the last day of the month in
which they are due.
   C.   Returns shall show the gross rents collected, taxable rents and the
total amount of TLT collected. Returns shall also show the exempt and excluded
rents and the basis for exemption and exclusion.
   D.   Tax returns and remittances may be submitted in person or by mail. If
the return and remittance is mailed, the postmark shall be considered the date
of delivery.
   E.   The Tax Administrator may extend the time for making any return or
remittance of the tax up to 30 days. No further extension shall be granted,
except by the City Council. Any local Tax Trustee to whom an extension is
granted shall pay interest at the rate of 1% per month on the amount of the
remittance due without proration for a fraction of a month. If a return is not
filed, and the remittance and interest due is not paid by the end of the
extension granted, then the interest shall become part of tax for computation
of penalties.
(Ord. 1268, § 8, 2017; Ord. 1022, § 8, 1990)
§ 3.24.090  PENALTIES AND INTEREST.
   A.   Interest shall be added to the overall tax amount due at the same rate
established under O.R.S. 305.220 for each month, or fraction of a month, from
the time the return to Oregon Department of Revenue was originally required to
be filed to the time of payment.
   B.   If a Local Tax Trustee fails to file a return with the Oregon
Department of Revenue or pay the tax as required, a penalty shall be imposed in
the same manner and amount provided under O.R.S. 314.400.
   C.   Every penalty imposed and any interest that accrues becomes a part of
the financial obligation required to be paid and remitted to the Oregon
Department of Revenue.
   D.   Taxes, interest and penalties transferred to the City of Sweet Home by
the Oregon Department of Revenue will be distributed to the city's General
Fund.
   E.   If at any time a Local Tax Trustee fails to remit any amount owed in
taxes, interest or penalties, the Oregon Department of Revenue is authorized to
enforce collection on behalf of the city of the owed amount, an agreement
between the Oregon Department of Revenue and City of Sweet Home under O.R.S.
305.620 and any applicable administrative rules adopted by the Oregon
Department of Revenue.
(Ord. 1268, § 9, 2017; Ord. 1022, § 9, 1990)
§ 3.24.100  DEFICIENCY DETERMINATIONS—FRAUD—EVASION—LOCAL TAX TRUSTEE DELAY.
   A.   Deficiency determination. The Tax Administrator may review tax returns
and adjust the amount due based on the information in the return, on
information obtained during a review or audit of records, or on the basis of
other evidence. In the event of a deficiency, the Tax Administrator shall
provide notice of the deficiency to the Local Tax Trustee, who shall remit
deficiencies within ten business days of the deficiency notice. Notice may be
by personal delivery or certified or registered mail. Penalties on deficiencies
shall be applied as set forth in §
3.24.090.
      1.   In reviewing and adjusting tax returns, the Tax Administrator shall
offset any amount received in excess of the remittances due against any
shortages in remittances.
      2.   Except in the case of fraud or intent to evade TLT, notice of
deficiency determinations shall be issued within three years of the period for
which the deficiency determination is made.
      3.   The time to remit deficient payment amounts under this section shall
be extended if the Local Tax Trustee timely requests a redetermination.
      4.   The Tax Administrator shall mail or personally serve written notice
of final determination to the Local Tax Trustee.
   B.   Fraud, refusal to collect, evasion. If any Local Tax Trustee fails to
collect, report or remit the tax as required, submits a fraudulent return, or
otherwise violates or attempts to violate this chapter, the Tax Administrator
shall estimate the tax due, and calculate the amount owing from the Local Tax
Trustee for tax remittance, interest and penalties and provide notice to the
Local Tax Trustee of the assessment. The determination and notice shall be made
and mailed within three years of the discovery by the Tax Administrator of the
violation. The determination is due and payable upon receipt of notice and
shall become final ten business days after the date notice was delivered if no
petition for redetermination is filed.
   C.   Costs of determining tax. All costs to the city in determining the
actual tax due from any operator shall be added to and become a part of the
amount owed by the operator upon written notice to the operator, served
personally or by mail.
(Ord. 1268, § 10, 2017; Ord. 1022, § 10, 1990)
§ 3.24.110  RESERVED.
§ 3.24.120  REDETERMINATIONS.
   A.   Any person affected by a determination may file a petition for
determination with the Tax Administrator within ten business days of service of
notice of the tax deficiency. A determination becomes final if a petition for
redetermination is not timely filed.
   B.   If a petition for redetermination is filed within the allowable period,
the Tax Administrator shall reconsider the determination and grant an oral
hearing if requested. The petitioner shall be allowed at least 20 business days
to prepare for the hearing.
   C.   After considering the petition and all available information, the Tax
Administrator shall issue a redetermination decision and mail the decision to
the petitioner. During the redetermination process, the Tax Administrator may
agree to a compromise of the amount due if there is a good faith dispute over
the amount owing.
   D.   The decision of the Tax Administrator on redetermination becomes final
and payment is due ten business days after the decision is mailed unless the
petitioner files an appeal to the City Council within that time.
(Ord. 1268, § 11, 2017; Ord. 1022, § 12, 1990)
§ 3.24.130  REFUNDS.
   A.   Refunds by the city to the Local Tax Trustee. If the Local Tax Trustee
remits more tax, penalty or interest than is due, the Local Tax Trustee may
file a claim in writing stating the facts relating to the claim, within three
years from the date of remittance. If the claim is approved by the Tax
Administrator, the excess amount shall be either refunded or credited on any
amount due from the Local Tax Trustee.
   B.   Refunds by city to occupant. A Local Tax Trustee may file a claim for
refund by filing a claim in writing within three years of payment providing the
facts relating to the claim for refund. If the Tax Administrator determines
that the tax was collected and remitted to the city and the occupant was not
required to pay the tax or overpaid, the city shall issue a refund.
   C.   Refunds by Local Tax Trustee to occupants. If an occupant has paid tax
to a Local Tax Trustee, but then stays a total of 30 or more consecutive days,
the Local Tax Trustee shall refund to the occupant any tax collected for any
portion of the continuous stay. The Local Tax Trustee shall account for the
collection and refund to the Tax Administrator. If the Local Tax Trustee has
remitted the tax prior to the refund or credit to the occupant, the Local Tax
Trustee shall be entitled to a corresponding refund or offset if the claim for
refund is filed within three years from the date of collection.
   D.   Burden of proof. The person claiming the refund shall have the burden
of proving the facts that established the basis for the refund.
(Ord. 1268, § 12, 2017; Ord. 1022, § 13, 1990)
§ 3.24.140  ADMINISTRATION.
   A.   Records required from operators-form. Every operator shall keep guest
records of room sales and accounting books and records of the room sales. All
records shall be retained by the operator for a period of at least three years
and six months after they come into being.
   B.   Examination of records-investigations. The Tax Administrator or agent
may examine during normal business hours, the books, papers and accounting
records relating to room sales of any operator after notification to the
operator liable for the tax and may investigate the business of the operator in
order to verify the accuracy of any return made or, if no return is made by the
operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid.
   C.   Authority of Tax Administrator. The Tax Administrator shall have the
power to enforce this chapter, conduct audits, and to adopt rules, regulations
and forms consistent with this chapter. Rules and regulations of general
application shall be mailed to all registered operators. The Tax Administrator
may also issue written interpretations on request of a Local Tax Trustee. As to
the Local Tax Trustee to whom the interpretation is issued, the city will act
consistently with the interpretation until it is withdrawn, and the city shall
provide 30 days' written notice of withdrawal of an interpretation.
   D.   Confidential character of information obtained-disclosures unlawful.
The city shall maintain the confidentiality of information provided by Local
Tax Trustees. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prevent:
      1.   The disclosure to, or the examination of records and equipment by,
another city official, employee or agent for collection of taxes for the
purpose of administering or enforcing any provisions of this chapter or
collecting city business license fees.
      2.   Disclosure of information to the Local Tax Trustee and the Local Tax
Trustee's agents.
      3.   The disclosure of the names and addresses of any persons to whom
certificates of authority have been issued.
      4.   The disclosure of general statistics regarding taxes collected or
business done in the city.
      5.   Disclosures required by O.R.S. Chapter 192.
      6.   Disclosures required by O.R.S. Chapter 297.
(Ord. 1268, § 13, 2017; Ord. 1022, § 14, 1990)
§ 3.24.150  TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX APPEAL BOARD—PROCEDURE.
   A.   A transient occupancy appeal board is created to be composed of members
of the City Council. Four members of the Board shall constitute a quorum. The
Board shall keep a record of its transactions and shall not, at any time,
receive any compensation for their services on the Board.
   B.   The Board shall have the power to:
      1.   Hear and determine appeals of orders or decisions of the City
Manager made upon petitions for redetermination of tax. The Board may affirm,
modify or reverse such orders or decision or dismiss the appeals therefrom, as
may be just, and shall prescribe such forms, rules and regulations relating to
appeals as it may deem necessary. In the review of the City Manager decision or
order, the Committee may take such evidence and make such investigation as it
may deem necessary and give notice of its determinations. The determination
shall become final ten days thereafter and shall thereupon become due and
payable, subject to interest and penalties;
      2.   Modify, affirm or disapprove all forms, rules, determinations and
regulations prescribed by the City Recorder in the administration and
enforcement of this chapter; and
      3.   Make such investigations as it deems advisable regarding the
imposition and administration of the transient occupancy tax.
(Ord. 1022, § 15, 1990)
§ 3.24.160  REMEDIES, COLLECTIONS AND LIENS.
   A.   The remedies, which include penalties herein, provided for in this
chapter or sections thereof shall be cumulative and not exclusive and shall be
in addition to any and all other remedies available to the city.
   B.   The city may bring legal action to collect on any amounts owed to the
city under this chapter within three years after remittance is due to the city
or within three years after any determination becomes final.
   C.   The city is entitled to collect reasonable attorneys' fees in any legal
action brought to collect on amounts owed to the city under this chapter.
   D.   The city may record a lien in the city's lien docket against any real
property owned by an operator who receives any portion of the rent from a
transient lodging facility located within the city as to any delinquent
remittances by the operator.
(Ord. 1268, § 14, 2017; Ord. 1022, § 19, 1990)
§ 3.24.170  VIOLATION.
   A.   It is unlawful for any operator or other person so required, to fail or
refuse to register as required in this chapter, or to furnish any return
required to be made, or to fail or refuse to furnish a supplemental return or
other data required by the Tax Administrator or to render a false or fraudulent
return. No person required to make, render, sign or verify any report shall
make any false or fraudulent report, with intent to defeat or evade the
determination of an amount due required by this chapter. No person shall
violate any provision of this chapter.
   B.   Violation of this chapter constitutes a violation and may be prosecuted
under the provisions of
Chapter 9.36 and any amendments thereto. Each day that a violation remains
uncured is a separate offense.
(Ord. 1268, § 15, 2017; Ord. 1237, § 1 (part), 2013; Ord. 1022, §§ 16, 17,
1990)
§ 3.24.180  APPEALS TO CITY COUNCIL.
   Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Tax Administrator may appeal to
the City Council by filing a written appeal with the Tax Administrator within
ten business days of the serving or mailing of the decision being appealed. The
City Manager shall schedule the hearing on a City Council agenda and provide
the appellant notice of the hearing at least ten business days before the
hearing. The City Council may agree to a compromise of the amount of tax
remittance if there is a good faith dispute over the amount owing. Any person
may appeal the issuance of a rule or regulation issued by the Tax Administrator
to the City Council by filing a written appeal within ten business days of the
mailing of the notice of the regulation. The City Council's decision shall be
final when reduced to writing and mailed to the petitioner and all amounts due
must be paid within ten business days of mailing of the City Council decision.
(Ord. 1268, § 16, 2017)
CHAPTER 3.28:  ADVANCE FINANCING OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
Section
   
3.28.010   Definitions.
   
3.28.020   Receipt of application.
   
3.28.030   City analysis.
   
3.28.040   Public hearing—Notification.
   
3.28.050   Informational public hearing.
   
3.28.060   Advance financing district ordinances and agreements.
   
3.28.070   Advance financed reimbursement.
   
3.28.080   Calculation of reimbursement—Intervening properties.
   
3.28.090   Calculation of reimbursement—Future properties.
   
3.28.100   Interest applied to reimbursements.
   
3.28.110   Collection of an advance financed reimbursement.
   
3.28.120   Voluntary imposition of lien.
   
3.28.130   Disposition of an advance financed reimbursement.
   
3.28.140   Recording.
   
3.28.150   Public improvements.
§ 3.28.010  DEFINITIONS.
   The following words and phrases for the purposes of this chapter and for the
purposes of any advance financing agreement entered into pursuant hereto and
for any actions taken as authorized pursuant to this chapter or otherwise,
shall have the meanings set out below.
   ADVANCE FINANCING. A method of recapturing costs by a developer, where the
developer installs public improvements and where the public improvements may be
utilized by intervening or future properties.
   ADVANCE FINANCING AGREEMENT. An agreement between the developer and the
city, as authorized by the Council, and executed by the Mayor, which provides
for the installation of and payment for advance financed public improvements
and which agreement contains improvement guarantees, provisions for
reimbursement by the intervening and future properties that may utilize the
improvement, inspection guarantees and the like as determined in the best
interest of the public by the Council.
   ADVANCE FINANCING DISTRICT ORDINANCE. An ordinance adopted by the Council
and executed by the Mayor designating a public improvement to be an advance
financed public improvement and creating an advance financing district and
containing provisions for financial reimbursement by intervening and future
properties that may utilize the improvement and such other provisions as
determined in the best interest of the public by the Council.
   CITY. The City of Sweet Home.
   COUNCIL. The Council of Sweet Home.
   DEVELOPER. The city, an individual, a partnership, a joint venture, a
corporation, a subdivider, a partitioner of land or any other entity, without
limitation, who will bear, under the terms of this chapter, the expense of
design, construction, purchase, installation or other expenses associated with
the creation of a public improvement. The rights of a DEVELOPER, created under
this chapter, also apply to his or her heirs, successors or assigns.
   DEVELOPMENT. Real property developed by the developer or improved by the
developer and for which property the advance financing district ordinance is
adopted.
   FUTURE PROPERTY. Real property which may be served by the installation of
oversized or over-capacity public improvements, but does not include the
development or intervening property.
   INTERVENING PROPERTY. Real property abutting an advance financed public
improvement, but does not include the development of future property.
   OWNER. The fee holder of record of the legal title to the real property in
question. Where the real property is being purchased under a recorded land
sales contract, then the purchasers shall also be deemed OWNERS.
   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT. The following:
      1.   The grading, graveling, paving or other surfacing of any street, or
opening, laying out, widening, extending, altering, changing the grade of or
constructing any street;
      2.   The construction of sidewalks;
      3.   The construction or upgrading of any sanitary or storm sewer or
water main;
      4.   The construction or upgrading of any flood control dike, dam,
structure or facility;
      5.   Those “local improvements”, as provided in O.R.S. 223.387(1) as now
written or hereafter amended; and
      6.   Any other public improvement authorized by the Council.
(Ord. 1091, § 1, 1995)
§ 3.28.020  RECEIPT OF APPLICATION.
   The Council will receive applications for advance financing from the
developer, which applications shall be submitted to the city and shall be
accompanied by a fee set by resolution. The fee will be applied for the cost of
administrative analysis of the proposed advance financing district, the cost of
notifying the property owners, recording costs and such other costs reasonably
associated with processing the application. When the city is the developer, the
Council may direct the City Administrator to submit the application without
fee.
(Ord. 1091, § 2, 1995)
§ 3.28.030  CITY ANALYSIS.
   Upon receipt of the advance financing application, the City Engineer shall
make an analysis of the advance financing proposal and shall prepare a report
to be submitted to the Council for discussion at a public hearing. The report
shall include a map showing the location and front footage of the development
and intervening properties, as well as the location and total acreage of all
future properties. The report shall also include an estimate of the total cost
of the advance financed public improvement.
(Ord. 1091, § 3, 1995)
§ 3.28.040  PUBLIC HEARING—NOTIFICATION.
   Not less than ten, nor more than 30, days prior to any public hearing being
held pursuant to this chapter, developer and all intervening and future
property owners shall be notified of the hearing and the purpose thereof. The
notification shall be accomplished by regular mail or by personal service. If
notification is accomplished by mail, notice shall be made on the date that the
letter of notification is posted. Failure of any owner to be so notified shall
not invalidate or otherwise affect any advance financing district ordinance or
the Council’s action to approve or not to approve the same.
(Ord. 1091, § 4, 1995)
§ 3.28.050  INFORMATIONAL PUBLIC HEARING.
   After the City Engineer’s analysis has been completed, an informational
public hearing shall be held in which all parties and the general public shall
be given the opportunity to express their views and ask questions pertaining to
the proposed advance financed public improvement. Since advance financed public
improvements do not give rise to assessments, the public hearing is for
informational purposes only and is not subject to remonstrances. The Council
has the sole discretion after the public hearing to decide whether or not an
advance financing district ordinance shall be adopted.
(Ord. 1091, § 5, 1995)
§ 3.28.060  ADVANCE FINANCING DISTRICT ORDINANCES AND AGREEMENTS.
   After the public hearing held pursuant to §
3.28.050, if the Council desires to proceed with the advance financed public
improvement, it shall adopt an advance financing district ordinance. The
ordinance shall designate the improvement as an advance financed improvement
and provide for advance financed reimbursement by intervening and future
property owners pursuant to this chapter. Except when the developer is the
city, the advance financing district ordinance may instruct the city to enter
into an agreement between developer and the city pertaining to the advance
financed improvement, and may, in the agreement, require the guarantee or
guarantees as the city deems best to protect the public, intervening and future
properties, and may make such other provisions as the Council determines
necessary and proper. All agreements entered into must contain and have
distributed costs to all future and intervening properties. A copy of the
agreement must be filed with the Finance Director.
(Ord. 1091, § 6, 1995)
§ 3.28.070  ADVANCE FINANCED REIMBURSEMENT.
   An advance financed reimbursement is imposed on all intervening and future
properties for projects that utilize an advance financed public improvement
district. The reimbursement is made at the time of utilization of the advance
financed public improvement.
(Ord. 1091, § 7, 1995)
§ 3.28.080  CALCULATION OF REIMBURSEMENT—INTERVENING PROPERTIES.
   A.   The advance financed reimbursements, imposed on intervening properties,
when future properties are not involved, shall be calculated by dividing the
total actual cost of the advance financed public improvement by the front
footage of all intervening properties which determines unit cost. The unit cost
(cost per foot) is then multiplied by the front footage of each intervening
property. In addition, the city may use any other method of apportioning costs
on those properties specially benefitted that are just and reasonable. Interest
is then applied and calculated as set out in §
3.28.100.
   B.   When the advance financed improvement includes future properties, then
the above calculation will be the same except that the total cost of the
improvement shall be reduced by the cost which relates to the oversizing or
over capacity of the advance financed improvement.
   C.   In both subsections A. and B. of this section and §
3.28.090, advance financing reimbursements for odd-shaped lots shall be
individually established and consistent with the benefit received by the lot
and the reimbursement required of other lots in the area. If inequities are
created through the strict implementation of the above formulas, the Council
will modify its impact on a case-by-case basis.
(Ord. 1091, § 8, 1995)
§ 3.28.090  CALCULATION OF REIMBURSEMENT—FUTURE PROPERTIES.
   The advance financed reimbursement imposed on future properties shall be
calculated by dividing the total actual cost of the advance financed public
improvement that relates to oversizing or over capacity by the total acreage of
all future properties which determines unit cost. The unit cost (cost per acre)
is then multiplied by the acreage of each future property. In addition, the
city may use any other method of apportioning costs on those properties
specially benefitted that are just and reasonable. Interest is then applied and
calculated as set out in §
3.28.100.
(Ord. 1091, § 9, 1995)
§ 3.28.100  INTEREST APPLIED TO REIMBURSEMENTS.
   In both §§
3.28.080 and
3.28.090, the reimbursements will be increased by an annual interest rate as
set forth by Council in the advance financing district ordinance. The interest
will be calculated from the date the Council adopts the advance financing
district ordinance to the date of collection of the reimbursement.
(Ord. 1091, § 10, 1995)
§ 3.28.110  COLLECTION OF AN ADVANCE FINANCED REIMBURSEMENT.
   A.   The advance financed reimbursement is immediately due and payable to
the city by intervening or future property owners upon their utilizing any
advance financed public improvement. If connection is made or construction
commenced without the proper permits, then the advance financed reimbursement
is immediately due and payable upon the earliest date that any such permit was
required.
   B.   No permit for connection or construction shall be issued until the
advance financed reimbursement is paid in full or otherwise processed under the
terms of §
3.28.120. Whenever the full and correct advance financed reimbursement has not
been paid and collected for any reason, the city’s Finance Director shall
report to the Council the amount of the uncollected reimbursement, the
description of the real property to which the reimbursement is attributable,
the date upon which the reimbursement was due and the name or names of the
intervening or future property owners.
   C.   The City Council, by motion, shall then set a public hearing and shall
direct the City Engineer to give notice of that hearing to each of those
intervening and future property owners, together with a copy of the City
Engineer’s report concerning the unpaid reimbursement, either in person or by
regular mail. Upon public hearing, the Council may accept, reject or modify the
City Engineer’s report; and, if it finds that any reimbursement is unpaid and
uncollected, the Council, by motion, may direct the Finance Director to docket
the unpaid and uncollected reimbursement in the record of liens; and, upon
completion of the docketing, the city shall have a lien against the described
land for the full amount of the unpaid advance financed reimbursement, interest
and the city’s actual cost of serving notice upon the intervening or future
property owners. The lien shall be enforced in the manner as provided by law.
(Ord. 1091, § 11, 1995)
§ 3.28.120  VOLUNTARY IMPOSITION OF LIEN.
   A.   The Council may allow financing for an advance finance reimbursement.
If the option is allowed, it shall be so stated in the ordinance creating the
district. If so allowed, when an advance financed reimbursement is due and
collectable, the intervening or future property owner within the city limits
may apply, upon forms provided by the city, for the voluntary imposition of a
lien upon the parcel for the full amount of the advance financed reimbursement
and the payment of that lien in 20 equal semiannual installments, including
interest. The applicant must provide a certificate from a licensed title
insurance company showing the identity and amount of all other liens already of
record against the property and a certificate from the county’s Tax Assessor
showing the assessed valuation of the property. The city shall not permit a
lien greater than that allowed by law. The property that lies outside the city
limits must have the permission of Linn County in accordance with Oregon law.
   B.   Upon receipt of the certificates and application, the city shall
compute the amount of the advance financed reimbursement and shall report to
the Finance Director the amount of the advance financed reimbursement, the date
upon which the reimbursement is due, the name or names of the applicant/owners
and the description of the property; and upon receiving that report, the
Finance Director shall docket the lien in the docket of liens. From the time
that docketing is completed, the city shall have a lien upon that land. That
lien shall be enforced in the manner as provided by law.
(Ord. 1091, § 12, 1995)
§ 3.28.130  DISPOSITION OF AN ADVANCE FINANCED REIMBURSEMENT.
   A.   Developers shall receive the advance financed reimbursement collected
by the city for their advance financed public improvements. The reimbursements
shall be delivered to the developer for a period of ten years after execution
of the advance financing agreement unless extended by §
3.28.120. After the period, all payments shall be the property of the city and
not be delivered to the developer.
   B.   Payments will be made to the developer by the city within 90 days of
receipt of the advanced financed reimbursements and any advance financed
reimbursements not paid the developer under the terms of this chapter shall be
retained by the city to be used for related system improvements as authorized
from time to time by the Council.
   C.   The city shall collect an amount for administrative services performed
in collecting and distributing the reimbursement. The administrative fee shall
reasonably reflect the service preformed and shall be set by resolution.
(Ord. 1091, § 13, 1995)
§ 3.28.140  RECORDING.
   All advance financing district ordinances and agreements or a memorandum of
same shall be recorded by the city in the deed records of the county. The
ordinance and agreement and memorandum shall contain full legal description of
the development, intervening properties and future properties. Failure to make
the recording shall not affect the legality of an advance financing ordinance
or agreement.
(Ord. 1091, § 14, 1995)
§ 3.28.150  PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
   Public improvements installed pursuant to advance financing agreement shall
become and remain the sole property of the city pursuant to the advance
financing agreement. Advance financed reimbursements, plus interest, not paid
to the developers as set forth in §
3.28.130, shall be paid to the city to be used for related system improvements
as authorized from time to time by the Council.
(Ord. 1091, § 15, 1995)
CHAPTER 3.30:  PROCEDURE FOR PROCESSING CLAIMS OF COMPENSATION
Section
   
3.30.010   Purpose.
   
3.30.020   Definitions.
   
3.30.030   Claims.
   
3.30.040   Claim denial.
   
3.30.050   Transferability.
   
3.30.060   Application process.
   
3.30.070   Application review.
   
3.30.080   Notice of public hearing for consideration by Council.
   
3.30.090   Written evidence.
   
3.30.100   Evidence.
   
3.30.110   Determination by Council.
   
3.30.120   Council decision.
   
3.30.130   Council resolution.
   
3.30.140   Judicial review.
   
3.30.150   Fees.
§ 3.30.010  PURPOSE.
   O.R.S. 195.305 authorizes the city to establish procedures governing new
claims on §§ 12 to 14 of Measure 49. These provisions are in addition to and
not in lieu of the requirements of Ballot Measure 49.
(Ord. 1203, § 12, 2008; Ord. 1198, § 1, 2008)
§ 3.30.020  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases mean:
   BALLOT MEASURE 49. The measure enacted by the voters at the November, 2007,
General Election, which amended O.R.S. 195.305.
   CITY MANAGER. The City of Sweet Home or designee.
   CLAIM. A claim filed under O.R.S. 195.305, as amended by Ballot Measure 49.
   CLAIMANT. The person or persons filing a claim. The CLAIMANT must be a
current owner of the property that is the subject of the claim.
   EXEMPT LAND USE REGULATION. A land use regulation that:
      1.   Restricts or prohibits activities commonly and historically
recognized as public nuisances under common law;
      2.   Restricts or prohibits activities for the protection of public
health and safety, such as fire and building codes, health and sanitation
regulations, solid or hazardous waste regulations and pollution control
regulations;
      3.   Is required in order to comply with federal law;
      4.   Restricts or prohibits the use of property for the purpose of
selling pornography or performing nude dancing; or
      5.   Was enacted prior to the date of acquisition of the property by the
owner or a family member of the owner.
   FAIR MARKET VALUE. The amount of money, in cash, that the property would
bring if the property was offered for sale by a person who desires to sell the
property, but is not obligated to sell the property, and if the property was
bought by a person who was willing to buy the property but not obligated to buy
the property. The FAIR MARKET VALUE is the actual value of property, with all
of the property’s adaptations to general and special purposes. The FAIR MARKET
VALUE OF PROPERTY does not include any prospective value, speculative value or
possible value based upon future expenditures and improvements.
   FAMILY MEMBER. Includes the wife, husband, son, daughter, mother, father,
brother, brother-in-law, sister, sister-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law,
mother-in-law, father-in-law, aunt, uncle, niece, nephew, stepparent,
stepchild, grandparent or grandchild of the owner of the property, an estate of
any of the foregoing family members, or a legal entity owned by any one or
combination of these family members or the owner of the property.
   JUST COMPENSATION. If a claim is valid, JUST COMPENSATION is one of the
following:
      1.   An amount of money equal to the decrease in the fair market value of
the property from the date that is one year before the enactment of the land
use regulation to the date that is one year after the enactment, plus interest.
INTEREST shall be computed using the average interest rate for a one year
United States Government Treasury Bill on December 31 of each year of the
period between the date the land use regulation was enacted and the date the
claim was filed, compounded annually on January 1 of each year of the period;
and
      2.   Authorization to use the property without application of the land
use regulation to the extent necessary to offset the reduction in the fair
market value of the property.
   LAND USE REGULATION. Includes the City of Sweet Home’s Comprehensive Plan,
Zoning Ordinance, Land Division Ordinance and Transportation Ordinance.
   OWNER. The present owner of the property or any interest therein.
   VALID CLAIM. A claim submitted by the owner of real property that is subject
to a land use regulation adopted by the city that restricts the use of the
private real property in a manner that reduces the fair market value of the
real property.
   ZONED FOR RESIDENTIAL. Zoning that has as its primary purpose single-family
residential use.
(Ord. 1203, § 12, 2008; Ord. 1198, § 1, 2008)
§ 3.30.030  CLAIMS.
   A person may file a claim for just compensation if:
   A.   The person is an owner of the property and if there is more than one
owner, each owner has signed a written statement of consent to the filing of
the claim;
   B.   The property is wholly within the boundaries of the City of Sweet Home;
   C.   The property is zoned for residential use;
   D.   The person’s desired use of the property is a residential use or a
farming or forest practice;
   E.   The person’s desired use of the property is restricted by one or more
land use regulations enacted after January 1, 2007;
   F.   The claim must be filed within five years after the date the land use
regulation was enacted; and
   G.   The enactment of one or more land use regulations after January 1,
2007, has reduced the fair market value of the property, other than an exempt
land use regulation.
(Ord. 1198, § 1, 2008)
§ 3.30.040  CLAIM DENIAL.
   The city shall deny a claim if:
   A.   It is not filed within five years from the date the land use regulation
was enacted; or
   B.   An application for a Comprehensive Plan or zoning amendment is approved
for the subject property.
(Ord. 1198, § 1, 2008)
§ 3.30.050  TRANSFERABILITY.
   A.   Authorizations to partition, subdivide or establish dwellings on a
property run with the property and are transferable.
   B.   There is no time limit on when the authorization must be carried out,
with the following exception: when the owner who obtains the authorization
conveys the property, the subsequent owner must create the lots or parcels and
establish the dwellings authorized within ten years of the conveyance.
   C.   If the claimant is the surviving spouse of a person who was an owner of
the property in fee title, the claimant’s acquisition date is the date the
claimant was married to the deceased spouse or the date the spouse acquired the
property, whichever is later.
(Ord. 1198, § 1, 2008)
§ 3.30.060  APPLICATION PROCESS.
   The demand for compensation, accompanied by the deposit set by separate
Council fee resolution, shall be submitted to the City Manager, in writing.
   A.   All of the owner(s) of the subject property shall be the claimant(s).
   B.   If not all owners are to be the claimant, the application shall be
subscribed by at least one of the property owner(s) and accompanied by the
written consent of the other owners to the submission of the demand for
compensation claim. The application for compensation shall be verified under
the claimants’ oath or affirmation, under penalty of perjury, that the
information contained in the application for compensation and supporting
materials is true and correct.
   C.   The application shall contain or have attached thereto the following
information and materials at a minimum:
      1.   A description, sufficient for identification, of the regulation
asserted by the claimant to have restricted the use of the private real
property;
      2.   The street address, township, range and section of the property,
Linn County Assessor’s Tax lot number and a description in compliance with the
provisions of O.R.S. 93.600, sufficient to identify and permit location of the
private real property, the use of which is alleged to have been restricted by
the regulation;
      3.   A copy of the instrument conveying the property to the claimant;
      4.   The true and correct names, mailing addresses, telephone numbers,
accompanied by a title chain report, in the form of a litigation guarantee,
completed within 30 days of the application which includes the title history,
all restriction on the use of the property unrelated to the land use
regulations and a statement of the date the claimant acquired ownership of the
property, and that shows the ownership interests of all owners of the property;
      5.   A completed Department of Treasury, Internal Revenue Service, Form
W-9, Request for Taxpayer Identification Number and Certification, which will
be held in confidentiality with the city’s Finance Director;
      6.   A citation to the land use regulation that the claimant believes is
restricting the claimant’s desired use of the property that is adequate to
allow identification of the specific land use regulation that is the basis for
the claim;
      7.   A description of the specific use of the property that the claimant
desires to carry out, but cannot because of the land use regulation;
      8.   Relief may not be granted if the highest and best use of the
property at the time the land use regulation was enacted was not the use that
was restricted by the land use regulation;
      9.   A statement of the amount claimed to be due for compensation;
      10.   A statement of the manner in which the fair market value of the
property has been reduced;
      11.   An appraisal showing the fair market value of the property one year
before the enactment of the land use regulation and the fair market value of
the property one year after the enactment;
      12.   The appraisal must be accompanied by a copy of the detailed written
appraisal report by an MAI appraiser, qualified, certified and licensed as such
in the State of Oregon for the type of property under consideration, indicating
the amount of the alleged reduction in the fair market value of the property by
showing the difference in the fair market value of the property before and
after application of the regulation(s);
      13.   Appraisals must meet the uniform standards of Professional
Appraisal Practice (USPAP) and be performed by an appraiser who meets the
Competency Rule of USPAP. The appraisal must be in a self contained format and
must be “complete”, not “limited”;
      14.   The appraisal shall expressly determine the highest and best use of
the property at the time the land use regulation was enacted;
      15.   The cost of preparing the claim, including the appraisal, not to
exceed $5,000 may be added to the calculation of the reduction in fair market
value;
      16.   If the claim is for more than $10,000, copies of two separate
detailed appraisal reports must be included. If the claim is for $10,000 or
less, one detailed appraisal report must be included;
      17.   A statement that the restriction is not related to an exempt land
use regulation; and
      18.   Any additional information which would aid in the determination of
the validity and value of the claim or any decision to release the restriction.
(Ord. 1198, § 1, 2008)
§ 3.30.070  APPLICATION REVIEW.
   The City Manager shall conduct a completeness review within 60 days after
submittal of the demand for compensation and shall advise the claimant, in
writing, of any material remaining to be submitted.
   A.   A claim is complete when any of the following information and the
required fee are received:
      1.   Part of the missing information and written notice from the claimant
that the remainder of the missing information will not be provided;
      2.   Written notice from the claimant that none of the missing
information will be provided; or
      3.   If claimant not notified within the 60 days or the fee is missing,
the claim is deemed complete when filed.
   B.   A claim is deemed withdrawn if, after notice of missing information,
the claimant does not comply with the requirements to complete the application.
(Ord. 1198, § 1, 2008)
§ 3.30.080  NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING FOR CONSIDERATION BY COUNCIL.
   A.   A notice of the claim shall be provided at least 30 days before the
deadline for submission of written comments to the following:
      1.   All owners identified in the claim;
      2.   To owners of record of property on the most recent property tax
assessment roll;
      3.   To owners within 100 feet of the property which is the subject of
the notice;
      4.   To any neighborhood or community organization recognized by the
governing body and whose boundaries include the site;
      5.   To the Department of Land Conservation and Development; and
      6.   To Linn County.
   B.   The notice must describe the claim and state the following:
      1.   The date, time and location of the public hearing for consideration
of the claim, that this is not a public hearing, and the final date for
submission of written evidence and arguments relating to the claim;
      2.   That judicial review of the final determination of the city on the
claim is limited to the written evidence and arguments submitted; and
      3.   That judicial review is available only for issues that are raised
with sufficient specificity to afford the City Council an opportunity to
respond.
(Ord. 1198, § 1, 2008)
§ 3.30.090  WRITTEN EVIDENCE.
   A.   Written evidence and arguments on the claim must be submitted to the
city no later than the date that is specified in the notice.
   B.   1.   The claimant may request additional time to submit written
evidence and arguments in response to testimony.
      2.   The request must be made before the close of testimony or the
deadline for submission of written evidence and arguments.
(Ord. 1198, § 1, 2008)
§ 3.30.100  EVIDENCE.
   The burden of proof of any material element shall be upon the claimant for
all matters required to be shown that the claimant is entitled to just
compensation and shall be upon the city to show that the regulation is exempt
from the obligation for compensation.
(Ord. 1198, § 1, 2008)
§ 3.30.110  DETERMINATION BY COUNCIL.
   A.   The City Council shall consider the claim at a regularly scheduled
meeting as noticed.
   B.   At the Council meeting or subsequent meeting, the City Council shall,
by the concurrence of a quorum, either:
      1.   Determine the claim is not valid; or
      2.   Determine the claim is valid.
(Ord. 1198, § 1, 2008)
§ 3.30.120  COUNCIL DECISION.
   A.   If the claimant establishes that the requirements for a claim are
satisfied and the land use regulation was enacted by the city, the Council must
either:
      1.   Compensate the claimant for the reduction in the fair market value
of the property; or
      2.   Authorize the claimant to use the property without application of
the land use regulation to the extent necessary to offset the reduction in the
fair market value of the property.
         a.   A use permitted under this section has the legal status of a
legal, nonconforming use.
         b.   (1)   A subdivision or partition or the establishment of a
dwelling on property, must comply with all applicable standards governing the
siting or development of the dwelling, lot or parcel including, but not limited
to, the location, design, construction or size of the dwelling, lot or parcel.
            (2)   The standards must not be applied in a manner that has the
effect of prohibiting the establishment of the dwelling, lot or parcel.
         c.   If the owner is authorized to subdivide, partition or establish
dwellings on more than one property, the owner may cluster some or all of the
dwelling, lots or parcels that would have been located in a farm or forest zone
on the property zoned for residential use.
         d.   Regardless of the number of properties subject to a claim, the
owner will not be eligible for more than 20 home sites.
   B.   The Council will have a record on review of a claim, including any
staff reports, available to the public before the close of the record.
   C.   The decision by the Council is not a land use decision.
   D.   A copy of the final determination shall be mailed to the claimant and
to any person who submitted written evidence or arguments before the close of
record.
   E.   The city shall forward a memorandum of the final determination to Linn
County to be recorded by the county in the deed records.
(Ord. 1198, § 1, 2008)
§ 3.30.130  COUNCIL RESOLUTION.
   The City Council shall adopt a resolution as the final decision on a claim.
(Ord. 1198, § 1, 2008)
§ 3.30.140  JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   A person that is adversely affected by a final determination of the city may
obtain judicial review of the decision under O.R.S. 34.010 to 34.100.
   A.   A person eligible for a judicial review must be:
      1.   An owner of the property that is the subject of the final decision;
or
      2.   A person who submitted written evidence, arguments or comments to
the city prior to the final date for submission of evidence.
   B.   A judicial review is limited to:
      1.   Evidence in the record at the time of the final decision; and
      2.   For issues that are raised with sufficient specificity to afford the
Council an opportunity to respond.
(Ord. 1198, § 1, 2008)
§ 3.30.150  FEES.
   The claimant shall pay for the cost of processing the application on a
demand for compensation.
   A.   The City Council shall set, by resolution, a fee schedule to cover the
costs of processing the application.
   B.   The City Manager shall maintain a record of the city’s costs in
processing a demand for compensation claim, including the costs of obtaining
necessary information which the claimant does not provide to the city.
   C.   Following the final action by the Council on the demand for
compensation, the City Manager may send to the claimant a bill for actual
costs, including staff and legal costs, that the city incurred in reviewing and
acting on the claim.
   D.   If the claimant does not pay the amount due within 30 days, the city
may pursue collection, including filing a lien on the property.
(Ord. 1198, § 1, 2008)
CHAPTER 3.34:  MARIJUANA SALES TAX
Section
   
3.34.010   Purpose.
   
3.34.020   Definitions.
   
3.34.030   Levy of tax.
   
3.34.040   Deductions.
   
3.34.050   Seller responsible for payment of tax.
   
3.34.060   Penalties and interest.
   
3.34.070   Failure to report and remit tax—determination of tax by Director.
   
3.34.080   Appeal.
   
3.34.090   Refunds.
   
3.34.100   Actions to collect.
   
3.34.110   Violation.
   
3.34.120   Confidentiality.
   
3.34.130   Audit of books, records, or persons.
   
3.34.140   Forms and regulations.
   
3.34.150   Disposition of marijuana tax revenue.
   
3.34.160   Alternative collection process.
   
3.34.170   Interest and penalty for alternative collection process.
§ 3.34.010  PURPOSE.
   For the purposes of this chapter, every person who sells marijuana items in
the City of Sweet Home is exercising a taxable privilege. The purpose of this
chapter is to impose a tax upon the retail sale of marijuana items consistent
with O.R.S. 475B.345 and other state laws and the home rule authority of the
City of Sweet Home.
(Ord. 1251, § 1, 2016)
§ 3.34.020  DEFINITIONS.
   Except as the context otherwise specifically requires, as used in this
chapter, the following mean:
   DIRECTOR. The City Manager, or the City Manager's designee.
   GROSS TAXABLE SALES. The total amount received in money, credits, property,
or other consideration from sale of marijuana items that is subject to the tax
imposed by this chapter.
   MARIJUANA ITEM. Has the meaning given that term in O.R.S. 475B.015(16).
   MARIJUANA RETAILER. A person who sells marijuana items to a consumer in the
City of Sweet Home.
   MEDICAL MARIJUANA. Marijuana that is sold or transferred pursuant to the
Oregon Medical Marijuana Act.
   OREGON MEDICAL MARIJUANA ACT. The legislation codified at O.R.S. 475B.400
through 475B.525, as it may be amended from time to time, and any
administrative rules promulgated thereto.
   PERSON. Any natural person, partnership, corporation, limited liability
company, government entity, association, or other entity in law or fact.
   PURCHASE OR SALE. The acquisition or furnishing for consideration by any
person of marijuana items within the city.
   REGISTRY IDENTIFICATION CARDHOLDER. A person who has been diagnosed by an
attending physician with a debilitating medical condition and for whom the use
of medical marijuana may mitigate the symptoms or effects of the person's
debilitating medical condition, and who has been issued a registry
identification card by the Oregon Health Authority.
   RETAIL SALE. The transfer of goods or services in exchange for any valuable
consideration, and does not include the transfer or exchange of goods or
services between a grower or processor and a seller of marijuana items.
   RETAIL SALE PRICE. The price paid for a marijuana item, excluding tax, to a
marijuana retailer by or on behalf of a consumer of the marijuana item.
   SELLER. Any person who is required to be licensed or has been licensed by
the State of Oregon to provide marijuana items to purchasers for money, credit,
property, or other consideration.
   TAX. Either the tax payable by the seller or the aggregate amount of taxes
due from a seller during the period for which the seller is required to report
collections under this chapter.
   TAXPAYER. Any person obligated to account to the Director for taxes
collected or to be collected, or from whom a tax is due, under the terms of
this chapter.
(Ord. 1251, § 1, 2016)
§ 3.34.030  LEVY OF TAX.
   A.   As described in O.R.S. 475B.345, the City of Sweet Home hereby imposes
a tax of 3% on the retail sale price of marijuana items by a marijuana retailer
in the area subject to the jurisdiction of the city.
   B.   The sale of medical marijuana shall be exempt from the tax imposed by
this chapter.
   C.   The tax shall be collected at the point of sale of a marijuana item by
a marijuana retailer at the time at which the retail sale occurs and remitted
by each marijuana retailer that engages in the retail sale of marijuana items
as set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 1251, § 1, 2016)
§ 3.34.040  DEDUCTIONS.
   The following deductions shall be allowed against sales received by the
seller providing marijuana items:
   A.   Refunds of taxable sales actually returned to any purchaser;
   B.   Any adjustments in sales which amount to a refund to a purchaser,
providing such adjustment pertains to the actual sale of marijuana items and
does not include any adjustments for other services furnished by a seller.
(Ord. 1251, § 1, 2016)
§ 3.34.050  SELLER RESPONSIBLE FOR PAYMENT OF TAX.
   A.   Every seller shall, on or before the last day of the month following
the end of each calendar quarter (April 30, July 31, October 31, and January
31), make a return to the Director, on forms provided by the city, specifying
the total sales subject to this chapter and the amount of tax due under this
chapter. When the due date falls on a Saturday, a Sunday, or any legal holiday,
the report may be filed on the next business day without penalty. A return
shall not be considered filed until it is actually received by the Director.
   B.   At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax due shall
be remitted to the Director. Payments received by the Director for application
against existing liabilities will be credited toward the period designated by
the taxpayer under conditions that are not prejudicial to the interest of the
city. A condition considered prejudicial is the imminent expiration of the
statute of limitations for a period or periods.
   C.   Non-designated payments shall be applied in the order of the oldest
liability first, with the payment credited first toward any accrued penalty,
then to interest, then to the underlying tax. If the Director, in the
Director's sole discretion, determines that an alternative order of payment
application would be in the best interest of the city in a particular tax or
factual situation, the Director may order such a change.
   D.   Returns and payments are due 30 days after a business is sold,
ownership is transferred, or upon cessation of business for any reason.
   E.   All taxes collected by sellers pursuant to the chapter shall be held in
trust for the account of the city until payment is made to the Director. A
separate trust bank account is not required in order to comply with this
provision.
   F.   Every seller must keep and preserve, in a generally-accepted accounting
format used for reporting revenue and taxes due on business activity, detailed
records of all sales made. Every seller must keep and preserve for a period of
six years all such books, invoices, and other records. The Director shall have
the right to inspect all such records at all reasonable times.
(Ord. 1251, § 1, 2016)
§ 3.34.060  PENALTIES AND INTEREST.
   A.   Any seller who fails to remit any portion of any tax imposed by this
chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of 10% of the amount of
the tax, in addition to the amount of the tax.
   B.   Any seller who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a
period of 60 days following the date on which the remittance first became
delinquent, shall pay a second delinquency penalty of 10% of the amount of the
tax, an addition to the amount of the tax and the penalty first imposed.
   C.   If the Director determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due
under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of 25% of the amount of the tax
shall be added hereto, in addition to the penalties stated in subsections A.
and B. of this section.
   D.   In addition to the penalties imposed, any seller who fails to remit any
tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of 9% per month or
fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the
date on which the remittance first became due.
   E.   Every penalty imposed, and such interest as accrues under the
provisions of this section, shall become a part of the tax required to be paid.
   F.   Notwithstanding SHMC
3.34.050(c), all sums collected pursuant to the penalty provisions in
subsection A., B., or C., or the interest provision in subsection D. of this
section shall be distributed to the City of Sweet Home General Fund to offset
the costs of auditing and enforcement of this tax.
   G.   Waiver of penalties. A seller may petition the Director for waiver and
refund of the penalty or any portion thereof. The petition must be in writing
and submitted to the Director within 90 days of the remittance due date. The
Director shall make a determination within 30 days of receiving the petition.
(Ord. 1251, § 1, 2016)
§ 3.34.070  FAILURE TO REPORT AND REMIT TAX - DETERMINATION OF TAX BY DIRECTOR.
   If any seller should fail to make, within the time provided in this chapter,
any report of the tax required by this chapter, the Director shall proceed in
such manner as deemed best to obtain facts and information on which to base the
estimate of tax due. As soon as the Director procures such facts and
information as is able to be obtained, the Director shall determine and assess
against such seller the tax, interest, and penalties provided for by this
chapter. The Director shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by having
it served personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, certified,
postage prepaid, addressed to the seller at the last known place of address.
The seller may appeal the Director's determination as provided in §
3.34.080. If no appeal is filed, the Director's determination is final and the
amount thereby is immediately due and payable.
(Ord. 1251, § 1, 2016)
§ 3.34.080  APPEAL.
   A seller aggrieved by a decision of the Director with respect to the amount
of any tax or penalty may file a written appeal pursuant to the process set
forth in by resolution of City Council, except that the appeal shall be filed
within 30 days of the serving or mailing of the Director's decision. The
hearings officer shall hear and consider any records and evidence presented
bearing upon the Director's determination, and make findings affirming,
reversing, or modifying the determination. The findings of the hearings officer
shall be final and conclusive, and shall be served upon the appellant in the
manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to
be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice.
(Ord. 1251, § 1, 2016)
§ 3.34.090  REFUNDS.
   A.   Whenever the amount of any tax, interest, or penalty has been overpaid
or paid more than once, or has been erroneously collected or received by the
city under this chapter it may be refunded as provided in subsection B. of this
section, provided a claim in writing, stating under penalty of perjury the
specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the Director
within one year of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished
by the Director.
   B.   The Director shall have 30 days from the date of receipt of a claim to
make a written determination as to its validity. The Director shall notify the
claimant in writing of the Director's determination. Such notice shall be
mailed to the address provided by claimant of the claim form. If the Director
determines a claim is valid, a credit will be granted against the seller's tax
liability for the next reporting period. If the claimant is no longer in
business, a refund check will be mailed to the claimant at the address provided
in the claim form.
   C.   No tax credit or refund shall be paid under the provisions of this
section unless the claimant established the right by written records, showing
entitlement to such refund and the Director acknowledged the validity of the
claim.
(Ord. 1251, § 1, 2016)
§ 3.34.100  ACTIONS TO COLLECT.
   Any tax required to be paid by any seller under the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the seller to the city. Any such tax
collected by a seller which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a
debt owed by the seller to the city. When taxes due are more than 30 days
delinquent, the city shall submit any outstanding tax to a collection agency.
If the city complies with the provisions set forth in O.R.S. 697.105, it may
add to the amount owing an amount equal to the collection agency fees.
(Ord. 1251, § 1, 2016)
§ 3.34.110  VIOLATION.
   A.   It is a violation of this chapter for any seller or other person to:
      1.   Fail or refuse to comply as required herein;
      2.   Fail or refuse to furnish any return required to be made;
      3.   Fail or refuse to permit inspection of records;
      4.   Fail or refuse to furnish a supplemental return or other data
required by the Director;
      5.   Fail, refuse, or neglect to remit the tax to the city by the due
date; or
      6.   Render a false or fraudulent return or claim.
   B.   Violation of an above subsections except subsection A.6. of this
section or any other provision of this chapter shall be considered a violation
and may be prosecuted under
Chapter 9.36 of this code as now enacted or hereafter amended with each day's
violation a separate offense. Violation of subsection A.6. shall be considered
a misdemeanor under state law.
   C.   The remedies provided by this section are not exclusive and shall not
prevent the city from exercising any other remedy available under the law, nor
shall the provisions of this chapter prohibit or restrict the city or other
appropriate authority from pursuing criminal charges under state law or city
ordinance.
(Ord. 1251, § 1, 2016)
§ 3.34.120  CONFIDENTIALITY.
   Except as otherwise required by law, it shall be unlawful for the city, any
officer, employee, or agent to divulge, release, or make known in any manner
any financial information submitted or disclosed to the city under the terms of
this chapter. Nothing in this section shall prohibit;
   A.   The disclosure of the names and addresses of any person who is
operating a licensed establishment from which marijuana items are sold or
provided;
   B.   The disclosure of general statistics in a form which would not reveal
an individual seller's financial information;
   C.   The presentation of evidence to a court, or other tribunal having
jurisdiction in the prosecution of any criminal or civil claim, by the Director
or an appeal from the Director for the amount due the city under this chapter;
   D.   The disclosure of information when such disclosure is ordered by a
court of competent jurisdiction;
   E.   The disclosure of information to law enforcement authorities when
investigating a crime;
   F.   The disclosure of records related to a seller's failure to report and
remit the tax when the report or tax is in arrears for over six months or the
tax exceeds $5,000. The City Council expressly finds and determines that the
public interest in disclosure of such records clearly outweighs the interest in
confidentiality under O.R.S. 192.501(5).
(Ord. 1251, § 1, 2016)
§ 3.34.130  AUDIT OF BOOKS, RECORDS OR PERSONS.
   The city, for the purpose of determining the correctness of any tax return,
or for the purpose of an estimate of taxes due, may examine or may cause to be
examined by an agent or representative designated by the city for that purpose,
any books, papers, records, or memoranda, including copies of the seller's
state and federal income tax returns, bearing upon the matter of the seller's
tax return. All books, invoices, accounts, and other records shall be made
available within the city limits and be open at any time during regular
business hours for examination by the Director or an authorized agent of the
Director. If any seller refuses to voluntarily furnish any of the foregoing
information when requested, the Director may immediately seek a subpoena from
the Sweet Home Municipal Court to require that the seller attend a hearing or
produce any such books, accounts, and records for examination.
(Ord. 1251, § 1, 2016)
§ 3.34.140  FORMS AND REGULATIONS.
   The Director is hereby authorized to prescribe forms and promulgate rules
and regulations to aid in the making of returns and the ascertainment,
assessment, and collection of the tax imposed by this chapter. In particular,
and without limiting the general language of this section, the Director shall
provide for:
   A.   A form of report on sales and purchases to be supplied to all sellers;
and
   B.   The records which sellers providing marijuana items are to keep
concerning the tax imposed by this chapter.
(Ord. 1251, § 1, 2016)
§ 3.34.150  DISPOSITION OF MARIJUANA TAX REVENUE.
   All funds derived from the collection of the tax on the sale of marijuana
items shall be credited to the General Fund.
(Ord. 1251, § 1, 2016)
§ 3.34.160   ALTERNATIVE COLLECTION PROCESS.
   A.   As an alternative to the above described collection process the City
Council may by resolution enter into an agreement with the State of Oregon and/
or its agencies to collect the 3% tax referred to in this chapter.
   B.   Any provisions of this chapter not superseded by said agreement shall
be complied with by the persons referred to therein and any enforcement may be
taken as provided for in this chapter.
(Ord. 1254, § 1, 2016)
§ 3.34.170   INTEREST AND PENALTY FOR ALTERNATIVE COLLECTION PROCESS.
   A.   When using the alternative collection process in §
3.34.160 the following interest and penalty provisions are hereby authorized to
be used by Oregon Department of Revenue in collection of the local tax:
      1.   Interest shall be added to the overall tax amount due at the same
rate established under O.R.S. 305.220 for each month, or fraction of a month,
from the time the return to the Oregon Department of Revenue was originally
required to be filed by the marijuana retailer to the time of payment.
      2.   If a marijuana retailer fails to file a return with the Oregon
Department of Revenue or pay the tax as required, a penalty shall be imposed
upon the marijuana retailer in the same manner and amount provided under O.R.S.
314.400.
      3.   Every penalty imposed, and any interest that accrues, becomes a part
of the financial obligation required to be paid by the marijuana retailer and
remitted to the Oregon Department of Revenue.
      4.   Taxes, interest and penalties transferred to the City of Sweet Home
by the Oregon Department of Revenue will be distributed to the city’s General
Fund.
      5.   If at any time a marijuana retailer fails to remit any amount owed
in taxes, interest or penalties, the Oregon Department of Revenue is authorized
to enforce collection on behalf of the city of the owed amount in accordance
with O.R.S. 475B.700 to 475B.755, any agreement between the Oregon Department
of Revenue and City of Sweet Home under O.R.S. 305.620 and any applicable
administrative rules adopted by the Oregon Department of Revenue.
   B.   Any provisions of this chapter not superseded by this section shall be
complied with by the persons referred to therein and any enforcement may be
taken as provided for in the chapter.
(Ord. 1256, § 1, 2017)
TITLE 4
[Reserved]
TITLE 5: BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
      Chapter
         
5.04.   AMUSEMENT DEVICES
         
5.08.   BICYCLE DEALERS
         
5.12.   PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
         
5.24.   SOCIAL GAMES
         5.25.   SPECIAL EVENTS
         
5.28.   TAXICABS
         
5.32.   SECONDHAND DEALERS
CHAPTER 5.04:  AMUSEMENT DEVICES
Section
   
5.04.010   Miscellaneous events.
   
5.04.020   Violation—Penalty.
Editor’s note:
   The former sections of this chapter were misnumbered. Former code § 5.04.090
is renumbered as §
5.04.010 and former code § 5.04.100 is renumbered as §
5.04.020 to flow consistently.
§ 5.04.010  MISCELLANEOUS EVENTS.
   Carnivals, circuses and similar entertainment are required to obtain a city
license. The city may grant a license for each day or fraction thereof, during
which the event shall operate, for a fee as set by City Council resolution.
Shows, exhibitions, lectures, concerts and similar public entertainments shall
operate subject to the same license requirement. Nothing in this chapter shall
apply to entertainments sponsored by educational institutions. Such events
taking place on public property or in the public right-of-way that involve 75
or more persons shall require a permit pursuant to Chapter 5.25 of this code.
(Ord. 1285, § 2, 2020; 1036, 1991: Ord. 804, 1980; Ord. 368, 1960)
§ 5.04.020  VIOLATION—PENALTY.
   Violation of this chapter constitutes a violation and may be prosecuted
under the provisions of
Chapter 9.36 and any amendments thereto. Each day’s violation of a provision of
this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 1240, § 9, 2015; Ord. 1237, § 1 (part), 2013; Ord. 876, (part), 1982;
Ord. 368, 1960)
CHAPTER 5.08:  BICYCLE DEALERS
Section
   
5.08.010   Dealers.
   
5.08.020   Rental agencies.
   
5.08.030   Violation.
§ 5.08.010  DEALERS.
   Every person engaged in the business of buying secondhand bicycles shall
maintain a record of every bicycle purchased, giving the name and address of
the person from whom purchased, a description of the bicycle by name or make,
the frame number thereof and the license number, if any, found thereon.
(Ord. 380, 1961)
§ 5.08.020  RENTAL AGENCIES.
   A rental agency shall not rent or offer any bicycle for rent unless the
bicycle is licensed and the bicycle is equipped with all equipment required by
the motor vehicle laws of Oregon and this chapter.
(Ord. 380, 1961)
§ 5.08.030  VIOLATION.
   Violation of this chapter constitutes a violation and may be prosecuted
under the provisions of Sweet Home Municipal Code
Chapter 9.36 and any amendments thereto. Each day’s violation of a provision of
this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 1203, § 13, 2008)
CHAPTER 5.12:  PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
Section
   
5.12.010   Registration required.
   
5.12.020   Definitions.
   
5.12.030   Exclusions.
   
5.12.040   Registration form.
   
5.12.050   Registration term.
   
5.12.060   Exhibit of license.
   
5.12.070   Duty of police to enforce.
   
5.12.080   Public property location.
   
5.12.090   Loud noises and speaking devices.
   
5.12.100   Denial or revocation of registration.
   
5.12.110   Appeal.
   
5.12.120   Reapplication.
   
5.12.130   Violation—Penalty.
§ 5.12.010  REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   No person may engage in the business of a peddler, solicitor or transient
merchant, as defined in this chapter, without first registering as provided in
this chapter. Each employee or member of an organization so engaged shall be
registered individually as provided herein. The registration can be waived for
special events by prior approval of City Council upon set conditions that will
consider public safety, traffic, business experience and responsibility and
other matters that relate to the public.
(Ord. 1037, 1991)
§ 5.12.020  DEFINITIONS.
   When used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION.   A nonprofit organization that is soliciting for
its charitable purposes.
   PEDDLER.   Any person, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling by
foot, or any type of conveyance, from place to place, conveying anything of
value, offering and exposing the same for sale, or making sales and delivering
articles to purchasers, or who solicits orders and as a separate transaction
makes deliveries to purchasers shall be deemed a peddler subject to the
provisions of this chapter.
   PERSON.   The singular and the plural and shall also mean and include any
person, firm or corporation, association, club, copartnership or society or any
other organization.
   SOLICITOR.   Any person, whether resident of the city or not, who goes from
house to house, place to place, soliciting or taking or attempting to take
orders for things of value, including wares, merchandise, magazines, books,
periodicals or personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery,
or for service to be performed in the future, whether or not the individual
has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of the order or
whether or not he or she is collecting advance payments on the orders. 
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT.   Any person whether as owner, agent, consignee or
employee, whether a resident of the city or not, who engages in a temporary
business of selling goods, wares or merchandise within the city, and who, in
furtherance of such purposes, occupies any place within the city for the
exhibition and sale of the goods, wares or merchandise.  The person so engaged
shall not be relieved from complying with the provisions of this chapter merely
by reason of associating temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant or
auctioneer, or by conducting the transient business in connection with, as a
part of, or in the name of any local merchant.
(Ord. 1232, § 1, 2013: Ord. 1037, 1991)
§ 5.12.030  EXCLUSIONS.
   The terms of this chapter shall not be held to include persons selling
personal property at wholesale to dealers, persons who sell or deliver goods
and/or services to businesses which regularly handle or use the goods and/or
services in their business, or persons who have the consent of the occupant of
the real property to enter on it before they come to the real property as part
of a routine or regular route connected with persons at the real property. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be held to prohibit any sale required
by statute or by order of any court or to prevent any person conducting a bona
fide auction sale pursuant to law.  The terms of this chapter shall not be held
to include the acts of persons soliciting money, donations of money or property
or financial assistance of any kind or selling or distributing any item or
literature or merchandise for a fee upon the streets, in business buildings, by
house to house canvass or in public places for religious purposes, political
purposes or charitable purposes, when the solicitations are made by a bona fide
member of organizations sponsoring the canvasses.  Professional agents in the
employ of such organizations shall be included under and be subject to the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 1232, § 2, 2013; Ord. 1037, 1991)
§ 5.12.040  REGISTRATION FORM.
   A.   A person registering as a peddler or solicitor shall file with the city
a form to be provided by the city and shall give the following information:
      1.   Name, description, photo identification issued by state or federal
government and driver’s license number or state ID number of the registrar;
      2.   Address and phone number, both legal and local of registrar;
      3.   Name, address and phone number, both legal and local of employer/
sponsor, if any, and relationship to same;
      4.   A statement as to whether or not the registrar has been convicted of
any crime, felony or misdemeanor, the nature of the offense and the punishment
or penalty assessed therefore, within the last fifteen years for a felony and
the last five years for a misdemeanor, if the convictions and sentencing are
themselves public records; and a statement as to whether or not the registrar
is currently the subject of a stalking order or restraining order issued by a
court of competent jurisdiction that is itself a public record;
      5.   The last cities, not to exceed three, where registrar carried on
business immediately preceding date of registration and the addresses from
which the business was so conducted;
      6.   Description of event or business with proposed location and length
of time in Sweet Home;
      7.   If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together with
license number or other means of identification; and
      8.   Signature of registrar verifying that all the information on the
form is true.
   B.   The form shall state thereon that it is a public record and available
for public inspection.
   C.   Each form shall contain in substance the following wording in addition
to any other relevant questions or information thereon: The City of Sweet Home
does not endorse or recommend this person to anyone. This registration form is
on file at City Hall for public inspection. No background investigation need be
conducted with the registration. The license issued shall in substance have the
above referred to information thereon.
   D.   The City of Sweet Home shall process an application within two business
days of its receipt. 
   E.   A person registering as a transient merchant shall file with the city a
form to be provided by the city that shall give the following information:
      1.   Name, description, photo identification issued by state or federal
government and driver’s license number or state ID number of the registrar;
      2.   Address and phone number, both legal and local of the registrar;
      3.   Name, address and phone number, both legal and local of employer/
sponsor, if any, and relationship to same;
      4.   The name of the owner of the property where the temporary business
is to be located;
      5.   A plot plan for temporary business including set backs;
      6.   Description of event or business with proposed location and length
of time in Sweet Home;
      7.   If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together with
license number or other means of identification; and
      8.   Signature of registrar verifying that all the information on the
form is true and verifying that the owner of the property has given permission
for the transient merchant.
(Ord. 1240, § 10, 2015; Ord. 1232, §§ 3 - 6, 2013; Ord. 1203, §§ 14, 15, 2008;
Ord. 1037, 1991)
§ 5.12.050  REGISTRATION TERM.
   A license issued under this chapter shall be valid for one year unless
otherwise specified on the license for a shorter period of time. A person must
register for each event or business enterprise on or prior to the expiration of
the license.
(Ord. 1203, § 16, 2008; Ord. 1037, 1991; Ord. 1282, § 2, 2020)
§ 5.12.060  EXHIBIT OF LICENSE.
   A registrar including any peddler, solicitor or transient merchant shall
exhibit his or her license form supplied by the city for exhibit on request of
any citizen.
(Ord. 1232, § 7, 2013; Ord. 1037, 1991)
§ 5.12.070  DUTY OF POLICE TO ENFORCE.
   A police officer may require a peddler, solicitor or transient merchant to
produce his or her license form supplied by the city for exhibit. A police
officer shall enforce the provisions of this chapter against any person found
to be violating same.
(Ord. 1232, § 8, 2013; Ord. 1037, 1991)
§ 5.12.080  PUBLIC PROPERTY LOCATION.
   No person shall have any exclusive right to any location on the public
sidewalk, street or other public area nor shall any be permitted a stationary
location, nor shall any be permitted to operate in any congested area where his
or her operations might impede or inconvenience the public. For the purpose of
this chapter, the judgment of a police officer, exercised in good faith, shall
be deemed conclusive as to whether the area is congested or the public impeded
or inconvenienced.
(Ord. 1037, 1991)
§ 5.12.090  LOUD NOISES AND SPEAKING DEVICES.
   No person, nor any person in his or her behalf, shall shout, make any
outcry, blow a horn, ring a bell, use any sound device, including any loud-
speaking radio or sound amplifying system upon any of the streets, alleys,
parks or other public places of the city or upon any private premises in the
city where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced therefrom to be
capable of being plainly heard upon the streets, avenues, alleys, parks or
other public places, for the purpose of attracting attention to any wares,
goods, or services which the person proposes to sell or offer to the public.
(Ord. 1037, 1991)
§ 5.12.100  DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF REGISTRATION.
   The privilege to conduct the event or business under the provisions of this
chapter may be denied or revoked by the Police Chief, including a police
officer acting as Chief of Police, after notice for any of the following
causes:
   A.   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
registration form;
   B.   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on the event or business;
   C.   A violation of this chapter;
   D.   For a peddler or solicitor conviction within the last 15 years for any
felony that would relate directly to the safety (either economic or physical)
of the public by the person conducting or participating in the event or
business or within the last five years for any misdemeanor that would relate
directly to the safety (either economic or physical) of the public by the
person conducting or participating in the event or business. For a solicitor or
peddler who is a current subject of a stalking order which is based on danger,
force or threat to a victim or a restraining order involving physical abuse or
threat of physical abuse issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. Time
spent in jail or prison shall extend the time period for the 15-year period and
the five-year period for a maximum of two years from the date of application.
   E.   Conducting the event or business in an unlawful manner or in such a
manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the
health, safety or general welfare of the public.
(Ord. 1240, § 11, 2015; Ord. 1232, § 9, 2013; Ord. 1037, 1991)
§ 5.12.110  APPEAL.
   Any person aggrieved by the action of the Police Chief in denying or
revoking the privilege to conduct the event or business shall have the right to
appeal to the City Council of the city. The registrar shall file with the
Council a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal
within 14 days after the day the notice is delivered by the city to the
registrar indicating disapproval or revocation. The decision and order of the
Council on such appeal shall be final and conclusive.
(Ord. 1037, 1991)
§ 5.12.120  REAPPLICATION.
   No registrar who has been denied or revoked shall make further application
until a period of at least six months shall have elapsed since the last
previous denial or revocation unless the registrar can show that the reason for
the denial or revocation has been corrected.
(Ord. 1037, 1991)
§ 5.12.130  VIOLATION—PENALTY.
   Violation of this chapter constitutes a violation and may be prosecuted
under the provisions of
Chapter 9.36 and any amendments thereto. Each day’s violation is a separate
offense.
(Ord. 1232, § 10, 2013; Ord. 1037, 1991)
CHAPTER 5.24:  SOCIAL GAMES
Section
   
5.24.010   Charitable, fraternal and religious organizations.
   
5.24.020   Application.
   
5.24.030   Permit—Revocation.
   
5.24.040   Pan.
   
5.24.050   Texas Hold ‘Em tournaments.
§ 5.24.010  CHARITABLE, FRATERNAL AND RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATIONS.
   Upon obtaining a permit as hereinafter provided, charitable, fraternal and
religious organizations may conduct social games in accordance with the
provisions of O.R.S. 167.117.
(Ord. 747, 1978)
§ 5.24.020  APPLICATION.
   A.   The application for the permit to conduct social games shall be made to
the Chief of Police of the city and the applicant shall furnish such
information as he or she may require.
   B.   Charitable, fraternal and religious organizations shall not be required
to pay any application fee, but other applicants shall pay an application fee
set by City Council resolution, which shall not be refunded if the permit is
not granted.
   C.   As promptly as any appropriate investigation has been made, the Chief
of Police shall submit the application for the permit to the Council of the
city. The Council may either grant or refuse the application for the permit.
(Ord. 747, 1978; Ord. 1282, § 3, 2020)
§ 5.24.030  PERMIT—REVOCATION.
   The Council may revoke a permit to conduct social games at any time after
holding a public hearing on the matter. The organization holding the permit
shall be given at least ten days’ written notice of the hearing. The notice
shall be delivered to one of the leaders or officers of the organization; and
if that cannot be done, then the notice shall be mailed by certified mail.
(Ord. 747, 1978)
§ 5.24.040  PAN.
   Pan may be played as a social game, with bets limited to not more than $0.25
each, in a public place where the owner has paid the required city privilege
tax.
(Ord. 928, 1984)
§ 5.24.050  TEXAS HOLD ‘EM TOURNAMENTS.
   A.   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to allow in a private business,
private club or place of public accommodation Texas Hold ‘Em poker card
tournaments. The requirements of this section do not apply to charitable,
fraternal and religious organizations already covered by §§
5.24.010,
5.24.020,
5.24.030 and the playing of Pan covered in §
5.24.040.
   B.   Social game permitted. Texas Hold ‘Em poker card tournaments as defined
below, between players in a private business, private club or in a place of
public accommodation where no house player, house dealer, house bank or house
odds exist, and there being no house take (meaning no house income from the
operation of the social gaming), is hereby permitted as provided herein.
Definitions used for this section are as follows:
      1.   BUY IN. In tournament-style Texas Hold ‘Em, all players who play in
the tournament pay the same exact buy in fee. The tournament winners split up
the buy in fee as the winnings pursuant to terms agreed upon before the
tournament begins; provided, however, that, no deduction, fee, expense, gift or
cover charge, head fee, fee for entrance or otherwise of any kind is allowed to
anyone for 100% of the buy in must be returned to the players as winnings. No
other winnings or compensation to the players is permitted other than the buy
in fees. No more than two buy in fees are permitted, one during the initial buy
in for participation in the tournament and a second buy in optional with the
tournament organizer for players during the tournament. The buy in fee is
limited as set forth in subsection I.11. herein.
      2.   HOUSE. Includes owner of private business, private club or place of
public accommodation, tournament organizer, spouse of owner, spouse of
tournament organizer, children of owner, children of tournament organizer,
spouse of child of owner, spouse of child of tournament organizer, brother,
sister or parent of owner, brother, sister or parent of tournament organizer, a
business in which one of the foregoing named individual(s) is associated,
employee of owner and employee of tournament organizer.
      3.   OTHER DEFINITION. Unless the context requires otherwise, all terms
set forth in this section shall have the same meaning as set forth in O.R.S.
167.117.
      4.   TEXAS HOLD ‘EM POKER CARD TOURNAMENT. A seven-card poker card game.
The players deal to each other and the deal passes between players. There may
be a set betting on the first round of betting called “blinds”. The players at
each table are dealt two cards face down. After a round of betting, three
community cards are turned face up in the middle of the table. This action is
called the “flop”. Players may fold at any time. After the flop is turned face
up, there is another round of betting. A fourth community card is turned up
next to the flop. This is known as the “turn”. Another round of betting ensues.
Finally, a fifth community card is turned up next to the turn. This is known as
the “river” or “fifth street”. A round of betting follows. There is no limit on
the amount a player can bet at any time. Therefore, a player can bet all of his
or her chips or move all in any round of betting.
   C.   License required for Texas Hold ‘Em poker card tournament. Any person
(s) hosting a Texas Hold ‘Em poker card tournament at any private business,
private club or place of public accommodation desiring to permit patrons or
invitees to engage in Texas Hold ‘Em poker card tournaments within the City of
Sweet Home and any tournament organizer shall acquire and maintain a valid
license from the city. Licenses shall be granted only upon application to the
city and upon approval of the Chief of Police. Licenses shall be renewed
annually not later than July 1 of each year; provided, further, that, there
shall be no prorating of any license fee for license applications made at other
times throughout the year.
   D.   Application for license and investigation application requirements.
Before a license for Texas Hold ‘Em poker card tournaments may be granted by
the Chief of Police, an applicant must submit an application for license to the
Chief of Police with the following information and allow investigation to be
made there upon. A completed applicant form must include the true names, dates
of birth, Social Security numbers and addresses of all persons financially
interested in the business, all persons who are on the Board of Directors and
all persons who hold offices in the entity or organization. The term “persons
financially interested in the business” shall include all persons who share in
the profits of the business or in social gaming activities located at the
business, on the basis of gross or net revenue, including landlords, lessors,
lessees, any owners of the building, fixtures or equipment used in the social
game. The application shall also include names, dates of birth, Social Security
numbers and addresses of all tournament sponsors and tournament organizers, if
different from person(s) financially interested in the business. The tournament
organizer who has no interest in the place where the tournament is to be held
must have a license of his or her own.
   E.   Application renewal. The licensee of the Texas Hold ‘Em poker card
tournament license must notify the Chief of Police within ten days of any
change in persons financially interested in the business, new members on the
Board of Directors and new office holders in the entity or organization and
request a renewal of its license. At the time of the request, the licensee
shall submit the information required by subsection D. of this section
regarding application requirements.
   F.   License fee. For each business or other entity or organization license
(including tournament organizer), an annual fee set by City Council resolution
shall be required.
   G.   Standards for issuance of license. The Chief of Police shall either
approve the application and grant the license applied for, or deny the
application and refuse to grant the license. The license shall not be granted,
or if so be temporarily revoked or suspended, if any applicant or any person(s)
financially interested in the business, Board of Directors or office holders in
the entity or organization have:
      1.   Supplied any false or misleading information in the application or
omitted any request of information from the application;
      2.   Pled no contest or guilty or have been convicted of any felony
within the last 15 years;
      3.   Had a license in his or her name revoked or suspended three times by
Oregon Liquor Control Commission (OLCC), either of which was in the last five
years;
      4.   Been convicted for any crime involving or related to gambling within
the last 15 years; and
      5.   Violated any provision of this section.
   H.   License not transferrable. No license shall be assigned or transferred;
any such attempt shall void the license.
   I.   Responsibilities of the licensee. It shall be the responsibility of the
licensee to insure that:
      1.   No form of unlawful gambling is permitted upon the licensed
premises;
      2.   Texas Hold ‘Em poker card tournaments are conducted consistent with
the provisions of state law, city ordinances and this section, including the
limits set forth below;
      3.   Limitations. There shall be no house player, house bank, house
dealer, house odds and there shall be no income from the operation or buy in
fees of the Texas Hold ‘Em poker card tournament and tournament organizers may
not charge any fee to players or participants in Texas Hold ‘Em poker card
tournaments other than the buy in fee;
      4.   The playing of social games shall be arranged as to provide equal
access and visibility to any interested party. The buy in fee for each player
must be the same amount per tournament;
      5.   No person under 18 years of age shall be permitted to participate in
the Texas Hold ‘Em poker card tournament and no person listed in the “house”
definition defined herein shall be permitted to participate in the Texas Hold
‘Em poker card tournament;
      6.   No charge other than a buy in fee shall be collected from a player
for the privilege of participating in a game and no charge shall be collected
from a player for the privilege of entering the premises;
      7.   No player shall be charged a price for any consumer goods which is
higher or lower than the price charged to nonparticipants or that is normally
charged;
      8.   A copy of this section, and the Texas Hold ‘Em poker card tournament
license of the license holder shall be posted in a conspicuous place near the
area where the games are to be played;
      9.   Free and immediate access by law enforcement officers be allowed by
doors leading into the room or enclosure remaining unlocked during all hours of
operation and the tournament be held in a public area on the premises;
      10.   Tournaments are to be conducted in the normal operating hours of
any private business, private club or in a place of public accommodation.
Furthermore, no Texas Hold ‘Em poker card tournament is to be conducted between
the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on any day;
      11.   Buy in limitation. No tournament may charge a player a total buy in
fee, greater than $100 in a 24-hour period. No other winnings or compensation
to the players is permitted other than the buy in fee; and
      12.   In a Texas Hold ‘Em poker card tournament, no more than two buy in
fees are permitted per player, per tournament, one during the initial buy in
for participation and the tournament, and a second buy in optional with the
tournament organizer for players during the tournament. The total sum of one or
two buy ins may not be greater than $100 for any single player in a 24-hour
period.
   J.   Tournament format required. All Texas Hold ‘Em poker card tournaments
shall utilize a tournament format. A tournament format shall include the
following:
      1.   Except for the buy in fee, no fee may be charged to the players and
no fee shall be paid to the house or tournament organizer which include no tip
or other gratuity;
      2.   A set buy in fee;
      3.   Players shall receive in-game currency represented by chips (poker-
type) which shall be non-redeemable; and
      4.   All fees and monies taken in for the tournament shall be paid back
to the contestants at the conclusion of the tournament; and, therefor, the
house licensee, private business owner, manager, tournament organizer or any
other person shall take no part of the buy in from the tournament players as
profit or expenses or otherwise.
   K.   Terms of the license. All licenses issued hereunder shall be for a
period of one year and shall be renewed annually not later than July 1 of each
year. Licenses are not transferable and must be reapplied for not later than
July 1 of each year. Persons applying for licenses must submit an application
and the appropriate fee. All persons securing a license shall be required to
pay an annual fee. There shall be no proration for licenses applied for or
renewed after July 1 regarding the annual fee. All renewals shall be approved
by the Chief of Police.
   L.   Revocation of license. A license is subject to revocation at any time
for violation of this section or any provisions of state law related to
gambling. If at any time facts arise or become known to the Chief of Police
which are sufficient to show the violation of this section or state law, the
Chief of Police shall notify the licensee in writing that the license is to be
revoked and that all Texas Hold ‘Em poker card tournament activities must cease
within ten days. The violations need not lead to a conviction, but must
establish a reasonable doubt about the licensee’s ability to perform the
license activity without danger to property or public health or safety or
violation of this section. The notice of revocation shall state the reasons for
the revocation, set a period of not less than 30 days before Texas Hold ‘Em
poker card tournament activities can recommence and inform the licensee of the
procedures for filing an appeal.
   M.   Suspension of license. Upon determining that a licensed activity
presents an immediate danger to persons or property, or that a license holder
is in violation of any provisions of state law related to gambling or violation
of this section, the Chief of Police shall suspend the license for the Texas
Hold ‘Em poker card tournament activity. The suspension shall take effect
immediately upon notice being received by the licensee or being delivered to
the licensee’s business address as stated on the licensee’s application for the
license that is being suspended. The notice shall be mailed to the licensee and
state the reason for the suspension and inform the licensee of the procedures
for filing an appeal. The Chief of Police shall continue the suspension for as
long as the reason for the suspension exists, or until a decision is made by
the appellate authority on appeal regarding the suspension concludes the
matter.
   N.   Appeals. Appeals of revocation or suspension shall be made to the City
Manager of the City of Sweet Home. Upon decision by the City Manager, a final
appeal regarding suspension or revocation of the license will be submitted to
the Sweet Home City Council. The person whose license is being suspended or
revoked will have the opportunity to present his or her side to the Sweet Home
City Council for final decision at an open public Council meeting.
   O.   Penalty. In addition to the suspension or revocation of any license
hereunder, any person, any licensee, firm, corporation, business, association
or person(s) associated with the licensee who violate(s) any provision of this
section commit(s) a violation under Sweet Home Municipal Code and may, upon
conviction, be fined in the amount not to exceed $500 for each violation. Upon
conviction, a license may be revoked by the Sweet Home Municipal Court. Each
day that a violation exists is a separate offense.
(Ord. 1240, § 12, 2015; Ord. 1210, § 1, 2009; Ord. 1191, § 1, 2007; Ord. 1282,
§§ 4, 5, 2020)
CHAPTER 5.25:  SPECIAL EVENTS
Section
   
5.25.010   Purpose and policy.
   
5.25.020   Definitions.
   
5.25.030   Exemptions.
   
5.25.040   Administration.
   
5.25.050   Permit required.
   
5.25.060   Permit fee and deposit.
   
5.25.070   Application and fee exemptions and waivers.
   
5.25.080   Pre-application conference.
   
5.25.090   Permit application.
   
5.25.100   Permit requirements.
   
5.25.110   Permit conditions.
   
5.25.120   Denial of application.
   
5.25.130   Indemnification.
   
5.25.140   Insurance required.
   
5.25.150   Revocation or suspension.
   
5.25.160   Appeal procedure.
   
5.25.170   Penalty for violation.
   
5.25.180   Severability.
§ 5.25.010  PURPOSE AND POLICY.
   Special events are of infrequent occurrence and temporary nature and may be
associated with promotions, holidays, festivals, and the like. Special events
shall be allowed by a special events permit granted by the City Manager or
designee. It is the purpose of this chapter to:
   A.   Ensure that special events, as defined in this chapter, held within the
city meet minimum standards in order to protect the peace, health, safety, and
welfare of individuals attending special events in the city, as well as the
surrounding neighbors and areas of the special event.
   B.   It is the intent of the city to ensure that special events within the
city limits meet minimum standards. These standards include, but are not
limited to, the safety of the participants and the public, ensuring that
responsible persons are directing or are in charge of the event, safeguards
against unlawful use and abuse of drugs and alcohol are in effect, and that
noise levels are limited so as to ensure the peace, health, safety, and welfare
of those attending the special events, as well as the surrounding neighbors.
   C.   It is the intent of the city to issue a permit as soon as these minimum
health, safety, peace, and welfare criteria are met. However, city officials
may also consider any history of noncompliance of a particular organizer and/or
event with the minimum peace, health, safety, and welfare criteria of this
chapter.
   D.   Issuance of a permit does not constitute approval of the operation of
any business on any particular piece of property.
   E.   Issuance of a permit authorizes only temporary use of property.
Approval does not constitute approval of any property use, construction or
alteration of permanent structures. Any long-term use of a specific property or
structures as a permanent or developed event site must first be approved under
the relevant provisions of the Sweet Home Municipal Code.
   F.   It is the specific intent to place the obligation of complying with the
requirements of this chapter upon the applicant and permittee, and nothing
contained in this chapter is intended to be construed to create or form the
basis for liability on the part of the city, or its officers, employees or
agents for any injury or damage resulting from the failure of the applicant
and/or permittee to comply with the provisions stated herein.
(Ord. 1285, § 1, 2020)
§ 5.25.020  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, words and phrases used herein are as
follows:
   APPLICANT. Any person or organization who seeks a special event permit to
conduct an event governed by this chapter.
   ATHLETIC EVENT. An occasion in which a group of persons collect to engage in
or watch a sport or form of exercise on private or public property and/or on a
city street, sidewalk, alley, or other street right-of-way, which obstructs,
delays or interferes with the normal flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic,
or does not comply with traffic laws or controls. ATHLETIC EVENTS include, but
are not limited to, bicycle and foot races.
   BLOCK PARTY. A festive gathering on a street which may or may not require
the closure of a street, or a portion thereof, to vehicular traffic, and/or use
of the street for the festivity including barbecues, picnics, music or games.
   EXPRESSIVE ACTIVITY. Conduct, the sole or principal object of which is the
expression, dissemination or communication by verbal, visual, literary or
auditory means of opinion, views or ideas. EXPRESSIVE ACTIVITY includes, but is
not limited to, public oratory and the distribution of literature.
   PERMIT APPLICATION FEE. The fee to be paid by the special event permit
applicant at the time the application is filed with the city.
   PERMITTEE. Any person or organization who has been issued a special events
permit by the City Manager or designee. The PERMITTEE shall have authority,
subject to approval by the city, to determine participation in any activities
associated with the special event during the time period specified in the
permit.
   REFUNDABLE DEPOSIT. The amount of money required of a permittee by the city
in order to assure adequate cleanup of the special event site. The deposit
shall be returned to the permittee upon the completion of the event and
verification by the Public Works Department that the site has been returned to
the condition it was in prior to the event.
   SPECIAL EVENT.
      1.   Any organized formation, parade, procession, demonstration or
assembly which may include persons, animals, vehicles, or any combination
thereof, which is to assemble or travel in unison on any street, sidewalk or
other public right-of-way owned or controlled by the city which does not comply
with applicable traffic regulations, laws or controls; or
      2.   Any organized assemblage of 75 or more persons at any public place,
property, or facility, which is to gather for a common purpose under the
direction or control of a person.
      3.   Examples of SPECIAL EVENTS include, but are not limited to,
concerts, parades, circuses, fairs, festivals, block parties, street fairs,
community events, on the water activities (such as boat races), mass
participation sports (such as marathons and other running events), athletic or
sporting events, and community celebrations and observances conducted on public
property or public rights-of-way.
   SPECIAL EVENTS PERMIT. The permit issued by the City Manager or designee
after the applicant has met all applicable reviews and requirements set forth
in this chapter.
(Ord. 1285, § 1, 2020)
§ 5.25.030  EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
   A.   Funeral processions;
   B.   Groups required by law to be so assembled;
   C.   Pedestrian processions along a route that is restricted to sidewalks
and crossing streets only at pedestrian crosswalks in accordance with traffic
regulations and controls;
   D.   Expressive activities. If practicable, the organizers should give
notice to the city at least four hours prior to the event informing the city of
the date and time of the event and provide an estimate of the approximate
number of persons who will be participating.
   E.   Activities of state and federal governmental agencies, including
military units, which are performed within the scope of such agency’s duties
and functions.
(Ord. 1285, § 1, 2020)
§ 5.25.040  ADMINISTRATION.
   The City Manager or designee shall, after consultation with appropriate
departments and agencies, have discretionary authority regarding special event
permits. The City Manager or designee may approve, modify, condition, or deny
an application for a special events permit, in accordance with the principles
of this chapter.
(Ord. 1285, § 1, 2020)
§ 5.25.050  PERMIT REQUIRED.
   A.   Any person desiring to conduct a special event on public property, and/
or which will necessitate the use of the public right-of-way, shall first
obtain a special event permit.
   B.   Any event subject to the provisions of this chapter that is staged
without complying with all conditions of this chapter shall be subject to
closure by the Sweet Home Police Department.
(Ord. 1285, § 1, 2020)
§ 5.25.060  PERMIT FEE AND DEPOSIT.
   The fee for issuance of a special events permit shall be set by resolution
of the City Council. A clean-up deposit is required for applicants of special
events involving the sale of food or beverages for immediate consumption, the
erection of structures, the use of horses or other animals, or the use of
fireworks or other incendiary devices, in an amount reasonably anticipated to
be incurred in removing debris or litter caused by such special event, as
determined by the City Manager or designee. The clean-up deposit may be
returned after the special event if the applicant or applicant organization
cleans and restores the area used for the permitted event to the same condition
as existed prior to the event. If the property used for the event has not been
properly cleaned or restored, the clean-up deposit shall be applied toward the
city’s costs in cleaning up the permitted area. There may be requirements for
police officers to control traffic, provide security, and protect people and
property, and the Public Works Department may have costs for placing
barricades, roadway preparation, and clean-up, which may impact the amount of
the fee and deposit.
(Ord. 1285, § 1, 2020)
§ 5.25.070  APPLICATION AND FEE EXEMPTIONS AND WAIVERS.
   A.   No fee shall apply to a block party.
   B.   The City Council may waive fees for special events that are sponsored
by nonprofit agencies and which further the goals and objectives of the city.
   C.   Upon a finding of good cause, the City Manager or designee may waive by
order any time limit imposed by this chapter. In the order waiving any time
limit, the City Manager or designee must state the new time limit. Any waiver
of the time limits imposed by this chapter shall not require an applicant to
submit an application more than 120 days before the first day on which the
public event is to be held.
   D.   The City Manager or designee may waive all or part of the requirements
of liability insurance upon a showing by the applicant of good cause to reduce
or waive the insurance.
(Ord. 1285, § 1, 2020)
§ 5.25.080  PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE.
   The city may require a pre-application conference take place before the
application is deemed complete by the city. The pre-application conference, if
required, shall be scheduled within ten business days of receipt of the
application by the city.
(Ord. 1285, § 1, 2020)
§ 5.25.090  PERMIT APPLICATION.
   A.   Any person or organization wishing to conduct a special event shall
apply for a special event permit by filing an application with the city at
least 45 days prior to the date on which the event is to begin to occur.
   B.   The applicant shall provide the city with proof of commercial general
liability insurance as detailed in § 5.25.140.
   C.   The City Manager or designee shall issue the special event permit once
the application has been approved after review of appropriate agencies to
include police, fire, public works, building and planning, and others as
determined by the City Manager or designee, and the applicant has agreed in
writing to comply with the terms and conditions of the permit.
   D.   The City Manager or designee shall approve, conditionally approve, or
deny an application based on the application’s conformance to this chapter, and
the recommendations of city departments involved in the review process.
(Ord. 1285, § 1, 2020)
§ 5.25.100  PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   A.   Special event uses are to be temporary and approved for a particular
zoning district by the City Manager or designee.
   B.   Temporary signage and temporary structures will be allowed subject to
provisions of this code pursuant to the interpretive authority and discretion
of the City Manager or designee.
   C.   Requests for temporary parking facilities for special events and street
closures for special events shall be subject to provisions of this code
pursuant to the interpretive authority and discretion of the Police Chief, or
designee. Street closures for any portion of a state highway or right-of-way
(such as Main Street) shall be subject to state requirements and approvals.
   D.   Requests for fire and emergency medical services shall be subject to
requirements and interpretive authority and discretion of the Sweet Home Fire
District.
   E.   Requests for police services shall be subject to provisions of this
code pursuant to the interpretive authority and discretion of the Police Chief
or designee.
   F.   Expenses for fire, police, medical services, parks, and public works
crews needed for coverage and clean-up at the special event shall be prepaid
and the responsibility of the permittee, even if the permit fee has been
waived. If the actual cost for city services and equipment on the date(s) of
the event is greater than the estimated cost, the permittee is responsible for
the cost and will be billed for the difference.
   G.   Adequate sanitation and other required health facilities shall, as
required by applicable statutes and the Linn County Department of Health
Services, be provided or made available in or adjacent to any public assembly
areas.
   H.   Permittees must allow inspections by city and Sweet Home Fire District
officials at all reasonable times before the special event and at all times
during the actual hours of the special event in order to ensure compliance with
this chapter and all applicable health and safety codes and statutes.
(Ord. 1285, § 1, 2020)
§ 5.25.110  PERMIT CONDITIONS.
   The City Manager or designee may condition the issuance of a special event
permit by imposing reasonable requirements concerning time, place, and manner
of the event; and such requirements as are necessary to protect the safety and
rights of persons and property and the control of traffic.
(Ord. 1285, § 1, 2020)
§ 5.25.120  DENIAL OF APPLICATION.
   A special event permit may be denied based upon a determination that:
   A.   The event would endanger public safety or health;
   B.   The proposed event would seriously inconvenience or impair the general
public’s use of public property, services or facilities;
   C.   The event would unreasonably infringe upon the rights of abutting
properties;
   D.   The event would conflict with another proximate event or interfere with
construction or maintenance work in the immediate vicinity;
   E.   There is not sufficient qualified safety personnel or other necessary
city staff to accommodate the event;
   F.   The applicant failed to complete the application form after being
notified of the additional information or documents required;
   G.   Information contained in the application or supplemental information
requested from the applicant is found to be false in any material detail;
   H.   The applicant cannot meet, or is unwilling to meet, all of the
requirements of this chapter or any special conditions imposed by any of the
reviewing agencies;
   I.   Other issues in the public interest where identified by the City
Manager, or designee;
   J.   Failure to prepay expenses, fees, charges, deposits, or insurance;
   K.   The proposed event is scheduled to occur at a route or location
adjacent to a school or class during a time when such school or class is in
session, and the noise created by the activities of the event would
substantially disrupt the educational activities of the school or class;
   L.   The purpose of the proposed event is to incite crime or the overthrow
of the government by force or the event would engage in or encourage
participants to engage in illegal acts; or
   M.   The primary purpose of the special event is for advertising products,
goods or events that are for private profit, and the special event is primarily
for private profit. The prohibition against advertising any product, goods or
event shall not apply to signs identifying organizations or sponsors furnishing
or sponsoring exhibits or structures used in the special event.
(Ord. 1285, § 1, 2020)
§ 5.25.130  INDEMNIFICATION.
   A.   Prior to the issuance of the special event permit, the applicant must
agree to reimburse the city for any costs incurred by the city in repairing
damage to city property occurring in connection with the permitted event.
   B.   In consideration of being permitted to conduct this special event or
activity or use of any city property or facilities in connection with this
activity, the applicant (“indemnitor”) agrees to the following:
      1.   The indemnitor hereby agrees to release, indemnify and hold harmless
the City of Sweet Home from any and all liability, claims, demands, causes of
action, charges, expenses, and attorney fees (including attorney fees to
establish the city’s right to indemnity or incurred on appeal) resulting from
involvement in this event whether caused by any negligent act or omission of
the city or otherwise. This agreement shall not apply to any liability
resulting from the sole negligence of the city.
      2.   The indemnitor agrees to reimburse the city for any loss, theft of,
or damage to city property, equipment and/or facilities.
      3.   The indemnitor agrees to comply with all applicable laws, statutes,
ordinances, rules and requirements including, but not limited to, not admitting
more attendees than designated by the Sweet Home Fire District as safe for the
particular event or facility.
      4.   The indemnitor expressly agrees that this release and hold harmless
agreement is intended to be as broad and inclusive as permitted by Oregon law
and that if any portion thereof is held invalid, notwithstanding, the balance
shall continue in full legal force and effect.
      5.   Falsification and/or misrepresentation in completing an application
may result in rate adjustment or event cancellation. Changes to the detailed
program require immediate notification to city.
(Ord. 1285, § 1, 2020)
§ 5.25.140  INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   A.   As required by the City Manager or designee, the permittee shall
provide the city with proof of commercial general liability insurance generally
in the amount of at least $1,000,000 (combined single limits per occurrence),
$2,000,000 aggregate, and an endorsement naming the city of Sweet Home as an
additional insured must be provided. Upon determination by the City Manager or
designee, higher limits may be required for certain events.
   B.   Certificates of insurance shall be submitted to the city for approval
directly from the insuring agency via postal mail, fax or email. The insurance
policy shall be written on an occurrence basis, shall name the city as an
additional insured, shall be written for a period not less than 24 hours prior
to the event and extending for a period not less than 24 hours following the
completion of the event, and shall contain a provision prohibiting cancellation
of the policy except upon 30 days’ written notice to the city. Acceptability of
insurance is subject to approval by the City Manager or designee.
(Ord. 1285, § 1, 2020)
§ 5.25.150  REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
   A.   A special events permit issued under this chapter shall be temporary,
shall vest no permanent rights in the permittee, and may be immediately revoked
or suspended by the City Manager or designee if:
      1.   The permittee has made a misstatement of material fact in the
information supplied; the applicant has failed to fulfill a term or condition
of the permit in a timely manner; or the check submitted by the applicant in
payment of the fee or deposit for a permit has been dishonored;
      2.   The permittee requests the cancellation of the permit or cancels the
event;
      3.   The activity endangers or threatens persons or property, or
otherwise jeopardizes the health, safety or welfare of persons or property;
      4.   The activity conducted is in violation of any of the terms or
conditions of the special events permit;
      5.   An emergency or supervening occurrence requires the cancellation or
termination of the event in order to protect the public health or safety;
      6.   The permittee fails to prepay expenses.
   B.   The city shall refund the permit fee and/or deposit in the event of a
revocation caused by an emergency or supervening occurrence; the city shall
refund the balance of the fee, less the actual costs incurred if the
cancellation occurs at the request of a permittee who is in compliance with
this chapter.
   C.   If any event, use or occupancy for which the permit has been revoked is
not immediately discontinued, the City Manager or his or her designee may
remove any structure or obstruction, or cause to be made, without obligation to
do so, such repairs upon the structure or obstruction as may be necessary to
render the same secure and safe, or adjourn any special event. The cost and
expense of such removal, repair or adjournment shall be assessed against the
permittee, including all professional fees associated with enforcement of the
collection of the same.
(Ord. 1285, § 1, 2020)
§ 5.25.160  APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   A.   The applicant or permittee shall have the right to appeal a denial of a
special event permit, or a condition imposed thereby, including the amount of
fees, expenses, or clean-up deposits imposed or a determination that the
applicant’s certificate of insurance does not comply with the city’s
requirements. A written notice of appeal shall be filed within five business
days from the date of the denial or conditional approval. The written notice of
appeal shall set forth the specific grounds for the appeal and attach any
relevant documents for consideration. The City Council shall hear the appeal on
the record provided from the designated city official, the appellant, and
public comment given at the scheduled hearing before the Council. The hearing
shall be scheduled no later than ten business days after receipt of a timely
and proper notice of appeal. The decision of the City Council on the appeal
shall be final.
   B.   If there is insufficient time for a timely appeal to be heard by the
City Council prior to the date on which the event is scheduled, the applicant
may, at the applicant’s option, request that the Municipal Judge hear the
appeal. The Municipal Judge shall hold a hearing no later than five business
days after the filing of the appeal and shall render a decision no later than
one business day after the hearing on the appeal is closed. If the appeal is
requested and heard before the Municipal Judge, the Municipal Judge’s decision
shall be final.
(Ord. 1285, § 1, 2020)
§ 5.25.170  PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.
   Any person, association, firm, partnership, limited liability company, or
corporation that violates any of the provisions of this chapter may be
prosecuted under SHMC Chapter 9.36. Each day in which a violation is committed
constitutes a separate offense.
(Ord. 1285, § 1, 2020)
§ 5.25.180  SEVERABILITY.
   If any part, provision or section of this chapter is held to be void or
unconstitutional, all other parts not expressly so held shall continue in full
force and effect.
(Ord. 1285, § 1, 2020)
CHAPTER 5.28:  TAXICABS
Section
   
5.28.010   License—Required.
   
5.28.020   Fees.
   
5.28.030   Application.
   
5.28.040   City Council—Authority.
   
5.28.045   Reasons for denying, not renewing or revoking a license.
   
5.28.047   Exceptions.
   
5.28.050   Violation—Penalty.
§ 5.28.010  LICENSE—REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate a taxicab
service or carry passengers for hire in a motor vehicle without first applying
for and obtaining a license therefor from the city. No person, firm or
corporation shall use the word “cab,” “taxi” or “taxicab” in the business name
without first obtaining a license herein. With prior City Council approval
based on written conditions, the city can waive the requirement for a license
for special events within the city.
(Ord. 1233, § 1, 2013; Ord. 320, 1956; Ord. 126, 1947)
§ 5.28.020  FEES.
   A.   License fees set by City Council resolution shall be paid by each
person, firm or corporation licensed under this chapter for the operation of
one vehicle and for each additional vehicle used in the business per calendar
year or any part thereof.
   B.   No part of any license fee shall be refunded upon the revocation or
relinquishment of a license to operate.
   C.   No license granted under this chapter may be transferred.
(Ord. 1233, § 2, 2013; Ord. 320, 1956; Ord. 126, 1947; Ord. 1282, §§ 6, 7,
2020)
§ 5.28.030  APPLICATION.
   Each application for a license hereunder shall:
   A.   Be made in writing to the City Council; and
   B.   Contain a statement under the oath of the applicant, showing:
      1.   His, her or its financial status and responsibility;
      2.   A description of the equipment proposed to be used; and
      3.   The type of service the applicant will render.
   C.   The Council may demand, and upon demand, the applicant shall furnish
additional information and particulars concerning the applicant, his or her
financial condition, and the service he or she proposes to render. No license
may be granted to any applicant who fails to furnish such additional
information upon demand.
(Ord. 320, 1956; Ord. 126, 1947)
§ 5.28.040  CITY COUNCIL—AUTHORITY.
   A.   The City Council shall be the sole and final judge of the following
questions:
      1.   Whether or not there is a public necessity or convenience to justify
the granting of the application and the issuance of the license;
      2.   Whether or not the applicant is properly qualified to be granted a
license;
      3.   Whether or not a license granted should be renewed for the ensuing
calendar year, or years; and
      4.   Whether or not there is good cause to revoke a license.
   B.   There shall be no appeal from the rejection of any application for a
license or the renewal thereof, or from a revocation of a license.
   C.   A license shall be granted, renewed or revoked by a majority vote of
the Council.
(Ord. 320, 1956; Ord. 126, 1947)
§ 5.28.045  REASONS FOR DENYING, NOT RENEWING OR REVOKING A LICENSE.
   A.   The City Council shall not grant or renew a license if any of the
following conditions are present:
      1.   The applicant is insolvent, either in the sense that the person’s
liabilities exceed the person’s assets or that the person cannot meet
obligations as they mature, or is in such financial condition that the person
cannot continue in business with safety to the person’s customer.
      2.   The applicant or driver has engaged in dishonest, fraudulent or
illegal practices or conduct  in any business or profession within the last 15
years.
      3.   The applicant has presented an application that contains a
misrepresentation, false statement or fraudulent statement.
      4.   The applicant violates any provision of this chapter.
      5.   The applicant or driver has been convicted within the last 15 years
of any felony. The applicant or driver has been convicted within the last five
years of any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or other characteristics
that would relate directly to the safety (either economic or physical) of the
public by the person conducting or participating in the business.
      6.   The applicant or driver is the subject of a stalking order based on
danger, force or threat issued by a court of competent jurisdiction or is a
subject of a restraining order involving physical abuse or threat of physical
abuse issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.
      7.   The driver does not have a valid Oregon Motor Vehicle Driver’s
License.
      8.   The applicant does not have motor vehicle insurance on the motor
vehicle to be used in the business in the amount of at least $1,000,000
combined single limits on bodily injury and property damage.
      9.   The applicant does not have a motor vehicle to be used in the
business that is in a safe operating condition or does not conduct the business
in a safe manner.
   B.   The City Council shall revoke any license upon presentation to them of
information that would allow them to deny or not renew a license.
(Ord. 1233, § 3, 2013)
§ 5.28.047  EXCEPTIONS.
   The Linn County Shuttle Bus, Dial-A-Bus, ambulances, medical transports
contracted through the State of Oregon, tour buses that require the driver to
have a commercial driver license and vehicles for hire that the owner of which
has a written agreement with the customer prior to the pickup that operate
within the city are not under the regulation of this chapter.
(Ord. 1233, § 4, 2013)
§ 5.28.050  VIOLATION—PENALTY.
   Violations of this chapter constitutes a violation and may be prosecuted
under the provisions of
Chapter 9.36 and any amendments thereto. Each day’s violation is a separate
offense.
(Ord. 1233, § 5, 2013; Ord. 876, (part), 1982; Ord. 126, 1947)
CHAPTER 5.32:  SECONDHAND DEALERS
Section
   
5.32.010   Definitions.
   
5.32.020   License—Required.
   
5.32.030   License—Application—Requirements.
   
5.32.040   License—Fee.
   
5.32.050   License—Application—Investigation—Grounds for denial or revocation.
   
5.32.060   License—Nontransferability.
   
5.32.070   License—Display.
   
5.32.080   Record—Required—Inspection.
   
5.32.090   Transactions prohibited.
   
5.32.100   Reports required.
   
5.32.110   Cooperation with law enforcement.
   
5.32.120   Revocation of license.
   
5.32.130   License denial procedures—Review of orders.
   
5.32.140   Reinstatement and reissue of license—Fee.
   
5.32.150   Preexisting secondhand dealers.
   
5.32.160   Violation—Penalty.
§ 5.32.010  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DETAILED IDENTIFYING DESCRIPTION. A description sufficient so that a
reasonable person is clearly able to know the type of item, the make, model,
size if known or applicable and any specific markings or other characteristic
of the item or items.
   GARAGE SALE, ESTATE SALE or YARD SALE. The sale of used personal items from
a place of residence on an irregular and temporary basis. Any person who
conducts a garage sale, estate sale or yard sale more than six days in any one
calendar year is a secondhand dealer and is required to be licensed as provided
in this chapter.
   OFFICIAL PHOTOGRAPHIC IDENTIFICATION. A current photographic driver’s
license from any state or an official photographic Oregon Identification Card
issued by the Department of Motor Vehicles.
   PERSON. Natural person, co-partnership, limited liability company (LLC),
corporation or similar entity.
   PLACE OF BUSINESS. The location regularly used or advertised to be used by a
person for the conducting of business.
   PLEDGE. Any article deposited with a secondhand dealer.
   SECONDHAND DEALER. Any person engaged in the business of buying, selling,
trading or otherwise dealing in secondhand goods where any such transactions
are initiated, conducted or concluded at the secondhand dealer’s place of
business, either as a separate venture or incidental to another business. The
term SECONDHAND DEALER does not include the following:
      1.   A person solely engaged in the business of buying and selling used
vehicles that are required to be registered by the Department of
Transportation;
      2.   Any person who sells, on an incidental basis, secondhand merchandise
taken in trade by that dealer for new merchandise;
      3.   Any person who deals exclusively with the buying and selling of used
clothing, used furniture and/or used books;
      4.   A person conducting a “garage sale”, “estate sale” or “yard sale”,
except as stated above;
      5.   A pawnbroker as defined in O.R.S. 726.010;
      6.   A person who buys for resale, secondhand goods solely as part of
estate sales or auctions; provided, the person shall keep and maintain records
or receipts sufficient to prove the secondhand goods were purchased from a
legitimate estate sale or auction, including the date and specific location of
the estate sale or auction and shall present the proof to a police officer upon
request; and
      7.   A person who receives secondhand goods solely by donation for
charitable purposes.
   SECONDHAND GOODS.
      1.   Sterling silver, including, but not limited to: flatware, candle
holders, coffee and tea sets or ornamental objects;
      2.   Jewelry, gem and coin, any jewelry, gem or coin that is valued for
its character, rarity, beauty, quality or antiquity including diamonds, rubies,
emeralds, sapphires and pearls, whether as a separate item or in combination
with a precious metal such as gold or silver as a piece of jewelry;
      3.   Audio equipment including but not limited to: tape players, tape
decks or players, compact or digital disc players, sound metering devices,
tuners, amplifiers, speakers, transceivers, equalizers, receivers, phonographs,
turntables, stereos, compact discs, clock radios, car stereos, car speakers,
radar detectors or citizen band radios/transceivers;
      4.   Video equipment, including, but not limited to: color televisions,
black and white televisions, videotape or videodisc recorders, videotape or
videodisc players, video cameras or video monitors;
      5.   Photographic and optical equipment, including, but not limited to:
camera motor drives, light meters, flash equipment, movie projectors, slide
projectors, photography processing equipment, photography enlarging equipment,
binoculars, telescopes, opera glasses, microscopes, surveying equipment, rifle
scopes, spotting scopes or electronic sighting equipment;
      6.   Electronic equipment, including, but not limited to: facsimile
machines, laser printers copiers, duplicators, typewriters, calculators, cash
registers, transcribers, Dictaphones, computers, home computers, video games,
modems, monitors or any computer equipment or accessories;
      7.   Power equipment and tools, including, but not limited to: air
hammers, air tools, nail guns, power staplers, power saws, power sanders,
chainsaws, power planers, power drills, routers, lathes, joiners, shop vacuums,
paint sprayers and accessory equipment, generators, air compressors, pressure
washers or logging equipment;
      8.   Hand tools, including, but not limited to: wrench sets, saws,
sockets sets, screw driver sets, pliers, vise grips, toolboxes, auto body
hammers, jacks or timing lights;
      9.   Musical instruments, including, but not limited to: pianos, organs,
guitars, violins, cellos, trumpets, trombones, saxophones, flutes, drums,
percussion instruments or electronic synthesizers;
      10.   Electrical household appliances, including, but not limited to:
sewing machines, microwaves and air conditioners;
      11.   Firearms, including, but not limited to: rifles, shotguns, hand
guns, revolvers, pellet guns or BB guns;
      12.   Telephones or telephone equipment, including, but not limited to;
office telephone, portable home telephones, mobile telephones, cellular
telephones or answering machines;
      13.   Sporting goods including, but not limited to; golf clubs, racquets,
bow hunting equipment, knives, camping gear, weight or exercise equipment;
      14.   Bicycles, scooters and carts; and
      15.   Clocks and watches.
(Ord. 1159, § 1, 2003)
§ 5.32.020  LICENSE—REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in any business as a secondhand dealer or assist in
the conducting of any such business, without first obtaining a license as
required by this chapter. Each license pursuant to this chapter shall be valid
for one calendar year from the date of issue.
(Ord. 1159, § 2, 2003)
§ 5.32.030  LICENSE—APPLICATION—REQUIREMENTS.
   An applicant for a license required by this chapter shall submit in writing
to the Chief of Police or his or her designate the following:
   A.   The name, description, date of birth, Social Security number, driver’s
license number, residence and a recent photograph of the applicant, any
operator(s) and agent(s) of the secondhand dealer and those employee(s) of the
secondhand dealer that buy, sell, trade or otherwise deal in secondhand goods
with the public. If the applicant is a corporation, firm or other legal
business entity, the names, description, dates of birth, driver’s license
numbers, Social Security numbers, residences and recent photograph of any
operator(s), agent(s), officer(s), member(s) and director(s) thereof and those
employee(s) thereof that buy, sell, trade or otherwise deal in secondhand goods
with the public;
   B.   The specific place of business for which the license is desired; and
   C.   The information required by subsection C.1., any time a person is to be
hired or is to assume one of the positions named therein at least ten days
before the position is filled so that the Chief of Police or his or her
designate can conduct the appropriate investigation.
(Ord. 1159, § 3, 2003; Ord. 1180, § 1, 2006)
§ 5.32.040  LICENSE—FEE.
   There shall be a fee required for all those required to obtain and maintain
a license under the provisions of this chapter. The fee amount shall be
established by resolution of the Sweet Home City Council.
(Ord. 1159, § 4, 2003)
§ 5.32.050  LICENSE—APPLICATION—INVESTIGATION—GROUNDS FOR DENIAL OR REVOCATION.
   The Chief of Police shall cause an investigation to be made to determine
whether the person(s) required by §§
5.32.010 and
5.32.020 to submit information to the Chief of Police meet all the requirements
of this chapter that pertain to them. The license shall be denied or revoked by
the Chief of Police if the Chief of Police determines that:
   A.   The applicant, operator(s) or agent(s) of the secondhand dealer;
officer(s), member(s), director(s) of the secondhand dealer or employee(s) of
the secondhand dealer that buy, sell, trade or otherwise deal in secondhand
goods with the public have a conviction within the last 15 years for any felony
that would relate directly to the safety (either economic or physical) of the
public or within the last five years for any misdemeanor that would relate
directly to the safety (either economic or physical) of the public. Time spent
in jail or prison shall extend the time period for the 15-year period and five-
year period for a maximum fo two years from the date of application.
   B.   The applicant or any other person listed in subsection A. above has
presented any false or misleading information in making application for the
license or in making reports or keeping records as required herein.
(Ord. 1159, § 5, 2003; Ord. 1180, § 2, 2006; Ord. 1282, § 8, 2020)
§ 5.32.060  LICENSE—NONTRANSFERABILITY.
   No license issued as provided in this chapter shall be transferred or
assigned.
(Ord. 1159, § 6, 2003)
§ 5.32.070  LICENSE—DISPLAY.
   It shall be the duty of every person to whom a license is issued, as
provided in this chapter, to display the license in a conspicuous manner in the
public area of the place of business to which the license relates.
(Ord. 1159, § 8, 2003)
§ 5.32.080  RECORD—REQUIRED—INSPECTION.
   A.   Every secondhand dealer shall keep a record of each purchase and/or
acceptance transaction of secondhand goods, which is initiated, conducted or
concluded at the secondhand dealer’s place of business. Each such transaction
shall record in permanent ink:
      1.   The date of the transaction;
      2.   The serial number, if applicable, of the property purchased, sold or
taken as a pledge;
      3.   Name and address of the seller, pledgor and if the sale or pledge is
made by a person acting as agent for a disclosed principal, the name and
address of principal and agent;
      4.   A detailed identifying description of the article or articles
purchased, pledged or held; and
      5.   The amount of the purchase or pledge loan.
   B.   All records of purchase shall be made legible in the English language
and shall be open to the inspection of any public official, police officer or
any other person who is duly authorized or empowered by the laws of the state,
county or city to make the inspection.
   C.   Every secondhand dealer shall maintain an alphabetical file from which
can be determined the total sales or obligations of any one seller or pledgor.
   D.   All records shall be preserved and available for at least two years
after making the final entry of any sale or pledge loan recorded therein.
(Ord. 1159, § 8, 2003)
§ 5.32.090  TRANSACTIONS PROHIBITED.
   A.   No person licensed under this chapter or his or her agent shall
purchase or receive any item from a minor unless the parent or legal guardian
accompanies the person, nor shall a person receive or acquire any items from
any person under the influence of alcohol or drugs.
   B.   No person licensed under this chapter or his or her agent shall
purchase and/or accept any item of pledge from any person who does not have in
his or her possession and display valid official photographic identification.
The secondhand dealer shall photocopy the photographic identification and
maintain the copy as part of the transaction record.
   C.   No person licensed under this chapter or his or her agent shall
purchase or receive any item from which the serial number or any maker’s
identification marking or owner identification marking has been obliterated,
altered or removed.
(Ord. 1159, § 9, 2003)
§ 5.32.100  REPORTS REQUIRED.
   A.   In addition to the records required under §
5.32.080, a secondhand dealer shall record on a form approved by the Chief of
Police, for each transaction which is initiated, conducted or concluded at the
secondhand dealer’s place of business, the date, the name and the address of
the seller or pledgor, the type and identification number of the official
photographic identification presented by the seller or pledgor pursuant to §
5.32.080, a physical description of the seller or pledgor and a complete
identifying description of the article pledged or sold. Every secondhand dealer
shall each Tuesday, deliver, either in person, via facsimile or via first class
mail and postmarked no later than the Tuesday, to the Chief of Police or
designee a true, legible and accurate copy of the above record of each purchase
transaction which occurred from the time of the previously submitted record.
   B.   No property purchased or received shall be sold for a period of 15
business days. The property shall be maintained in substantially the same form
as purchased and shall not be commingled so as to preclude identification
during the 15-day holding period. The person purchasing the property shall
affix, as soon as practicable, to the property a tag upon which the number
shall correspond to the number on the record forms required to be kept and
submitted under the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 1159, § 10, 2003)
§ 5.32.110  COOPERATION WITH LAW ENFORCEMENT.
   Every secondhand dealer and any agent or employee thereof shall cooperate
with any law enforcement officer acting in an official capacity and will:
   A.   Immediately present to the law enforcement officer for inspection or
seizure any record, video or audio recording of a transaction or any item of
purchase or pledge, which, in the judgment of the law enforcement officer, may
constitute evidence of a criminal act; and
   B.   Appear in a court of law in answer to any subpoena arising out of the
operation of the business.
(Ord. 1159, § 11, 2003)
§ 5.32.120  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   The Chief of Police may revoke any license under this chapter if the Chief
finds that:
   A.   The secondhand dealer has failed to pay the annual license fee or to
comply with any demand, ruling or requirement of the Chief or designee lawfully
made pursuant to and within the authority of this chapter;
   B.   The secondhand dealer has violated any provision of this chapter or any
rule or regulation lawfully made by the Chief or designee under and within the
authority of this chapter; or
   C.   Any fact or condition exists which, if it had existed at the time of
the original or renewal application for a license, would have warranted the
Chief in refusing originally to issue the license.
(Ord. 1159, § 12, 2003)
§ 5.32.130  LICENSE DENIAL PROCEDURES—REVIEW OF ORDERS.
   Where the Chief of Police proposes to refuse to issue or renew a license, or
proposes to revoke a license, the Chief shall notify the secondhand dealer in
writing of the proposed denial or revocation. The secondhand dealer may, within
ten days of mailing of the notice request, in writing, a hearing to contest the
denial or revocation. Opportunity for a hearing shall be accorded by following
the procedures set forth in O.R.S. 183.415. Judicial review of orders under
this section shall be to the Sweet Home Municipal Court and filed therewith
within 30 days of the order, once it becomes final. The reviewing court cannot
substitute its judgment for that of the hearings officer that decided a
contested case. The court must, however, set aside or remand a decision if it
is not supported by substantial evidence in the record.
(Ord. 1159, § 13, 2003)
§ 5.32.140  REINSTATEMENT AND REISSUE OF LICENSE—FEE.
   The Chief of Police may reinstate or issue a new license to a secondhand
dealer whose license has been revoked, upon the secondhand dealer’s compliance
with the provisions of law or any demand, ruling or requirement lawfully made
by the Chief pursuant to and within the authority of this chapter. For such
reinstatement or issuance of a new license, a fee as set by resolution shall be
paid.
(Ord. 1159, § 14, 2003)
§ 5.32.150  PREEXISTING SECONDHAND DEALERS.
   Any secondhand dealer in operation at the time of the first reading of this
chapter shall not be denied a license solely for the reasons set forth in §
5.32.050A.; provided, the conviction was prior to the date of the first reading
of this chapter. No exemption under this section shall be granted to any person
who has not obtained a license to be a secondhand dealer under this chapter on
or prior to February 28, 2006.
(Ord. 1159, § 15, 2003; Ord. 1180, § 3, 2006)
§ 5.32.160  VIOLATION—PENALTY.
   A.   A violation, or participation in the violation, of this chapter by any
secondhand dealer or any director, agent, member, officer or employee thereof,
or any other person is punishable, upon conviction by a fine of not more than
$500 or by imprisonment in jail of not more than six months, or both.
   B.   Upon conviction under subsection A. of this section, no license shall
be granted to such person, nor to the husband or wife of the person, nor to any
partnership, association, LLC, corporation or similar entity of which the
person is an officer, director, member, employee or agent, until two years
after the date of conviction. The city may waive this provision only for the
first conviction under subsection A.
(Ord. 1159, § 16, 2003)
TITLE 6: ANIMALS
      Chapter
         
6.04.   ANIMALS AND BIRDS GENERALLY
         
6.08.   DOGS
         
6.12.   WILD, EXOTIC OR DANGEROUS ANIMALS
CHAPTER 6.04:  ANIMALS AND BIRDS GENERALLY
Section
   
6.04.010   Communicable diseases.
   
6.04.020   Animals and birds.
   
6.04.030   Removal of animal or bird carcasses.
   
6.04.040   Placing poison for animals or birds.
   
6.04.060   Penalties.
   
6.04.070   Moratorium
§ 6.04.010  COMMUNICABLE DISEASES.
   No person shall permit any animal or bird owned or controlled by him or her
to be at large within the city if the animal or bird is afflicted with a
communicable disease.
(Ord. 1224, § 1, 2011; Ord. 955, 1986)
§ 6.04.020  ANIMALS AND BIRDS.
   A.   No person shall keep any animal or bird, wild or domesticated, in the
city, except as permitted by city ordinance, state law and federal law.
   B.   1.   Domesticated animals and birds may be kept in the city as allowed
by the provisions of this chapter.  A pet is a household animal kept for
companionship and a person's enjoyment.  Pets may not be allowed to cause a
nuisance, as defined by this chapter.  The keeping of domesticated animals and
birds does not include the operation of kennels, breeding pens and commercial
training schools, except where authorized under the provisions of the zoning
title and other city code provisions.
      2.   The following are considered to be household pets:
         a.   Felis Catus (domestic cat).
         b.   Canis Familiaris (domestic dog).
         c.   A fish kept in a tank.
         d.   Any nonpoisonous or nonvenomous reptile, except any crocodilian
(includes alligator) that is greater than two feet in length or whose average
adult length is greater than two feet, any snake that is greater than six feet
or whose average adult length is greater than six feet or any snapping turtle.
         e.   A gerbil, hamster, guinea pig, mouse, rat, squirrel, chipmunk or
similar rodent-like creature kept in a cage.
         f.   Any amphibian less than one foot in length, such as a frog, toad,
or salamander.
         g.   Ant farm.
         h.   Arachnids, including tarantulas.
   C.   1.   Nuisance, for this chapter, is defined to include any animal or
bird covered by this chapter that does any of the following:
         a.   Defecates on the property of a person other than the owner.
         b.   Creates noticeable odors that can be detected off the property
where the animal or bird is kept.
         c.   Makes noises that annoy or disturb the comfort, repose or peace
of another person.
         d.   Damages the property of a person other than the owner.
      2.   Any owner or keeper of an animal or bird including a person who
provides care and/or food for the animal or bird, whose animal or bird violates
this chapter shall be in violation of this chapter.
   D.   Where a person wishes to keep animals or birds other than a pet they
may do so, providing the criteria are met for the animal or bird designated in
the following subsections.
   E.   Horse(s), including donkey(s) and mule(s) and miniatures thereof:
      1.   There must be one acre exclusively set aside for each horse; and
      2.   The overall location at which the horse(s) are residing have at
minimum one and one-half acres; and
      3.   There must be an enclosed shelter/feeding area for the horse(s); and
      4.   There must be adequate fencing to contain the horse(s).
   F.   Cow(s) and miniature cow(s):
      1.   There must be one-half acre exclusively set aside for each cow; and
      2.   The overall location at which the cow(s) are residing have at
minimum one and one-half acre; and
      3.   There must be an enclosed shelter/feeding area for the cow(s); and
      4.   There must be adequate fencing to contain the cow(s).
   G.   Goat(s) and sheep:
      1.   There must be one-quarter of an acre exclusively set aside for each
goat or sheep; and
      2.   The overall location at which the goat(s) or sheep are residing have
at minimum three-quarters of an acre; and
      3.   There must be an enclosed shelter/feeding area for all goat(s) and
sheep; and
      4.   There must be adequate fencing or controls to contain the goat(s)
and sheep.
   H.   Miniature goat(s) and sheep:
      1.   Miniature goats and sheep must have an area of at least 500 square
feet exclusively set aside for each goat or sheep; and
      2.   The overall location at which the miniature goat(s) or sheep are
residing has at minimum 8,000 square feet; and
      3.   There must be an enclosed shelter/feeding area for all goat(s) and
sheep; and
      4.   There must be adequate fencing or controls to contain the goat(s)
and sheep.
   I.   Pig(s) including miniature pig(s) and pot bellied pig(s).
      1.   There must be one acre exclusively set aside for each pig; and
      2.   The overall locations at which the pig(s) are residing has at
minimum one and one-half of an acre; and
      3.   There must be an enclosed shelter/feeding area for the pig(s); and
      4.   There must be a wallow; and
      5.   There must be adequate fencing or controls to contain the pig(s).
   J.   Rabbit(s):
      1.   Rabbit(s) shall only be kept upon property occupied by a detached
single family dwelling or a duplex.
      2.   Property size:
         a.   On properties over one-half acre (21,780 square feet), there
shall be no more than 24 rabbits.
         b.   On properties between one-quarter acre (10,890 square feet) and
one-half an acre there shall be no more than six rabbits.
         c.   On properties less than one-quarter acre there shall not be more
than three rabbits.
      3.   There must be an enclosed shelter/feeding area for the rabbit(s).
      4.   There must be adequate fencing to contain the rabbit(s).
   K.   Chicken(s), duck(s) and geese:
      1.   Chicken(s), duck(s) and geese shall only be kept upon property
occupied by a detached single family dwelling or a duplex.
      2.   Property size:
         a.   On properties over one-half acre (21,780 square feet), there
shall be no more than 24 chickens, ducks or geese.
         b.   On properties between one-quarter acre (10,890 square feet) and
one-half an acre there shall be no more than 12 chickens or ducks.
         c.   On properties less than one-quarter acre there shall not be more
than six chickens.
      3.   The keeping of roosters is prohibited within the city limits of
Sweet Home.
      4.   Chickens raised on properties under one-half acre shall be kept for
personal, non-commercial use only.  No person shall sell eggs or engage in
fertilizer production for commercial purposes.
      5.   There shall be a fully enclosed coop and adequate fencing to contain
the chicken(s), duck(s) or geese.
      6.   Chicken(s), duck(s) or geese and their coop(s) and fenced area(s)
shall be located in a side or rear yard on properties less than one-half acre. 
On properties over one-half acre coop(s) and fenced area(s) may be located in a
front yard if such areas are at least 20 feet from front property line.
      7.   A coop over 200 square feet or ten feet in height must meet the
standards for an accessory structure in Sweet Home Municipal Code Title 17, and
may require a building permit.
      8.   A coop and fenced area must be kept clean, free of noticeable odors
and in good repair.
      9.   A coop shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from property lines,
unless a greater set back is required.
   L.   Honey bees:
      1.   There must be one-quarter of an acre that is exclusively set aside
for each hive of bees; and
      2.   The overall location at which the bees are residing has at minimum
one-half of an acre; and
      3.   Hives must be kept at least 50 feet from property lines and not
opened towards neighboring properties.
(Ord. 1224, § 1, 2011; Ord. 1203, § 19, 2008; Ord. 955, 1986; Ord. 1282, § 9,
2020)
§ 6.04.030  REMOVAL OF ANIMAL OR BIRD CARCASSES.
   No person shall permit any animal or bird carcass owned by him or her or
under his or her control to remain upon the public streets or places for a
period of time longer than is reasonably necessary to remove the carcass, and
no person who is the owner of or has control over any animal carcass shall
permit the carcass to remain on any private property for a period of time
longer than is reasonably necessary to dispose of the carcass, but in no case
longer than 24 hours.
(Ord. 1224, § 1, 2011; Ord. 955, 1986)
§ 6.04.040  PLACING POISON FOR ANIMALS OR BIRDS.
   No person shall put out or place any poison where it is liable to be eaten
by any domestic animal or bird.
(Ord. 1224, § 1, 2011; Ord. 1203, § 20, 2008; Ord. 886, 1983)
§ 6.04.060  PENALTIES.
   Violation of this chapter constitutes a violation and may be prosecuted
under the provisions of Sweet Home Municipal Code
Chapter 9.36 and any amendments thereto.  Each day’s violation of a provision
of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.  Any nuisance under this
chapter may be abated by following the procedures set forth in Sweet Home
Municipal Code
Chapter 8.04 - Abatement Procedure.
(Ord. 1224, § 1, 2011; Ord. 1203, § 22, 2008)
§ 6.04.070  MORATORIUM.
   For animals and birds covered by this chapter that are kept within the city
on or before November 25, 2011, the new area requirement provisions of this
chapter do not apply for a period of six months.
(Ord. 1224, § 1, 2011).
CHAPTER 6.08:  DOGS
Section
   
6.08.010   Generally.
   
6.08.020   License required.
   
6.08.030   Running at large prohibited.
   
6.08.040   Nuisances—Allowing prohibited.
   
6.08.050   Nuisances—Conditions constituting designated.
   
6.08.060   Waste matter deposit and removal.
   
6.08.070   Impoundment of dog.
   
6.08.080   Impoundment—Custody and disposal.
   
6.08.090   Killing of dog permitted.
   
6.08.100   Abatement.
   
6.08.110   Violation—Penalty.
§ 6.08.010  GENERALLY.
   A.   No kennel for dogs shall be located in the city. The city dog shelter
facility shall not fall under the purview of this section. A kennel is any
premises, except a veterinary clinic or pet store, on which four or more dogs
more than four months of age are kept.
   B.   It is unlawful for the owner of any dog to own, keep or operate a
kennel inside the city limits of the city.
   C.   OWNER means any person or legal entity having a possessory property
right in a dog or who harbors, cares for or exercises control over a dog or
knowingly permits any dog to remain on premises occupied by that person.
   D.   RUNNING AT LARGE means off the premises of the owner while the dog is
not under complete control of the owner by a leash not exceeding eight feet in
length, but the use of such leash shall not be required when said dog is in a
vehicle. However, a dog off a leash in obedience, retrieving or field training
under the direct supervision of the handler in designated off leash areas in
public parks, shall not be considered to be at large.
(Ord. 1260, 2017; Ord. 1033, 1991)
§ 6.08.020  LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall own a dog that is not licensed in accordance with the
provisions of O.R.S. 609.100 and Linn County Dog Licensing Code LLC 560.200 to
560.299.
(Ord. 1260, 2017)
§ 6.08.030  RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
   No owner of a dog shall allow the dog to run at large.
(Ord. 1260, 2017)
§ 6.08.040  NUISANCES—ALLOWING PROHIBITED.
   No owner of a dog shall allow the dog to be a public nuisance.
(Ord. 1260, 2017)
§ 6.08.050  NUISANCES—CONDITIONS CONSTITUTING DESIGNATED.
   A.   A dog shall be considered a public nuisance under the meaning of this
chapter in the following instances:
      1.   Any dog, that when unprovoked, bites any person or animal, or shows
a propensity to do so;
      2.   Any dog which chases vehicles or, when off the premises of the
owner, chases any person or persons;
      3.   Any dog which damages or destroys property of persons other than the
owner of the dog;
      4.   Any dog which scatters garbage other than that of its owner;
      5.   Any dog which trespasses on private property, other than its owner's
property;
      6.   Any dog which barks cumulatively for more than 20 minutes during any
one-hour period when such barking is audible off the premises of the dog's
owner;
      7.   Any dog which is a female in heat and running at large; or
      8.   Any dog which habitually escapes from confinement and trespasses on
public or private property. Trespass of more than two occasions shall be
considered "habitual" under the meaning of this section.
   B.   The Municipal Court, by written notice, can order the owner of a dog to
remove that dog from the city permanently if, upon written complaint made to
the Court, the Court finds that the dog is a public nuisance, as herein
defined, and that the dog's owner knew or should have known that the dog
created the nuisance and permitted that nuisance to continue or to be repeated.
The notice shall state the cause for its issuance, order the owner of the dog
to immediately confine the dog and, within five days, to remove the dog from
the city permanently. The notice shall be sent by certified mail to the owner
of the dog and/or shall be posted prominently upon the property on which the
dog is kept. After delivery and/or posting of the notice, it is unlawful not to
immediately confine the dog or within five days to permit it to be kept
anywhere within the city. If an owner does not remove the dog as ordered by the
Court, the Municipal Court Judge may have the dog removed from the city at the
owner's expense.
   C.   The Municipal Court Judge can place reasonable restriction on a dog
including sterilization, declare a dog a dangerous dog, or order a dog killed
by following the procedures in O.R.S. Chapter 609. In addition to any other
authority given by law any costs to the city associated with the orders of the
court are liens on real property of the owner and a personal obligation of the
owner to pay as set forth in §
6.08.100.
   D.   The Municipal Court Judge can order a dog rehomed within the city.
(Ord. 1260, 2017)
§ 6.08.060  WASTE MATTER DEPOSIT AND REMOVAL.
   It is unlawful for a dog owner to allow the dog to deposit solid waste
matter on any property other than that of the dog owner or where the owner of
the dog has permission. It shall be a defense to this section if the dog owner
immediately removes the solid waste. (See §
6.04.020 and §
8.04.020 dealing with odors).
(Ord. 1260, 2017)
§ 6.08.070  IMPOUNDMENT OF DOG.
   When any dog is found running at large, or when a dog is a public nuisance,
any police officer, city code enforcement officer, or private citizen may
impound it.
(Ord. 1260, 2017)
§ 6.08.080  IMPOUNDMENT—CUSTODY AND DISPOSAL.
   All dogs taken up and impounded under this chapter may be held and disposed
of as provided in O.R.S. 609.090 or LLC 560.430.
(Ord. 1260, 2017)
§ 6.08.090  KILLING OF DOG PERMITTED.
   A.   A dog may be summarily killed by any person if the dog constitutes an
imminent threat to human life.
   B.   A police officer may kill a dog when it has been injured and no owner
can be determined.
(Ord. 1260, 2017)
§ 6.08.100  ABATEMENT.
   Abatement of violations of this chapter can be accomplished by any remedy
open to the city, including using the procedures for abatement of nuisances set
out in §§
8.04.210 through
8.04.260 for an owner without having to comply with §
8.04.200. If abatement is performed by the city, the cost thereof shall become
a lien on the real property of the owner and the personal obligation of the
owner as set out in the procedures followed for abatement.
(Ord. 1260, 2017; Ord. 1033, 1991)
§ 6.08.110  VIOLATION—PENALTY.
   A.   Violation of this chapter constitutes a violation and may be prosecuted
under the provisions of
Chapter 9.36 as now enacted or hereafter amended. Each day's violation is
considered a separate offense.
   B.   In addition to any fine ordered by the Court, if an owner is convicted
of owning, keeping or operating a kennel, the Court may order that the dogs be
taken up so that this chapter is complied with and the dogs disposed of as the
Court directs.
   C.   Any peace officer or city code enforcement officer has authority to
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 1260, 2017; Ord. 1237, § 1 (part), 2013; Ord. 1033, §§ 3, 4, 1991)
CHAPTER 6.12:  WILD, EXOTIC OR DANGEROUS ANIMALS
Section
   
6.12.010   Definitions.
   
6.12.020   Exotic, wild or dangerous animals.
   
6.12.030   Offense and nuisance.
   
6.12.040   Certain animals exempt.
   
6.12.050   Exceptions to provisions.
   
6.12.060   Abatement of exotic, wild or dangerous animal nuisance.
   
6.12.070   Enforcement.
   
6.12.080   Interference with officers.
   
6.12.090   Violation—Penalty.
§ 6.12.010  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, except where context otherwise requires:
   CUSTODIAN. Any person who is not an owner of an animal, but who has custody
of, harbors (providing either shelter or food or both) or exercises effective
control over the animal.
   EXOTIC, WILD OR DANGEROUS ANIMAL. The meaning given in §
6.12.020.
   OWNER. Any person who exercises possessory rights over any animal.
(Ord. 975, 1988)
§ 6.12.020  EXOTIC, WILD OR DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   A.   Definition.
      EXOTIC, WILD OR DANGEROUS ANIMALS. Any animal which, because of its size,
vicious nature, poisonous bite or sting or other characteristic, would
constitute a danger to human safety or property.
   B.   Description. Exotic, wild or dangerous animal includes, but is not
limited to:
      1.   Any cat other than of the species Felis Catus (domestic cat);
      2.   Any nonhuman primate;
      3.   Any wolf, coyote or other canine not of the species Canis Familiaris
(domestic dog);
      4.   Any shark, dogfish or similar carnivorous fish;
      5.   Any piranha fish;
      6.   Any poisonous or venomous reptile, any crocodilian (includes
alligator) that is greater than two feet in length or whose average adult
length is greater than two feet, any snake that is greater than six feet or
whose average adult length is greater than six feet or any snapping turtle;
      7.   Any bat;
      8.   Any skunk, weasel, badger, fox, mammals of the raccoon family or
wolverine;
      9.   Any boar or wild pig;
      10.   Any bear;
      11.   Any kangaroo;
      12.   Any eagle, hawk, buzzard or similar predatory bird; and/or
      13.   Any poisonous or venomous insect.
(Ord. 1224, §§ 2, 3, 2012; Ord. 975, 1988)
§ 6.12.030  OFFENSE AND NUISANCE.
   Except as provided in this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to keep or
maintain one or more exotic, wild or dangerous animal within the corporate
limits of the city. It is further declared that the keeping or maintenance of
such an exotic, wild or dangerous animal is a public nuisance and the nuisance
shall be dealt with as set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 975, 1988)
§ 6.12.040  CERTAIN ANIMALS EXEMPT.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of §
6.12.030, but subject to any other applicable sections of this chapter and any
applicable federal or state law in effect at the time of an alleged offense, if
an animal is not identified as an exotic, wild or dangerous animal in §
6.12.020B., then a person may lawfully keep or maintain the animal, subject to
the provisions of any other applicable city ordinance if the animal is:
   A.   Of the species Felis Catus (domestic cat);
   B.   Of the species Canis Familiaris (domestic dog);
   C.   A fish kept in a tank;
   D.   Any nonpoisonous reptile;
   E.   A gerbil, hamster, guinea pig, mouse, rat, squirrel, chipmunk or
similar rodent-like creature kept in a cage;
   F.   Any amphibian less than one foot in length, such as a frog, toad,
salamander or chameleon;
   G.   Any livestock;
   H.   Any rabbit kept in a cage or hutch;
   I.   Any bees kept in a collection of hives or colonies; and/or
   J.   Ant farm.
(Ord. 975, 1988)
§ 6.12.050  EXCEPTIONS TO PROVISIONS.
   A.   The provisions of §§
6.12.030 and
6.12.040 shall not apply to the keeping of exotic, wild or dangerous animals in
the following cases:
      1.   The keeping of the animals in zoos, bona fide educational or medical
institutions, museums or any other place where they are kept as live specimens
for the public to view or for the purposes of instruction or study;
      2.   The keeping of such animals for exhibition to the public of the
animals by a circus, carnival or other exhibit or show;
      3.   The keeping of the animals in a bona fide, licensed veterinary
hospital for treatment; and
      4.   The keeping of a nonhuman primate that is less than 20 pounds or
whose average adult weight is less than 20 pounds and is used and kept as a
bonafide medical “assistant” to a disabled person, with prior approval of the
City Manager who shall consider the request after finding that the animal is a
bona fide medical “assistant”, can be housed in a safe and proper manner, and
will not be a danger to the public. The approval and conditions shall be
reviewed at least once a year.
   B.   The institution or persons keeping or maintaining exotic, wild or
dangerous animals in conformity with subsection A. of this section shall
nevertheless comply with all federal and state regulations regarding the
maintenance.
(Ord. 975, 1988)
§ 6.12.060  ABATEMENT OF EXOTIC, WILD OR DANGEROUS ANIMAL NUISANCE.
   A.   Upon receiving information that an exotic, wild or dangerous animal is
being kept within the city in violation of the provisions of this chapter, the
Chief of Police, any police or animal control officer, the City Attorney, or
Assistant City Attorney, may file with the Municipal Judge a petition supported
by affidavit setting forth such information, requesting a warrant to impound
the animal. If he or she is satisfied that there is probable cause to believe
that the nuisance exists, the Municipal Judge may issue a warrant directing the
Chief of Police or any police or animal control officer to impound the animal
pending further order of the Court as provided in this section.
   B.   The person executing a warrant issued pursuant to subsection A. of this
section shall have all powers of a police officer in executing a search warrant
pursuant to O.R.S. Chapter 133; provided, however, that, if forcible entry into
a building or vehicle is necessary because of a refusal of the person in
possession thereof to consent to entry, or because of the inability of the
person or persons attempting to execute the warrant to contact anyone having
authority to consent to the entry after at least three attempts more than five
hours apart, a regular police officer shall execute the warrant. In the event a
police officer, with or without an impoundment warrant, reasonably believes
that delay to contact a person having authority to permit entry into a building
or vehicle will endanger the safety of the public or any person because of the
inherently dangerous character of the particular animal and the reasonable
potential for the harm, or because it may be infected with rabies and has
bitten or scratched a person, he or she may forcibly enter the building or
vehicle for the purpose of impounding the animal.
   C.   Upon impounding an animal pursuant to this section, the city shall give
notice of the impoundment by personal service or by mail to the owner or
custodian of the animal, if known, or otherwise to the record owner of the
building, vehicle or other premises from which the animal was taken. If the
animal was found running at large and the identity of the owner or custodian is
unknown and cannot be found, the animal shall be disposed of by order of the
Municipal Court. In the event the identity of the owner or custodian becomes
known prior to disposition of the animal, the City Attorney shall cause notice
thereof to be given to the Municipal Court and the Court shall proceed as
provided in subsection D. of this section. Notice of impoundment pursuant to
this section shall specify the animal’s description, the time and place of
impoundment and the rights of the owner or custodian as provided in subsection
D. of this section. Proof of the service shall be filed with the Municipal
Judge within 24 hours (Saturday, Sundays and city holidays excepted) of the
impoundment.
   D.   Within two weeks of filing proof of the service, the Municipal Judge
shall convene a hearing to determine disposition of the animal, unless the
owner shall have filed with the Court a written waiver of interest in the
animal. In the latter case, the Judge shall order the animal disposed of;
otherwise, the Court shall cause notice of the time and place of hearing to be
served personally or by mail upon the owner, if known, or upon the person to
whom notice of impoundment was given.
   E.   Upon a determination that the impounded animal is a wild, exotic or
dangerous animal kept in violation of this chapter, the Court may order
disposition of the animal, including destruction of the animal or permanent
removal of the animal from the corporate limits of the city; provided, however,
that, if the owner or custodian was charged with a violation of this chapter,
and the trial on the violation was not consolidated with the hearing provided
for in this section, the Municipal Judge shall not order final disposition of
the animal, but may order the animal kept in impound pending a judgment on that
violation.
   F.   The Court may, as part of any order, provide for the reimbursement of
any costs and expenses incurred by the city in the process of abating the
nuisance and the impoundment of the animal.
   G.   Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect, limit or impair the
authority or duty of any public officer or other person pursuant to O.R.S.
433.340 to 433.390 or rules promulgated thereunder.
(Ord. 1240, § 13, 2015; Ord. 975, 1988)
§ 6.12.070  ENFORCEMENT.
   A.   Upon a conviction of an owner or custodian for violation of the
provisions of this chapter, the Municipal Judge may, in addition to imposing a
fine for the violation and assessing costs for an abatement and impoundment, if
any, order the disposition of the animal as he or she deems just and equitable.
This order may require abatement of the nuisance and destruction of the animal
or permanent removal of the animal from the corporate limits of the city.
   B.   Failure to comply with the terms of any order of the Court shall be
deemed contempt of Court, and upon the failure the Court may, in addition to
penalizing the contempt, modify its order to require more effective abatement
of the nuisance.
(Ord. 1240, § 14, 2015; Ord. 975, 1988)
§ 6.12.080  INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICERS.
   It is unlawful for any person to, in any way, resist, hinder, delay, impede
or otherwise interfere with, molest or harm any city employee in the
prosecution of his or her duties or exercise of his or her authority under the
terms of this chapter. Any person so interfering shall be prosecuted under
applicable criminal laws as they apply to the situation.
(Ord. 975, 1988)
§ 6.12.090  VIOLATION—PENALTY.
   A.   Violation of any provision of this chapter constitutes a violation and
may be prosecuted under the provisions of
Chapter 9.36 and any amendments thereto. Each day’s violation is a separate
offense.
   B.   The remedies, which include penalties herein provided for in this
chapter or sections thereof shall be cumulative and not exclusive and shall be
in addition to any and all other remedies available to the city.
(Ord. 1240, § 15, 2015; Ord. 1237, § 1 (part), 2013; Ord. 975, §§ 8, 9, 1988)
TITLE 7
[Reserved]
TITLE 8: HEALTH AND SAFETY
      Chapter
         
8.04.   NUISANCES
         
8.08.   WEED, GRASS AND BRUSH CONTROL
         
8.12.   CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY
CHAPTER 8.04:  NUISANCES
Section
Article I. Generally
   
8.04.010   Definitions.
   
8.04.020   Nuisances affecting public health.
   
8.04.025   Open burning.
   
8.04.030   Abandoned iceboxes.
   
8.04.040   Attractive nuisances.
   
8.04.045   Nuisance buildings and structures.
   
8.04.050   Metal tower—Structure—Antenna.
   
8.04.060   Glass openings.
   
8.04.070   Sifting or leaking loads.
   
8.04.080   Fences.
   
8.04.090   Surface water—Drainage.
   
8.04.100   Notices and advertisements.
   
8.04.110   Radio and television interference.
   
8.04.120   Appliances and fixtures.
   
8.04.130   Open storage at residences.
   
8.04.140   Household goods.
   
8.04.150   General nuisances.
   
8.04.160   Enforcement—Duty.
   
8.04.170   Prima facie evidence.
   
8.04.180   Remedies.
   
8.04.190   Violation—Penalty.
Article II. Abatement Procedure
   
8.04.200   Notice.
   
8.04.210   City abatement.
   
8.04.220   Billing and liability.
   
8.04.230   Assessment of lien.
   
8.04.240   Objection to assessment.
   
8.04.250   Lien—Interest.
   
8.04.260   Error in name.
   
8.04.270   Mailing notice.
ARTICLE I. GENERALLY
§ 8.04.010  DEFINITIONS.
   A.   As used in this chapter, except where the context indicates otherwise,
the following shall mean:
      CITY. The City of Sweet Home.
      COUNCIL. The governing body of the city.
      DEBRIS. Includes the remains of something broken down or destroyed,
including separated property not being used for the function for which it was
created in its separated condition, that is not connected with other parts of
the property.
      JUNK. Includes, but is not limited to, worn out property or materials
that may be turned into some use, or prepared so as to be useful again in some
form; scrap materials that could be sold or used again; part(s) of vehicle(s),
machinery or equipment having a salvage value; inoperable, inoperative or
separated part(s) of vehicle(s), machinery or equipement, including tire(s),
whether from its own worn out, damaged or broken condition or because it is not
connected with other parts of the vehicle, machinery or equipment; and worn
out, damaged or broken property or materials that thereby cannot be or are not
being used for the function that they were made, in their present worn out,
damaged or broken condition.
      PERSON. Every natural person, firm, partnership, association or
corporation.
      PERSON IN CHARGE OF PROPERTY. Any owner, agent, lessee, contract
purchaser or other person having the possession or control of property both
real and personal.
      PUBLIC PLACE. Any building, place or accommodations, whether publicly or
privately owned, open and available to the public.
   B.   As used in this chapter, the singular includes the plural and the
masculine includes the feminine.
   C.   The subject, division titles and section titles are for clarity and not
restrictive in nature in that the nuisance described in each may adversely
affect the health, safety or general welfare of the public.
(Ord. 1018, 1990; Ord. 1001, 1989; Ord. 989, 1989; Ord. 955, 1986)
§ 8.04.020  NUISANCES AFFECTING PUBLIC HEALTH.
   The following are declared to be public nuisances and may be abated in the
manner prescribed by this chapter:
   A.   Privies. Any open vault or privy maintained within the city except
those privies used in connection with construction projects and constructed in
accordance with the Oregon State Board of Health regulations;
   B.   Debris or junk property. No person shall leave debris, rubbish,
garbage, trash, manure, refuse or junk located on property or sidewalks
abutting thereon, and which has not been removed within a reasonable time, and
which adversely affects or is detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of
the public.
   C.   Stagnant water. Any pool of water which is without a proper inlet or
outlet and which, if not controlled, will be a breeding place for mosquitoes
and other similar insects.
   D.   Water pollution. The pollution of any body of water or stream or river
by sewage, industrial wastes or other substances placed on or near the water in
a manner that will cause harmful material to pollute the water.
   E.   Food. All decayed or unwholesome food which is offered for human
consumption.
   F.   Odor. Any premises which are in such state or condition as to cause a
noisome or offensive odor or which are in an unsanitary condition.
(Ord. 989, 1989; Ord. 955, 1986)
§ 8.04.025  OPEN BURNING.
   A.   No person shall burn household garbage, plastics, wire insulation, auto
bodies, asphalt, petroleum products, rubber products, animal remains, food
processing, cooking waste, tires, industrial waste or any material that emits
dense smoke or noxious odors. Burning of construction waste is allowed by
permit only.
   B.   Open burning of dried brush, shrubs, leaves and tree trimmings is
permitted at proper times on burn days in burn season, but any open burning
that is a threat to public safety is prohibited. Burning other than at proper
burn time on burn days can only be done by permit.
   C.   The Fire Chief or his or her designate or a police officer or Sweet
Home Municipal Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to enforce this section
under Sweet Home Municipal Code
Chapter 9.36 pertaining to violations and any abatement procedures. In addition
to any other remedy, after requesting that a fire be extinguished by person(s)
present, if any, the above named individuals can proceed to extinguish the fire
if his or her request is not complied with. The cost of the abatement shall be
borne by the person in charge of the property as prescribed by this chapter
with the notice and hearing being after the abatement.
(Ord. 1203, § 23, 2008; Ord. 1058, 1993)
§ 8.04.030  ABANDONED ICEBOXES.
   No person shall leave, in any place accessible to children, any abandoned,
unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or similar container which has an
airtight door and/or a lock, snap lock or other similar mechanism which may not
be released for opening from the inside, without first removing the lock, snap
lock or other mechanism or door from the icebox, refrigerator or similar
container.
(Ord. 955, 1986)
§ 8.04.040  ATTRACTIVE NUISANCES.
   A.   No person in charge of any property shall permit:
      1.   Any machinery, equipment or other devices; and any structures or
walls in a dilapidated condition that are not regulated by the building or
dangerous building codes; and any common law attractive nuisance to children on
such property which are attractive and dangerous to children and which are
accessible to children;
      2.   The piling of any lumber, logs or piling in such a manner as to be
attractive and dangerous to children and which is accessible to children; and/
or
      3.   Any excavation to remain open for an unreasonable length of time
without erecting proper safeguards or barriers to prevent the excavation from
being used by children.
   B.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to authorized
construction projects; provided that, during the course of construction
reasonable safeguards are maintained to prevent injury or death to playing
children.
   C.   Any nuisance as described in this section may be abated as provided in
this chapter.
(Ord. 1240, § 16, 2015; Ord. 955, 1986)
§ 8.04.045  NUISANCE BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
   A.   Purpose. The provisions of this section promote the health, safety and
general welfare of the public by requiring a level of maintenance of property
which will protect the livability, appearance and social and economic stability
of the city. These provisions will protect the public from the health and
safety hazards and the impairment of property values which results from the
neglect and deterioration of buildings and structures.
   B.   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
apply:
      DETERIORATION. To diminish in quality, character, or value.
      DILAPIDATE. To fall into a state of partial ruin, decay, or disrepair.
      OBSOLESCENCE. In the process of passing out of use or usefulness.
      OCCUPY. To be a resident or tenant of a building.
      SIMILAR COLOR. A color that has like characteristics of shade, tone, or
tint.
      STRUCTURE. Something built or constructed, such as a tower, bridge, or
dam.
      USE. The intended purpose for which a building or structure is used.
   C.   Blighted property. Any property on which there exists any one or more
of the following conditions is a blighted property for the purpose of this
section:
      1.   A building or structure which is not being occupied and which is
unsecured. A building or structure is unsecured when the public can gain entry
without the consent of the owner. To be secure means that the building or
structure is protected against unauthorized entry, including having doors,
windows, foundation walls, and other openings all firmly closed and locked or
otherwise closed off such as by a grille, grating, or boarding.
      2.   A partially constructed, reconstructed or demolished building or
structure upon which work is abandoned. Work is deemed abandoned when there is
no valid and current building or demolition permit or when there has been no
substantial work on the project for a period of six months or more.
      3.   A building or structure when it is in a state of disrepair with one
or more of the following:
         a.   Exterior walls and/or roof coverings do not provide adequate
weather protection, which may result in infestations of pests and/or dry rot.
Pest means animals commonly considered detrimental to humans or human concerns,
including but not limited to insects and rodents.
         b.   Broken or missing windows or doors.
         c.   Building exteriors and structures which are broken, deteriorated,
or substantially defaced, to the extent that the disrepair is visible from any
public right-of-way or visually  impacts neighboring public or private property
or presents an endangerment to public safety.
      4.   A building or structure that is used, or intended to be used, for
living, commercial, industrial or other purposes, and is unfit or unsafe to
occupy for those purposes because of any one or a combination of the following
conditions:
         a.   Defective design and quality of physical construction.
         b.   Obsolescence, deterioration, or dilapidation.
   D.   Property blight nuisance. Any property which has been determined to be
vacant and has a building or structure deemed to be blighted is hereby declared
and determined to be a public nuisance.
   E.   Vacant buildings and structures. A building or structure is deemed to
be vacant after three months with no occupancy. No person shall allow a
building or structure that is vacant to lack adequate maintenance to keep the
building or structure in a safe, secure, and sanitary condition.
   F.   Temporary protection. No person shall use a tarp, black plastic, or
similar material in place of a customary building component for siding, doors,
windows, or similar components, excluding roofs, for a period exceeding 90 days
in total, whether such use is continuous or interrupted, except when a longer
period is needed for the processing of an insurance claim or the Code
Enforcement Officer grants a one time extension for up to 30 days.
   G.   All boarding used to secure windows, doors, or other parts of a
building or structure under this section shall be the same or a similar color
as the building or structure to which they are attached.
(Ord. 1230, § 1, 2012)
§ 8.04.050  METAL TOWER—STRUCTURE—ANTENNA.
   No person shall erect or place any metal structure, tower or antenna in such
a manner that may allow hazardous contact with any electrical transmission
line.
(Ord. 955, 1986)
§ 8.04.060  GLASS OPENINGS.
   No person shall allow a glass window or door in a structure to be left
broken for more than 48 hours if the broken glass is within six feet of the
bottom of the structure.
(Ord. 955, 1986)
§ 8.04.070  SIFTING OR LEAKING LOADS.
   A.   No person shall drive or move a vehicle on any street unless it is so
constructed or loaded as to prevent its content from dropping, sifting, leaking
or otherwise escaping therefrom.
   B.   It shall be the duty of any person driving a vehicle from which the
contents have escaped to remove an escaped substance or material from the
street.
   C.   Any escaped substance or material, as set forth in this section, is
declared to be a nuisance and may be abated as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 955, 1986)
§ 8.04.080  FENCES.
   All fences and walls, including but not limited to chain link, wood, brick,
and masonry construction, shall be kept in good repair, sound structural
condition, and shall provide a neat appearance in keeping with the character of
the neighborhood. No fence is allowed to become or remain in a condition of
disrepair including, but not limited to noticeable leaning, missing slats, and
broken supports. At all times, fences and walls shall be kept free from
graffiti, undergrowth, weeds and other unsightly matter.
(Ord. 1246, § 1, 2015; Ord. 955, 1986)
§ 8.04.090  SURFACE WATER—DRAINAGE.
   No person in charge of any building or structure shall suffer or permit
rainwater to fall from any such building or structure onto any street or
sidewalk or to flow across the sidewalk; and every person in charge of property
shall, at all times, keep and maintain in a proper state of repair adequate
drainpipes or a drainage system so that any overflow water accumulating on the
roof or about the building will not be carried across or upon any sidewalk or
the property of another person.
(Ord. 955, 1986)
§ 8.04.100  NOTICES AND ADVERTISEMENTS.
   No person shall affix any placard, bill, advertisement or poster upon any
real or personal property, public or private, without first securing permission
from the owner or person in control of the property. This section shall not be
construed as an amendment to or a repeal of any regulation now or hereafter
adopted by the city regulating the use of and location of signs and
advertising.
(Ord. 955, 1986)
§ 8.04.110  RADIO AND TELEVISION INTERFERENCE.
   Operation or use by any person of any electrical, mechanical or other
device, apparatus, instrument or machine that causes interference with radio or
television reception is prohibited; provided that, the radio or television
receiver interfered with is of good engineering design and operating condition.
This section shall not apply to electrical and radio devices licensed, approved
and operated under the rules and regulations of the Federal Communications
Commission; nor shall this section be construed to prohibit the use or
operation of any such device when necessary for the protection of life or
property, for the care and treatment of sick or injured persons or for the
operation of a public utility.
(Ord. 955, 1986)
§ 8.04.120  APPLIANCES AND FIXTURES.
   No person shall leave, store or place any inoperative or discarded washer,
dryer, ice box, freezer, refrigerator, dishwasher, stove, water heater or other
household appliance or any plumbing fixture on public or private property
outside of a building unless it is completely enclosed by a solid fence, other
solid structure and/or vegetation and is not visible from a public street,
other public area or other private property, except private property zoned
industrial by the city zoning ordinance. Notwithstanding, no person shall
leave, store or place more than four of the above inoperative or discarded
appliances or fixtures outside of a building. This section does not apply to
the transfer station.
(Ord. 989, 1989; Ord. 955, 1986)
§ 8.04.130  OPEN STORAGE AT RESIDENCES.
   A.   At a residence, no person shall store parts of vehicles, machinery or
equipment; lumber, plywood or building materials; buckets, cans or bottles;
truck canopy, bikes or toys; household furniture and household furnishings
manufactured, built or designed for inside use (out of the elements) and other
personal property manufactured, built or designed for inside use or interior
use (out of the elements); and personal property that is manufactured, built or
designed for attachment to a structure as shutters, doors and windows, in front
or street side yards at all, or interior side yards if a backyard is available
for storage. “Yard”, for this subsection, shall include driveway.
   B.   At a residence, no person shall store an appliance (operable or
inoperable) or plumbing fixture in view of a public street (not alley).
   C.   At a residence, no person shall leave a burn barrel exposed to public
view from a public street (not alley) when burn season is closed.
   D.   At a residence, no person shall store lumber, plywood or building
materials in view of a public street (not alley) unless each type of item is
stacked in a uniform formation one upon another with edges flush.
   E.   At a residence, no person shall leave oil, fuel, chemical barrels or
similar containers exposed to public view from a public street (not alley) for
a period in excess of three days. This section does not prohibit barrels,
containers or tanks attached to a residential unit and used as a reservoir for
oil or fuel.
   F.   At a residence, no person shall leave accumulations of limbs, branches
and/or brush on property for longer than one entire burn season that can be
seen from the public street (not alley). This section is in addition to any
other provision of this chapter or other city ordinance and not a limit
thereon. If other materials are included in the piles and are removed under
another provision of the law, then the limbs, branches and brush can be
removed, with the other materials per the other provision.
   G.   At a residence, no person shall park a motor vehicle or utility trailer
in the front yard or street side yard for longer than 72 hours at any one time.
“Yard”, for this subsection, does not include driveway. Abatement of the motor
vehicle or trailer may be accomplished by following the procedures outlined in
Chapter 10.16 or any amendment thereof for discarded vehicles.
(Ord. 1038, 1992; Ord. 955, 1986)
§ 8.04.140  HOUSEHOLD GOODS.
   No person shall leave, store or place any discarded couch, chair, mattress,
carpet or other piece of household furniture or furnishings on public or
private property outside of a building, unless it is completely enclosed by a
solid fence, other solid structure and/or vegetation and is not visible from a
public street, other public area or other private property, except private
property zoned industrial by the city zoning ordinance. Notwithstanding, no
person shall leave, store or place more than four pieces of the above discarded
furniture or furnishings outside of a building. This section does not apply to
the transfer station.
(Ord. 955, 1986)
§ 8.04.150  GENERAL NUISANCES.
   In addition to those nuisances specifically enumerated within this chapter,
every other thing, substance or act which is determined by the Common Council
to be injurious or detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare of the
city is declared to be a nuisance and may be abated as provided in this
chapter. The city may summarily abate a nuisance involving an imminent danger
to the health or safety or property of the public. The cost of the abatement
shall be borne by the offending party as prescribed by this chapter.
(Ord. 989, 1989; Ord. 955, 1986)
§ 8.04.160  ENFORCEMENT—DUTY.
   Conditions that exist that violate the provisions of this chapter are
declared to be nuisances and no person shall cause, permit or allow a nuisance
on public or private property or take any action or allow any condition to
exist contradictory to the provisions of this chapter. It shall be the duty of
the person in charge of the property to abate the nuisance.
(Ord. 955, 1986)
§ 8.04.170  PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE.
   It shall be prima facie evidence in any trial or abatement procedure
concerning §§
8.04.120 through
8.04.140, that the offending property is inoperative, discarded or stored upon
public or private property contrary to the location provisions of §§
8.04.120 through
8.04.140, for a period in excess of the time limit specified in the section or
subsection or seven days if no time is specified.
(Ord. 1038, 1992; Ord. 955, 1986)
§ 8.04.180  REMEDIES.
   The remedies, which include penalties herein, provided for in this chapter
or sections thereof shall be cumulative and not exclusive and shall be in
addition to any and all other remedies available to the city.
(Ord. 955, 1986)
§ 8.04.190  VIOLATION—PENALTY.
   A.   Violation of this chapter constitutes a violation and may be prosecuted
under the provisions of
Chapter 9.36 and any amendments thereto.
   B.   If a person is convicted of violating more than one section or
subsection of this chapter, arising out of the same nuisance, the Municipal
Court Judge shall only fine the person for a single nuisance. This single fine
has no effect on each day’s violation being considered a separate offense and
being fined thereon.
(Ord. 1237, § 1 (part), 2013; Ord. 989, 1989; Ord. 955, §§ 21, 22, 1986)
ARTICLE II. ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
§ 8.04.200  NOTICE.
   A.   The City Code Enforcement Officer, a police officer, City Attorney,
Assistant City Attorney or a person designated by the City Council of the city
shall investigate and determine if and when a nuisance as defined in this
chapter exists, then the property where the nuisance exists shall be posted
with a notice directing the person in charge of the property to abate the
nuisance. EXISTS is defined to include lives or originates from.
   B.   At the time of posting, the City Code Enforcement Officer, police
officer, City Attorney, Assistant City Attorney or a person designated by the
City Council shall cause a copy of such notice to be forwarded by certified
mail, postage prepaid, to the person in charge of the property at the last
known address of the person, or cause the person to be personally served with
the notice.
   C.   The notice to abate shall contain:
      1.   A description of the real property, by the street address or
otherwise, where the nuisance exists;
      2.   A direction to abate the nuisance by a date certain;
      3.   A description of the nuisance;
      4.   A statement that unless such nuisance is abated, the city will abate
the nuisance and the cost of abatement will be charged against the person in
charge of the property, and/or the property itself, and becomes a lien on the
property; and
      5.   A statement that the person in charge of the property may protest
the abatement by giving notice to the City Code Enforcement Officer within five
days from the date of the notice. The five-day period under this subsection
does not include holidays, Saturdays or Sundays.
   D.   If the person in charge of the property protests the abatement, in
conformance with subsection C.5. of this section, a hearing shall be held
before a hearings officer, who shall decide if a nuisance exists by substantial
evidence to the record. The determination shall be final and is not subject to
appeal. If it is affirmative, the person in charge of the property shall cause
the nuisance to be abated as directed by the hearings officer. If the nuisance
is not so abated, the person in charge of the property is in violation of this
chapter.
   E.   Hearings held under this section may be informal in nature, but the
presentation of evidence in a hearing shall be consistent with the presentation
of evidence required for contested cases under O.R.S. 183.450.
   F.   The hearings officer at a hearing under this section may be an officer,
official or employee of the city, but shall not have participated in any
determination or investigation related to the alleged nuisance.
   G.   The person personally serving, posting and/or mailing the notices
provided herein shall, upon completion of the serving, posting and/or mailing,
execute and file a certificate stating the date and place of the service,
mailing and/or posting.
   H.   Substantial compliance with the notice and posting requirements of this
section shall be sufficient to comply with the requirements thereof. An error
in the name or address of the person in charge of the property shall not make
the notice invalid and in such a case the posting notice shall be sufficient.
(Ord. 1203, § 24, 2008; Ord. 989, 1989; Ord. 955, 1986)
§ 8.04.210  CITY ABATEMENT.
   If, after the city has complied with §
8.04.200 of this chapter, the nuisance has not been privately abated, the City
Manager or his or her designate shall cause it to be abated. The person
authorized to cause, or retained to do the abating, may enter upon the property
at reasonable times for purposes of abating the nuisance. Any person
interfering with the abatement shall be prosecuted under applicable criminals
laws as they apply to the situation.
(Ord. 955, 1986)
§ 8.04.220  BILLING AND LIABILITY.
   After the City Manager or his or her designate has caused the nuisance to be
abated, the City Manager shall cause the person in charge of the property to be
billed for the abatement. The abatement shall include at least the
administrative costs for each abatement. The person in charge of the property
is personally liable for the cost of abatement.
(Ord. 955, 1986)
§ 8.04.230  ASSESSMENT OF LIEN.
   If the bill is not paid within 30 days, the City Manager shall cause a
written notice to be given to the person in charge of the property, stating the
amount of administrative costs and the cost of the abatement, describing the
land with reasonable certainty, giving notice that such amount will be
considered by the City Council at a meeting at the time and place specified in
the notice as the amount to be assessed against the lot or parcel of land as a
lien and that any person having an interest in the land may appear and be heard
at the meeting with respect thereto.
(Ord. 955, 1986)
§ 8.04.240  OBJECTION TO ASSESSMENT.
   At the time and place specified in the notice mentioned in §
8.04.230, the City Council shall meet and shall consider any protests or
objections to the levying of the cost herein referred to as a lien upon the lot
or parcel of land and after considering the protests and objections, if any,
shall determine what amount shall be made a lien on the lot or parcel of land
and shall direct the City Recorder to enter the charges in the city lien docket
as a lien upon the lot or parcel of land so affected.
(Ord. 955, 1986)
§ 8.04.250  LIEN—INTEREST.
   Each such lien shall be a lien upon the lot or parcel of land against which
it is charged in the city lien docket and shall be subject to collection and
foreclosure in the same manner as is now or is hereafter provided for the
foreclosure of liens under O.R.S. 223.505 to O.R.S. 223.595, inclusive, and
shall bear interest at the rate of 9% per annum. Interest shall accrue 30 days
from the date of the entry of the lien in the city lien docket.
(Ord. 1240, § 17, 2015; Ord. 1203, § 25, 2008; Ord. 1113, (part), 1997; Ord.
989, 1989; Ord. 955, 1986)
§ 8.04.260  ERROR IN NAME.
   An error in the name of the person in charge of the property in a letter,
billing or notice shall not void the assessment, nor will a failure to receive
notice of the proposed assessment render the assessment void. The assessment
shall be a valid lien against the property after action by the City Council, as
set forth herein.
(Ord. 955, 1986)
§ 8.04.270  MAILING NOTICE.
   Any notice or copy thereof in this chapter sent by mail shall be deemed to
have been given by the deposit in the mails of a letter, by certified, postage
prepaid containing the notice or copy thereof addressed to the person in charge
of the property at his or her last known address. Notice by personal service
can be made by anyone over the age of 18 years including city employees who are
involved in or are investigating the nuisance in issue.
(Ord. 955, 1986)
CHAPTER 8.08:  WEED, GRASS AND BRUSH CONTROL
Section
   
8.08.010   Generally.
   
8.08.020   Duty of owner.
   
8.08.025   Publication and notice.
   
8.08.030   Abatement procedure.
   
8.08.040   Violation—Penalty.
§ 8.08.010  GENERALLY.
   A.   The term NOXIOUS VEGETATION does not include vegetation that
constitutes an agricultural crop, unless that vegetation is a health hazard or
a fire or traffic hazard within the meaning of subsection B. of this section.
   B.   The term NOXIOUS VEGETATION does include:
      1.   Weeds more than ten inches high;
      2.   Grass more than ten inches high and not within the exception stated
in subsection A. of this section;
      3.   Poison oak;
      4.   Poison ivy;
      5.   Blackberry bushes that extend into a public street, onto a sidewalk
or across a property line;
      6.   Vegetation, including trees and shrubs, that is:
         a.   A health hazard;
         b.   A fire hazard because it is near other combustibles; or
         c.   A traffic hazard because it impairs the view of a public street
or otherwise makes the use of the street hazardous.
   C.   Undeveloped property which adjoins developed property shall be
maintained to the standards set forth in this chapter for a minimum of 50 feet
back from the property line, in order to create a buffer zone.
   D.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit lawns, trees and
shrubbery grown or maintained for purposes of landscaping, nor shall it
prohibit the growth or maintenance of any vegetation designed for food or fuel
purposes, except that the owner and/or person in charge of any real property
shall not permit the limbs of any shrub or tree projecting into or extending
over a street to interfere with the use of the sidewalk or the street, or to
obstruct a driver’s view of an intersection or traffic upon the streets
approaching an intersection or otherwise to constitute a hazard to the public.
Trees shall be trimmed so that the minimum clearance of any overhanging portion
thereof is eight feet above the sidewalk and 12 feet above the street. Hedges
and other shrubbery shall be trimmed so that they do not overhang the sidewalk
or street. Trees, hedges and other shrubbery on corner lots shall be trimmed
and maintained so as to permit the minimum clearance prescribed by the zoning
ordinance. The untrimmed trees and shrubs are declared noxious vegetation.
   E.   An ALLEY is defined in this chapter as a street through the middle of a
block and/or as defined by O.R.S. 801.110.
(Ord. 1086, §§ 1,2, 1995; Ord. 1036, §§ 2Z7(2), 2Z7(3), 1991; Ord. 940, 1986)
§ 8.08.020  DUTY OF OWNER.
   A.   No owner and/or person in charge of property in the city shall allow
noxious vegetation to be on the property, on or over a sidewalk or on or over a
public street abutting on the property as provided in this chapter. It shall be
the duty of the owner and/or person in charge of property to cut, remove and/or
destroy grass, trees, shrubbery, bushes, weeds or other noxious vegetation as
often as needed to prevent them from becoming a nuisance as provided in this
chapter.
   B.   On an unimproved street (including unimproved alley), the owner and/or
person in charge of the adjacent property is required to cut noxious vegetation
on the street (alley) to the centerline of the street (alley) until such time
that it is improved. On an improved street (not alley), the adjacent owner or
person in charge of the property is required to cut noxious vegetation to the
curb on the street or edge of the traveled portion of the street whichever
pertains to the given property. On an improved alley, the owner or the person
in charge of the property is required to cut noxious vegetation to the
centerline of the alley. An unimproved street (including alley) refers to a
street (alley) that is not in use, but has been dedicated, deeded or otherwise
given to the city for use as a street (alley). “Improved street” (including
alley) refers to street (alley) that is being used by the public as a street
(alley). On an unimproved street (including alley), noxious vegetation on the
street (alley) shall be cut like the adjacent property is required to be cut.
   C.   If the city is required to pay damages for an injury to any person
caused by the failure of an owner to maintain his or her property in compliance
with this chapter, the owner shall reimburse the city for the amount of the
damages thus paid, and for the attorney fees and costs of defending against the
claim for damages. The city may maintain an action in a court of competent
jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this subsection.
(Ord. 1086, 1995; Ord. 1036, 7(1), 1991; Ord. 940, 1986)
§ 8.08.025  PUBLICATION AND NOTICE.
   Between April 15 and May 15 of each year, the City Manager or his or her
designate shall cause to be published three times in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city notice to all owners and persons in charge of real
property that they are to keep the property free of noxious vegetation.
(Ord. 1086, 1995)
§ 8.08.030  ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.
   A.   Deadline to cut. Within ten days after the third publication of the
notice required in §
8.08.025, or as soon thereafter as a violation of §
8.08.020 may occur, the owner of the property shall cause the weeds, grass or
other noxious vegetation in violation of this chapter to be cut.
   B.   Requested cutting by city. At the request of the owner, the City
Manager or his or her designate will cause grass, weeds or other noxious
vegetation to be cut for a fee sufficient to cover the direct cost, 30% for
administrative overhead with a minimum fee as per current resolution.
   C.   Cutting by city. The City Manager or his or her designate may cause to
be cut any weeds, grass or other noxious vegetation which is in violation of
this chapter at any time following the deadline to cut set forth at subsection
A. of this section. The cost of the removal of the weeds, grass and other
noxious vegetation shall be as calculated in subsection B. of this section and
will be a charge to the owner of the property and will become a lien against
the property.
   D.   Right to enter. In the event that it becomes necessary for the City
Manager or his or her designate to undertake the cutting and removal of the
grass, weeds and other noxious vegetation from any private lot within the city,
the designate of the City Manager shall have the right at reasonable times to
enter into or upon the property to cut the grass, weeds and other noxious
vegetation.
   E.   Costs to become a lien. Upon completion of the clearing of any real
property and in the event that the fee is not paid within 30 days thereafter,
the City Manager or his or her designate shall file with the City Recorder and
thereafter present to the City Council an itemized statement of the cost
thereof. After providing the notice and hearing set forth below, the City
Council shall determine the reasonableness of the statements of costs and
adjust the same, and thereupon the amount of the statements as approved by the
City Council shall be an obligation owed to the city by the owner or owners of
the real property involved, and the city shall have a lien upon the real
property for a sum and the lien shall be entered in the city lien docket and
enforced against the property in the same manner provided for the enforcement
of city liens including the procedure set forth in Sweet Home Municipal Code §
8.04.250. The lien shall earn 9% interest 30 days from the date of entry on the
city lien docket.
   F.   Notice and hearing. Prior to City Council action as referred to above,
the City Manager or his or her designate shall cause a notice to be mailed by
registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, to the record owner or owners of
any real property upon which the city proposes to impose a lien for the costs
of the clearing of any real property under this chapter. This notice shall be
mailed to the owner or owners of the real property in question at the address
designated on the Linn County real property tax assessment rolls. An error in
the name of the property owner or owners shall not void the lien, nor will a
failure to receive the notice of the proposed lien render the lien void and any
lien imposed pursuant to this section shall be a valid lien against the
property. The notice shall contain a summary of the costs which are proposed to
be assessed against the property and shall advise of the city’s intent to
assess the costs against the real property upon which the work was performed
and shall further advise the owner or owners of their right to a hearing before
the City Council concerning the proposed lien and the date and time of the
hearing.
   G.   Summary abatement. The procedure provided by this chapter is not
exclusive, but is in addition, to any abatement procedure provided by other
ordinances. The City Manager or his or her designate can abate noxious
vegetation by use of the abatement procedure set forth in
Chapter 8.04.
(Ord. 1203, § 26, 2008; Ord. 1086, 1995; Ord. 1036, 1991)
§ 8.08.040  VIOLATION—PENALTY.
   Violation of this chapter constitutes a violation and may be prosecuted
under the provisions of
Chapter 9.36.
(Ord. 1237, § 1 (part), 2013; Ord. 940, 1986)
CHAPTER 8.12:  CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY
Section
   
8.12.010   Title of provisions.
   
8.12.020   Definitions.
   
8.12.030   Chronic nuisance property.
   
8.12.040   Pre-filing notification procedure.
   
8.12.050   Compliance agreement with responsible party(ies).
   
8.12.060   Commencement of actions; summons and complaint.
   
8.12.070   Remedies; civil penalty; enforcement order.
   
8.12.080   Defenses; mitigation.
   
8.12.090   Emergency remedy.
   
8.12.100   Costs; lien.
   
8.12.110   Severability.
   
8.12.120   Nonexclusive remedy.
§ 8.12.010  TITLE OF PROVISIONS.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Chronic Nuisance Property Ordinance.”
(Ord. 1238, § 1 (part), 2014)
§ 8.12.020  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, the following definitions apply:
   CHIEF OF POLICE. The Chief of Sweet Home Police Department or designee.
   CITY MANAGER. The City Manager of the City of Sweet Home or designee.
   CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY. Real property premises (including industrial,
commercial or residential buildings), herein also referred to as the
“property,” “premises” or “subject property,” upon, near (as hereinafter
described in this section) or in which three or more distinct occurrences of
any of the below listed prohibited acts or behaviors (as defined in Oregon law
or the SHMC) occur, or the patrons, employees, residents, owners or occupants
thereof engage in three or more of said prohibited acts or behaviors on the
property, or, in relation to the property within 400 feet of the property, and
three or more citations are issued and/or arrests are made during any 90
consecutive day period:
 
1.  Criminal        O.R.S. 163.005
    Homicide
    Rape, Sodomy,
2.  and Unlawful    O.R.S. 163.355 to O.R.S. 163.411
    Sexual
    Penetration
    Menacing and
3.  Recklessly      O.R.S. 163.190 and O.R.S. 163.195
    Endangering
    Another Person
4.  Intimidation    O.R.S. 166.155 and O.R.S. 166.165
5.  Harassment      O.R.S. 166.065
6.  Disorderly      O.R.S. 166.025
    Conduct II
7.  Discharge of    O.R.S. 166.630 and O.R.S. 166.635
    Weapons         SHMC §§ 9.32.010, 9.32.020, 9.32.030 (See O.R.S. 166.172)
8.  Unnecessary     SHMC § 9.20.020
    Noise
9.  Providing       O.R.S. 471.410
    Liquor
    Minor in
10. Possession of   O.R.S. 471.430
    Alcohol
11. Assault and     O.R.S. 163.160 to O.R.S. 163.187
    Strangulation
    Sexual Abuse,
    Contributing to
12. the Delinquency O.R.S. 163.415, O.R.S. 163.425, O.R.S. 163.427, O.R.S.
    of a Minor And  163.435, and O.R.S. 163.445
    Sexual
    Misconduct
13. Public          O.R.S. 163.465
    Indecency
14. Controlled      O.R.S. 167.222, O.R.S. 167.262 and O.R.S. 475.525 to O.R.S.
    Substances      475.894
15. Criminal        O.R.S. 164.345 to O.R.S. 164.365
    Mischief
16. Criminal        O.R.S. 163.200 and O.R.S. 163.205
    Mistreatment
17. Criminal        O.R.S. 164.245 and O.R.S. 164.255
    Trespass
18. Unlawful Use of O.R.S. 166.220
    a Weapon
    Prostitution
19. and Related     O.R.S. 167.007 to O.R.S. 167.017
    Offenses
20. Theft           O.R.S. 164.015 to O.R.S. 164.140
    Placing
    Offensive
    Substances in
21. Waters, on      O.R.S.164.785 and O.R.S. 164.805
    Highways or
    Other Property
    and Offensive
    Littering
    Arson and
22. Related         O.R.S. 164.315 to O.R.S. 164.335
    Offenses
23. Illegal         O.R.S. 167.122 and O.R.S. 167.127
    Gambling
24. Curfew          SHMC § 9.28.010
25. Purchasing Sex  O.R.S. 163.413
    With a Minor
    Urinating or
26. Defecating in   SHMC § 9.24.050
    Public Places
    Consumption or
    Possession of
27. Alcoholic       SHMC § 9.20.030
    Beverages in
    Public Places
    Any attempt to commit (as defined by O.R.S. 161.405) or conspiracy to
28. commit (as defined by O.R.S. 161.450 and O.R.S. 161.455) any of the above
    offenses.
 
   OWNER. The person(s) (including individual(s), corporation, partnership or
other entity) having legal or equitable title to the property. “Property” means
any real property and any improvement thereon incidental or appurtenant,
including but not limited to any room, apartment, house, building, structure or
any separate part or portion thereof, whether permanent or not.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. Includes:
      1.   The owner of the property, or the owner’s manager or agent or other
person or entity in control of the property on behalf of the owner; and/or,
      2.   The person of entity occupying the property, including, a bailee,
lessee, tenant or other having possession.
      3.   RESPONSIBLE PARTY for a specific property shall be presumed from the
following:
         a.   The owner and the owner’s agent, as shown on the Assessor’s tax
rolls of Linn County.
         b.   The resident or occupant of the property, as shown on the records
(including utilities records) of the City of Sweet Home.
   COURT. A court of competent jurisdiction, which may address the respective
issues.
(Ord. 1238, § 1 (part), 2014)
§ 8.12.030  CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY.
   A.   The behavior, acts or omissions described in this chapter are hereby
declared to be nuisances and if they commonly reoccur in relation to a specific
property, such property may be declared ‘chronic nuisance property’, thereby
requiring the application of remedies set out in this chapter.
   B.   Any property within the City of Sweet Home, which is found to be a
chronic nuisance property, shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to
its remedies.
   C.   Any person who is a responsible party for property, which is deemed a
chronic nuisance property, shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to
its remedies.
(Ord. 1238, § 1 (part), 2014; Ord. 1282, § 10, 2020)
§ 8.12.040  PRE-FILING NOTIFICATION PROCEDURE.
   After two occurrences with citations and/or arrests on or near (as defined
in this chapter) the property, of any of the prohibited acts or behaviors
listed in this chapter, within a consecutive 90-day period, the Chief of Police
or designee shall provide notification, via certified mail, return receipt
requested, to all known responsible parties for the property, stating the times
and places of the alleged occurrences and the potential liability for violation
of this chapter and that a response is required on or before 15 days from the
date of the notification. The City Manager and City Attorney shall be provided
copies of the notice.
(Ord. 1264, § 1, 2017; Ord. 1238, § 1 (part), 2014)
§ 8.12.050  COMPLIANCE AGREEMENT WITH RESPONSIBLE PARTY(IES).
   A.   After providing notification to all known responsible parties, the
Chief of Police or designee has the authority to solicit and obtain, on behalf
of the city, a voluntary agreement with the party(ies) to comply with the
provisions of this chapter (“compliance agreement”). The compliance agreement
shall be in writing and signed by all known responsible parties that agree to
abide by the compliance agreement and the Chief of Police or designee on behalf
of the city. The compliance agreement shall be for a term not to exceed 12
months. A copy thereof shall be provided to the City Manager.
   B.   In proposing the compliance agreement, the Chief of Police or designee
shall consider the factors outlined in §
8.12.080B. below. The Chief of Police or designee can modify the voluntary
compliance agreement after considering said factors during the term of the
compliance agreement to accomplish the abatement of the chronic nuisance
including not counting against a responsible party to the compliance agreement
continued prohibited acts or behavior with citations and/or arrests as listed
in §
8.12.020 of this chapter that occur before or during the compliance agreement.
If a compliance agreement is successfully concluded no notification need be
made as set forth in §
8.12.060A.
   C.   The compliance agreement is strictly remedial in nature and shall not
be interpreted to limit in any manner the authority of the city to commence an
action against any responsible party or another for a violation of any
provision of the Sweet Home Municipal Code or Oregon law.
   D.   If the compliance agreement is not followed as agreed, the city may
proceed with civil action as provided in this chapter or the provisions of the
O.R.S. or the Sweet Home Municipal Code.
(Ord. 1264, §§ 2, 3, 2017; Ord. 1238, § 1 (part), 2014)
§ 8.12.060  COMMENCEMENT OF ACTIONS; SUMMONS AND COMPLAINT.
   A.   In the event there occurs on or near (as defined in this chapter) the
property three or more continued prohibited acts or behavior with citations
and/or arrests as listed in §
8.12.020 of this chapter, contrary to the terms of the compliance agreement
and/or in violation of this chapter, the Sweet Home City Council shall be
advised and, upon deliberation, may direct that the city proceed to initiate
court action pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or take such other
action as the Council deems appropriate.
   B.   The Sweet Home Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction to hear the
civil action as provided for herein using its municipal powers, justice court
powers or powers otherwise given or held by it.
   C.   Following the filing of an action in a court of competent jurisdiction,
upon verification of proper service of process of the summons and complaint,
and a prima facie presentation to the court, a default judgment and order may
be entered against a respondent who fails to duly appear before that court.
(Ord.1238, § 1 (part), 2014)
§ 8.12.070  REMEDIES; CIVIL PENALTY; ENFORCEMENT ORDER.
   A.   In the event the respondent(s) is found by a preponderance of the
evidence to have violated this chapter, the court may, by judgment and order:
      1.   Require that the chronic nuisance property be closed against all use
and occupancy for a period of not less than 30 days, but not more than 180
days; and/or,
      2.   Assess a civil penalty of up to $500 per day for each day nuisance
activities occur on (or near as defined herein) the property.
      3.   Subsequent acts and behavior in violation of the provisions of this
chapter, which occur within two years following the entry of any earlier
judgment and order, may be actionable, at the direction of the City Council,
and, if violation(s) of this chapter is established, the chronic nuisance
property may be closed in accordance with this section, and the court may
impose a civil penalty of up to $1,000 per day nuisance activities occur on (or
near as defined herein) the property.
      4.   In addition to the above, the court may employ any other remedy
provided by law, deemed by the court to be appropriate to abate the nuisance.
   B.   In addition to the above, the court may assess costs and charges as
described in §
8.12.100.
In lieu of closure of the property, at the court’s discretion, the respondent
may be permitted to file a bond with the city that is acceptable to the court
and subject to the court’s satisfaction of the respondent’s good faith
commitment to abatement of the nuisance. Such bond shall be in the amount of at
least $500 and shall be conditioned upon the non-recurrence, for a period of
one year after entry of the judgment, of any of the acts or behaviors listed in
§
8.12.020 of this chapter. Forfeiture of the bond is subject to court review and
order.
   C.   The court may authorize the city to physically secure the subject
property against use or occupancy, in compliance with the judgment or order, in
the event the owner(s) or the responsible party(ies) fail to do so within the
time specified by the court.
(Ord. 1238, § 1 (part), 2014)
§ 8.12.080  DEFENSES; MITIGATION.
   A.   It is a defense to an action brought pursuant to this chapter, that the
responsible party, the respondent, at the time the alleged action or behavior
occurred, could not, in the exercise of reasonable care or diligence, determine
that the property had become chronic nuisance property, or could not, in spite
of the exercise of reasonable care and diligence, control the conduct leading
to the determination that the property is a chronic nuisance property. The
assertion that the party, the respondent, was not present at the property at
the time the alleged acts or behavior occurred upon which the property was
deemed chronic nuisance property, shall not, alone, be a defense to the action.
   B.   The court may consider any of the following factors, as appropriate, in
its decision, and shall cite those found applicable:
      1.   The effort taken by the responsible party to mitigate or correct the
alleged action or behavior which occurred at or near (as defined in this
chapter) and in relation to the property;
      2.   Whether the alleged action or behavior was repeated or continuous;
      3.   The magnitude or gravity of the alleged action or behavior;
      4.   The cooperativeness of the responsible party with the city in
causing the abatement of the alleged action or behavior;
      5.   The cost to the city of investigating and abating action or behavior
or attempting to correct the condition; or
      6.   Any other factor deemed by the court to be relevant.
(Ord. 1238, § 1 (part), 2014)
§ 8.12.090  EMERGENCY REMEDY.
   In addition to any remedies available to the city under this chapter or
otherwise, in the event the City Manager finds that a property or its use
constitutes an immediate threat to the public safety and welfare, upon review
and approval by the City Council, the city may apply to the court for such
relief as is deemed appropriate.
(Ord. 1238, § 1 (part), 2014)
§ 8.12.100  COSTS; LIEN.
   A.   The court may assess the property owner(s) and the responsible party
(ies) the following costs incurred by the city in the proceeding:
      1.   Costs incurred in the actual physical securing of the subject
properly against use or occupancy, including, but not limited to, the cost of
personnel, materials, medical costs, consulting fees, notices and equipment
charges;
      2.   The city’s investigative costs; and,
      3.   Administrative costs and costs (collectively referred to as cost)
incurred in pre-filing implementation of the abatement process, together with
the cost of the initiation and conducting of the court action.
   B.   The City Manager may, within 14 days of the court’s entry of judgment
and order against the respondent(s), submit a signed detailed statement of
costs to the court for its review. If no objection to the statement is made
within 14 days after service on the respondent(s) of a copy of the statement,
the amount submitted shall become a part of the judgment and a lien against the
subject premises. A copy of the judgment and the statement of costs, together
with a verified designation of the address and legal description of the
property, shall be forwarded to the Sweet Home City Recorder, who shall enter
the same in the Sweet Home City Lien Docket.
   C.   Persons assessed the costs and/or civil penalty pursuant to this
chapter shall be jointly and severally liable for the payment thereof to the
city.
(Ord. 1238, § 1 (part), 2014)
§ 8.12.110  SEVERABILITY.
   If any provisions of this chapter, or its application to any person or
circumstance, is held to be invalid for any reason, the remainder of the
chapter, or the application of its provisions to other persons or
circumstances, shall not in any way be affected.
(Ord. 1238, § 1 (part), 2014)
§ 8.12.120  NONEXCLUSIVE REMEDY.
   The remedies described in this chapter shall not be the exclusive remedies
of the city in enforcement of the prohibition of the acts and behaviors
described in §
8.12.020.
TITLE 9: PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE
      Chapter
         
9.04.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
         
9.08.   OREGON CRIMINAL CODE ADOPTED
         
9.12.   OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST PUBLIC OFFICERS AND GOVERNMENT
         
9.16.   OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON
         
9.20.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
         
9.24.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
         
9.28.   OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST MINORS
         
9.32.   WEAPONS
         
9.36.   UNIFORM SHORT FORM COMPLAINT AND CITATION PROCEDURE
         
9.48.   ALARM SYSTEMS
CHAPTER 9.04:  GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
9.04.010   Definitions.
   
9.04.020   Violation—Penalty.
   
9.04.030   Soliciting or confederating to violate ordinance provisions.
§ 9.04.010  DEFINITIONS.
   A.   As used in this chapter, except where the context indicates otherwise,
the following mean:
      CITY. The City of Sweet Home.
      COUNCIL. The City Council of the city.
   B.   As used in this chapter, the singular includes the plural, the
masculine includes the feminine and the feminine includes the masculine.
   C.   The definitions contained in Oregon Criminal Code of 1971, with all
amendments thereto as now enacted or hereafter amended, are adopted by
reference and made a part of this chapter. Except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning, the general definitions and the definitions
appearing in the definitional and other sections of particular chapters of this
title shall be applicable throughout this title.
(Ord. 886, § 1, 1983)
§ 9.04.020  VIOLATION—PENALTY.
   A.   Violations of Oregon Revised Statutes made offenses against the city
are punishable to the same extent provided in the statutes.
   B.   Violations of §§
9.12.010,
9.12.020,
9.20.010,
9.20.020,
9.24.010 through
9.24.040,
9.32.010 through
9.32.030, and
Chapter 9.48 of this title are punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.
   C.   A violation of any other provision of this title is punishable by
imprisonment in jail not to exceed 30 days or a fine not to exceed $500, or
both.
(Ord. 1203, § 27, 2008; Ord. 1036, § 2Z4, 1991; Ord. 886, § 50, 1983)
§ 9.04.030  SOLICITING OR CONFEDERATING TO VIOLATE ORDINANCE PROVISIONS.
   No person shall solicit, aid, abet, employ or engage another or confederate
with another to violate a provision of this or any other title of the city.
Violation of this section shall be treated as a violation of the applicable
title provision.
(Ord. 886, § 55, 1983)
CHAPTER 9.08:  OREGON CRIMINAL CODE ADOPTED
Section
   
9.08.010   Adoption of Oregon Criminal Code.
§ 9.08.010  ADOPTION OF OREGON CRIMINAL CODE.
   The Oregon Criminal Code of 1971, with all amendments, is incorporated by
reference into this section as though fully set forth herein and any violation
of the code, as now enacted and hereafter amended, shall constitute an offense
against the city. The City Attorney shall have the authority to prosecute
violations of this section on behalf of the city.
(Ord. 1126, § 1, 1999; Ord. 1112, § 1, 1997; Ord. 1090, § 1, 1995; Ord. 1065, §
1, 1993; Ord. 1034, § 1, 1991; Ord. 1004, § 1, 1989; Ord. 967, § 1, 1987; Ord.
939, § 1, 1986; Ord. 919, § 1, 1984; Ord. 886, § 2, 1983)
CHAPTER 9.12:  OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST PUBLIC OFFICERS AND GOVERNMENT
Section
   
9.12.010   Police, fire and ambulance communications.
   
9.12.020   Obstruction of fire hydrants.
§ 9.12.010  POLICE, FIRE AND AMBULANCE COMMUNICATIONS.
   No person shall operate a generator or electromagnetic wave or cause a
disturbance of a magnitude that interferes with the proper functioning of a
police, fire department or ambulance radio communication system.
(Ord. 886, § 11, 1983)
§ 9.12.020  OBSTRUCTION OF FIRE HYDRANTS.
   No person shall place or maintain a bush, shrub, tree or other obstruction
within eight feet of a fire hydrant upon property adjacent to a street upon
which the fire hydrant is located.
(Ord. 886, § 31, 1983)
CHAPTER 9.16:  OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON
Section
   
9.16.010   Violating privacy of another.
   
9.16.020   Soliciting drinks.
§ 9.16.010  VIOLATING PRIVACY OF ANOTHER.
   No person shall enter onto land or into a building, used in whole or in part
as a dwelling, not his or her own, without permission of the owner or person
entitled to possession and, while so trespassing, look through or attempt to
look through a window, door or transom of the dwelling or that part of the
building used as a dwelling with the intent to violate the privacy of another
person.
(Ord. 886, § 22, 1983)
§ 9.16.020  SOLICITING DRINKS.
   No person shall frequent, loiter or be employed in a tavern, bar, night club
or cocktail lounge for the purpose of soliciting a person to purchase drinks.
No proprietor of such an establishment shall allow the presence in the
establishment of a person who violates the provisions of this section. This
section does not apply to persons regularly employed as bartenders, barmaids or
waitresses.
(Ord. 886, § 23, 1983)
CHAPTER 9.20:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
Section
   
9.20.010   Sidewalks.
   
9.20.020   Unnecessary noise.
   
9.20.030   Consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages in public places.
   
9.20.040   City property exclusion.
   
9.20.050   Enhanced law enforcement areas.
§ 9.20.010  SIDEWALKS.
   A.   No person shall make, assist in making or permit any loud, disturbing
or unnecessary noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the
comfort, repose, health, safety or peace of another person.
   B.   No person shall lead, ride, tie, fasten or allow to run at large a
horse, cow, goat, sheep, swine or similar animal in such manner as to permit it
to remain on or go along any parking strip, sidewalk area or public pathway.
(Ord. 886, § 17, 1983)
§ 9.20.020  UNNECESSARY NOISE.
   A.   No person shall make, assist in making or permit any loud, disturbing
or unnecessary noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the
comfort, repose, health, safety or peace of another person.
   B.   The following acts are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary
noises in violation of this section, but the enumeration shall not be construed
to be exclusive:
      1.   The keeping of any bird or animal, except a dog, which, by causing
frequent or long-continued noise, shall disturb the comfort and repose of any
person in the vicinity;
      2.   The use of engine brakes also known as “Jake brakes” inside the city
limits of the city;
      3.   The attaching of any bell to any animal or allowing a bell to remain
on any animal which is disturbing to any person in the immediate vicinity;
      4.   The use of any vehicle or engine, either stationary or moving, so
operated as to create any loud or unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or
other noise;
      5.   The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any vehicle on any
street, public or private place, except as a necessary warning of danger;
      6.   The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler,
except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of
danger or upon request of proper city authorities;
      7.   The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed air, steam
or otherwise, unless the noise thereby created is effectively muffled;
      8.   The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair
of any building in residential districts, other than between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of the
public welfare and safety, and then only with a permit granted by the building
officials;
      9.   The use of and gong or siren upon any vehicle, other than police,
fire or other emergency vehicle;
      10.   The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any
school, institution of learning, church or court of justice while the same are
in use or adjacent to any hospital or institution for the care of the sick or
infirm, which unreasonably interferes with the operation of the institution or
which disturbs or unduly annoys patients;
      11.   The discharge, in the open air, of the exhaust of any steam engine,
internal combustion engine, motor boat or motor vehicle, except through a
muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises
and the emission of annoying smoke;
      12.   The use or operation of any automatic or electric piano,
phonograph, radio, television, loudspeaker or any instrument for sound
producing or any sound-amplifying device so loudly as to disturb person(s) in
the vicinity thereof or in such a manner as renders the use thereof a nuisance;
provided, however, that, upon application to the Chief of Police (or, if a
sound-amplifying device is in a city park, to the Park Director), permits may
be granted for the broadcast or amplification of entertainment programs or to
any organization for the broadcast of programs of music, speeches or general
entertainment as a part of a national, state or city event, public festivals or
outstanding events of a non-commercial nature; provided that, the broadcast or
amplification shall not be audible for a distance of more than 1,000 feet from
the instrument, speaker or amplifier and, in no event, shall a permit be
granted where any obstruction to the free and uninterrupted traffic, both
vehicular and pedestrian, will result. This subsection does not apply to church
chimes or bells that are in proper working order and approved by the City
Council. The City Council, upon application to it, may grant understated
conditions a sound-amplifying permit to suspend the 1,000-foot limitation and
provide for the proper regulation of traffic;
      13.   The making of any noise by crying, calling or shouting or by any
means of any whistle, rattle, bell, gong, clapper, horn, hammer, drum, musical
instrument or other device for the purpose of advertising goods, wares or
merchandise or of attracting attention or of inviting patronage of any person
to any business whatsoever; provided that, newsboys may sell newspapers and
magazines by public outcry;
      14.   The conducting, operating or maintaining of any garage within 100
feet of any private residence, apartment, rooming house or hotel in such manner
as to cause loud or offensive noises to be emitted therefrom between the hours
of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; and/or
      15.   The running of the refrigeration unit, compressor and/or motor in
or about a refrigerated trailer within 300 feet of any residence for longer
than 15 minutes within any 24-hour period.
   C.   Further, this section does not apply, where the City Council has upon
application to it approved a permit for events or programs referred to in this
section for sound-producing or sound-amplifying devices that are audible for
more than 1,000 feet from the device or under 1,000 feet if traffic is
involved, upon conditions set by the City Council for either occurrence.
(Ord. 1278, § 1, 2019; Ord. 1203, §§ 31, 32, 2008; Ord. 1072, § 1, 1994; Ord.
1048, § 1, 1992; Ord. 1043, § 1, 1992; Ord. 955, § 13, 1986)
§ 9.20.030  CONSUMPTION OR POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to drink or consume any alcoholic
beverage while in or upon any public street, public alley, public grounds,
public building, or public place that is then and there open and available to
the general public including in a stationary motor vehicle on said premises.
   B.   It is unlawful to possess on one’s person any bottle, can, or other
receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage which has been opened, or upon
which a seal has been broken or from which the contents have been partially
removed while in or upon any premises or in a motor vehicle as described in
subsection A. of this section.
   C.   The prohibitions of subsections A. and B. of this section shall not
apply to any place wherein the possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages
is subject to the control or regulation of the Oregon Liquor Control
Commission, where otherwise permitted by state law or where otherwise
authorized by the City of Sweet Home or in any city park wherein a permit has
been granted.
   D.   For purposes of this section an alcoholic beverage means any liquid or
solid containing more than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume and
capable of being consumed by a human being.
   E.   A violation of this section is a violation punishable by a fine not to
exceed $500.00 and may be prosecuted under the provisions of SHMC
Chapter 9.36 and any amendments thereto.
(Ord. 1250, § 1, 2015)
§ 9.20.040  CITY PROPERTY EXCLUSION.
   A.   In addition to any other remedies or penalties provided by law any
Police Officer or Code Enforcement Officer may exclude any person who violates
a city or state criminal law including violations on city owned property,
includes leased city property other than on a city sidewalk, street or in a
city library or park from said real property as provided herein.
   B.   An exclusion issued under the provisions of this section shall be for
30 days. If the person to be excluded has been excluded from any city owned
real property at any time within two years before the date of the present
exclusion, the exclusion shall be for 90 days.
   C.   Written notice shall be given to any person excluded. The notice shall
specify the date and length of the exclusion and that the exclusion is for said
city owned real property and shall identify the provision of law the person has
violated. The notice shall inform the excluded person of the right to appeal,
including the time limit and the place of delivering the appeal. It shall be
signed by the issuing party. The notice shall prominently display a criminal
trespass warning describing the potential consequences of entering said
restricted city owned real property during the exclusion period.
   D.   Any person receiving an exclusion notice may appeal the issuance of
such notice by appealing to the City Manager. The appeal of the exclusion must
be made to the City Manager within five business days of the date of the
issuance of the exclusion notice. The City Manager or designee shall conduct a
hearing on the appeal within ten days from receipt of the appeal notice. At the
hearing both the appellant and the city shall be given an opportunity to
provide evidence on the exclusion. The City Manager or designee shall decide if
an offense did occur and if the length of expulsion is correct by reliable,
probative and substantial evidence on the record. The hearing held under this
section may be informal in nature but the presentation of evidence at the
hearing shall be consistent with the presentation of evidence required for
contested cases under O.R.S. 183.450.
   E.   After hearing the evidence the City Manager or designee may modify,
affirm, reverse the exclusion notice. The City Manager or designee shall make
his or her decision in writing which shall be provided to all parties and the
decision shall be made within five days of the hearing. The decision shall be
final and not appealable by either party to the hearing.
   F.   No person shall enter or remain in any said restricted city owned real
property at any time during which there is in effect a notice of exclusion
issued under this section excluding the person from the said restricted city
owned real property except an appeal of an exclusion notice automatically stays
the exclusion period until a decision on appeal is issued by the City Manager
or designee.
   G.   During the exclusion period the excluded person can contact the city to
conduct city business (not enter the excluded real property) and the city shall
use reasonable means to conduct the city business.
   H.   The violation provisions of this SHMC title do not apply to this
section, SHMC
9.20.040.
(Ord. 1257, § 1, 2017)
§ 9.20.050  ENHANCED LAW ENFORCEMENT AREAS.
   A.   Enhanced law enforcement areas are designed to protect the public from
those whose illegal conduct poses a threat to safety, health or welfare.
Enhanced law enforcement areas include the area within the City of Sweet Home
encircled by the following blue boundary (and including those portions of the
streets and rights-of-way therein): See Exhibit A attached to Ord. 1280 for
encircled area.
   B.   A person is subject to expulsion for a period of 30 days from entering
or remaining within an enhanced law enforcement area if that person has been
cited to appear and/or arrested within an enhanced law enforcement area for a
total of three or more instances of unlawful behavior within the enhanced law
enforcement area within the last 12 months. If the person to be expulsed has
been expulsed from that enhanced law enforcement area at any time within two
years before the date of the present expulsion, the expulsion shall be for 90
days. For purposes of this section, UNLAWFUL BEHAVIOR means violating or being
charged with violating the crimes and violations listed below:
 
1.  Criminal Homicide                     O.R.S. 163.005
2.  Rape, Sodomy, and Unlawful Sexual     O.R.S. 163.355 to O.R.S. 163.411
    Penetration
3.  Menacing and Recklessly Endangering   O.R.S. 163.190 and O.R.S. 163.195
    Another Person
4.  Intimidation                          O.R.S. 166.155 and O.R.S. 166.165
5.  Harassment                            O.R.S. 166.065
6.  Disorderly Conduct II                 O.R.S. 166.025
                                          O.R.S. 166.630 and O.R.S. 166.635
7.  Discharge of Weapons                  SHMC 9.32.010, 9.32.020, 9.32.030
                                          (See O.R.S. 166.172)
8.  Providing Liquor                      O.R.S. 471.410
9.  Minor in Possession of Alcohol        O.R.S. 471.430
10. Assault and Strangulation             O.R.S. 163.160 to O.R.S. 163.187
    Sexual Abuse, Contributing to the     O.R.S. 163.415, O.R.S. 163.425,
11. Delinquency of a Minor and Sexual     O.R.S. 163.427, O.R.S. 163.435, and
    Misconduct                            O.R.S. 163.445
12. Public Indecency                      O.R.S. 163.465
13. Controlled Substances                 O.R.S. 167.222, O.R.S. 167.262 and
                                          O.R.S. 475.525 to O.R.S. 475.894
14. Criminal Mischief                     O.R.S. 164.345 to O.R.S. 164.365
15. Criminal Mistreatment                 O.R.S. 163.200 and O.R.S. 163.205
16. Criminal Trespass                     O.R.S. 164.245 and O.R.S. 164.255
17. Unlawful Use of a Weapon              O.R.S. 166.220
18. Prostitution and Related Offenses     O.R.S. 167.007 to O.R.S. 167.017
19. Theft                                 O.R.S. 164.015 to O.R.S. 164.140
    Placing Offensive Substances in
20. Waters, on Highways or Other Property O.R.S.164.785 and O.R.S. 164.805
    and Offensive Littering
21. Arson and Related Offenses            O.R.S. 164.315 to O.R.S. 164.335
22. Purchasing Sex with a Minor           O.R.S. 163.413
23. Urinating or Defecating in Public     SHMC 9.24.050
    Places
24. Consumption or Possession of          SHMC 9.20.030
    Alcoholic Beverages in Public Places
    Any attempt to commit (as defined by O.R.S. 161.405) or conspiracy to
25. commit (as defined by O.R.S. 161.450 and O.R.S. 161.455) any of the above
    offenses.
 
   C.   If a person expulsed from an enhanced law enforcement area is found
within the perimeter of the enhanced law enforcement area during the expulsion
period, that person may be arrested for trespass in the second degree, as
defined by ORS 164.245. A person is not considered to be within the enhanced
law enforcement area if the person is within a vehicle that is passing through
the expulsion area.
   D.   The Chief of Police is designated as the person in charge of enhanced
law enforcement areas for the purpose of issuing expulsion notices in
accordance with this section. Any Sweet Home police officer can issue expulsion
notices in accordance with this section.
   E.   At the time a person is cited to appear and/or arrested within an
enhanced law enforcement area for any of the offenses specified in this
section, the officer making such cite to appear and/or arrest may deliver to
that person a written notice expulsing that person from the enhance law
enforcement area. Any expulsion notice shall not take effect until the sixth
day after the notice is issued.
      1.   The notice shall specify the area from which the person is expulsed,
the length of the expulsion, the penalty for entering the excluded area and
contain information concerning the right to appeal the expulsion to the Sweet
Home Municipal Court.
      2.   The person to whom the expulsion is issued shall sign a written
acknowledgment of receipt or the officer shall make a written record of the
refusal.
   F.   The person to whom an expulsion notice is issued shall have the right
to an appeal from the issuance of the notice. The expulsion notice will notify
the person of the right to appeal and process for appeal.
      1.   An appeal of the expulsion must be filed, in writing, within five
business days of the issuance of the notice. The appeal must be filed with the
Municipal Court. A hearing on the appeal shall be held before the Judge of the
Municipal Court within 20 business days of the appeal. The expulsion shall be
stayed during the pendency of the appeal. The decision of the Judge of the
Municipal Court shall be final.
      2.   The city shall have the burden to show by a preponderance of
evidence that the expulsion was based upon the conduct proscribed by this
section. Copies of documents in its control and which are intended to be used
by the city at the hearing shall be made available to the appellant at least
two days prior to the hearing.
      3.   A determination of the Judge of the Municipal Court that the officer
who issued the expulsion notice at the time had probable cause to cite and/or
arrest the person to whom the expulsion notice was issued for the conduct
described in this section shall be prima facie evidence that the expulsion was
based on conduct prohibited by those statutes, ordinances or code.
   G.   Variances from the expulsion may be granted at any time during the
expulsion period by the Chief of Police, or by the Municipal Court.
      1.   The Chief of Police or the Municipal Court shall grant a variance to
any person who can establish that he or she is a resident of the expulsion
area, is employed within the expulsion area, or will use the waiver to visit
the residence of a family member, to consult with an attorney, to attend
alcohol or drug treatment sessions, to attend religious services or otherwise
exercise a constitutional right, to pass through the expulsion area, to attend
a public meeting, to attend a court hearing, to engage in any activity ordered
by a court, to obtain social, medical or like services, or for employment
purposes. A variance may also be granted when, in the discretion of the Chief
of Police or the Municipal Court, the expulsion order is no longer necessary to
preserve public safety, health or welfare. The denial of a variance may be
appealed within five business days to the Municipal Court using the same
procedures as for an appeal of the imposition of the expulsion. The decision of
the Judge of the Municipal Court shall be final.
      2.   All variances shall be in writing, for a specific period of time and
only to accommodate a specific purpose, all of which shall be stated on the
variance.
      3.   The person shall keep the variance on his or her person at all times
the person is within the expulsion area.
(Ord. 1280, § 1, 2020)
CHAPTER 9.24:  OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
   
9.24.010   Flying model aircraft.
   
9.24.020   Travel over new street improvements.
   
9.24.030   Kindling of fires.
   
9.24.040   Obstructing passageways.
   
9.24.050   Urinating or defecating in public places.
§ 9.24.010  FLYING MODEL AIRCRAFT.
   A.   No person shall fly model aircraft within the city limits of Sweet Home
that are a small-scale version of an airplane, glider, helicopter, dirigible or
balloon that is used or intended to be used for flight and is controlled by
radio, electronic or similar free flight operation by a person on the ground or
otherwise.
   B.   No person shall fly within the city limits of Sweet Home any model
aircraft, by means of metal lines or other controls which will conduct
electricity, in a manner that the aircraft flies within 100 feet of an electric
power line or that at any point in the flight the model aircraft is closer to
an electric power line than to the operator of the controls.
   C.   This section does not apply to drones. See O.R.S. 837.385.
(Ord. 1132, 2000; Ord. 886, § 15, 1983; Ord. 1282, § 11, 2020)
§ 9.24.020  TRAVEL OVER NEW STREET IMPROVEMENTS.
   No person shall walk or ride or cause a vehicle to be operated, or cast any
object along or on a pavement, walk, curb or other surface of a hard surface
street improvement within the city before that portion of pavement, walk, curb
or other surface has been opened for public travel by the city, or before the
pavement, walk, curbing or other surface has set or hardened.
(Ord. 886, § 16, 1983)
§ 9.24.030  KINDLING OF FIRES.
   No person shall kindle or maintain a bonfire or rubbish fire or authorize
any such fire in the open air within the city without first obtaining a permit
or other proper authorization of the Fire Department.
(Ord. 1203, § 33, 2008; Ord. 886, § 30, 1983)
§ 9.24.040  OBSTRUCTING PASSAGEWAYS.
   A.   No person shall, except as otherwise permitted by this code, obstruct,
cause to be obstructed or assist in obstructing pedestrian or vehicular traffic
by depositing or storing personal property on a sidewalk or street.
   B.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the delivery of
merchandise or equipment, except that no person shall permit the merchandise or
equipment to remain on a street or sidewalk beyond a reasonable time.
   C.   No person shall, from sunset, to sunrise, permit any merchandise or
equipment or other obstruction to remain on a street or sidewalk. However, if
by the nature of the obstruction, it cannot be removed by sunset, a warning
light or lights shall be placed by the obstruction in a position as to be
clearly visible for a distance of at least 200 feet both ways.
   D.   No person shall use any portion of a street or sidewalk for selling,
storing or displaying merchandise or equipment.
   E.   No person shall allow or permit any personal property or real property
from or on that person’s real property to encroach on, over or above a sidewalk
unless otherwise allowed or permitted by law.
(Ord. 1240, §§ 18, 19, 2015; Ord. 1036, § 2Y1, 1991; Ord. 886, § 34, 1983)
§ 9.24.050  URINATING OR DEFECATING IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally or recklessly urinate
or defecate in any public place except a restroom or toilet facility maintained
for such purposes.
(Ord. 1279, § 1, 2019)
CHAPTER 9.28:  OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST MINORS
Section
   
9.28.010   Curfew hours for minors.
§ 9.28.010  CURFEW HOURS FOR MINORS.
   O.R.S. 419C.680 is incorporated by reference into this chapter and a
violation or failure to comply with the provisions of the statute as adopted
herein is an offense against the city and shall be punished as provided in
O.R.S. 419C.680(5), except that the curfew hours on Sunday through Thursday,
inclusive, are between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following
morning and on Friday and Saturday are between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00
a.m. of the following morning.
(Ord. 1203, § 36, 2008; Ord. 1113, § 1(part), 1997; Ord. 1064, § 1, 1993; Ord.
1036, § 2X, 1991; Ord. 886, § 3, 1983)
CHAPTER 9.32:  WEAPONS
Section
   
9.32.010   Discharge of gun or rocket.
   
9.32.020   Bows and crossbows.
   
9.32.030   Slingshots, flippers, air and pellet guns.
§ 9.32.010  DISCHARGE OF GUN OR ROCKET.
   A.   No person, other than an authorized police officer or animal control
officer in the performance of his or her duties, shall fire or discharge a gun
including a spring or air activated gun, nor shall a person propel a projectile
by use of explosives, combustibles or jet or rocket propulsion within the city
limits.
   B.   This section does not apply to areas designated by the city for the use
of the guns or legal fireworks.
(Ord. 1203, § 40, 2008; Ord. 1036, § 2Z1, 1991; Ord. 886, § 39, 1983)
§ 9.32.020  BOWS AND CROSSBOWS.
   No person shall carry a loaded bow or crossbow or discharge a bow or
crossbow in the city. This section does not apply to toys or to areas
designated by the city for the use of bows or crossbows.
(Ord. 886, § 43, 1983)
§ 9.32.030  SLINGSHOTS, FLIPPERS, AIR AND PELLET GUNS.
   A.   No person shall carry or possess a slingshot, flipper, air or pellet
gun, nor similar device equipped to fire a missile, without the use of black or
smokeless powder, between the hours of sunset and sunrise while on or within
the streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks or other public property of the city.
   B.   No person shall shoot, discharge or otherwise use the slingshot,
flipper or similar device for the purpose of propelling or throwing a shot,
stone or other missile within the city.
(Ord. 1036, § 2Z3, 1991; Ord. 886, § 44, 1983)
CHAPTER 9.36:  UNIFORM SHORT FORM COMPLAINT AND CITATION PROCEDURE
Section
   
9.36.010   Establishment and purpose.
   
9.36.020   Persons authorized to issue citation and sign complaint.
   
9.36.030   Delivery of the summons.
   
9.36.040   Violation - Penalty.
   
9.36.050   Enforcement.
   
9.36.060   Prosecution of offense designated as violation.
§ 9.36.010  ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE.
   A.   A procedure to handle certain city ordinance offenses as violations
through the issuance of citations, subject to the provisions set forth below,
is established pursuant to the home rule power granted to the city by Article
IV, Section 1, and Article XI, § 2, of the Oregon Constitution and Chapter 1, §
2, and
Chapter VII of the City Charter.
   B.   The State of Oregon has established in O.R.S. Chapter 153 a violation
procedure that sets forth the requirements involved in processing violations.
   C.   The city has designated certain offenses in its Sweet Home ordinances
and thereby Sweet Home Municipal Code sections as violations some being
formerly known as infractions.
   D.   The city shall use the procedures set forth in O.R.S. Chapter 153 to
process city violations and state violations.
   E.   As allowed by O.R.S, Chapter 153 and/or the home rule powers listed
above for city violations the following procedures and rights set forth in the
Sections of
Chapter 9.36 shall supplement the O.R.S. Chapter 153 procedures and rights for
processing city violations.
(Ord. 1203, § 43(part), 2008)
§ 9.36.020  PERSONS AUTHORIZED TO ISSUE CITATION AND SIGN COMPLAINT.
   A citation may be issued and a complaint may be signed by a police officer,
other city employee authorized by job description or otherwise to enforce the
provisions of a Sweet Home city ordinance that is alleged to have been violated
or a private citizen based upon having reasonable grounds to believe, and does
believe, that the person(s) cited or to be cited committed the violation.
(Ord. 1203, § 43(part), 2008)
§ 9.36.030  DELIVERY OF THE SUMMONS.
   A.   The city employee signing the complaint or the court shall cause the
summons to be delivered to the person who is alleged to have violated the Sweet
Home ordinance in issue.
   B.   Service shall be personal, by first class mail or certified mail,
except the procedures set out in O.R.S. 221.333 and O.R.S. 810.425 concerning
parking cases may be followed when applicable.
   C.   If the person against whom a complaint is or will be signed is a firm,
corporation or other organization, service of the summons to any managerial
employee, agent or representative thereof shall be sufficient to confer
jurisdiction.
(Ord. 1203, § 43(part), 2008)
§ 9.36.040  VIOLATION - PENALTY.
   The penalty for committing an offense designated as a violation of a state
statute shall be as set forth in the state statute. The penalty for committing
a city violation shall be a fine not to exceed $500. The Court may suspend a
fine, or a part thereof, on such conditions as it deems proper. Each day's
violation of a provision of a Sweet Home City ordinance and thereby Sweet Home
Municipal Code section designated as a violation shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Ord. 1203, § 43(part), 2008)
§ 9.36.050  ENFORCEMENT.
   A.   The procedure prescribed by this chapter shall be the procedure for
imposing fines for violation of the Sweet Home ordinances that are subject to
the procedure. However, the city may use other remedies set out in the Sweet
Home ordinances covered by this violation procedure to abate or alleviate Sweet
Home ordinance violations and recover expenses thereof.
   B.   The court may hold defendants in contempt of court for failing to
comply with its mandates.
   C.   Delinquent fines which are assessed against a property owner for
violations occurring on his or her real property, or for improper use of his or
her real property, may be imposed as city liens against said real property by
resolution of the City Council and collected in the same manner as other such
debts owing to the city, including using the procedures set out in §
8.04.250, as now enacted or hereafter amended.
   D.   The city may revoke or deny any city license or permit held or desired
by a person owing a fine to the city.
   E.   The court may order a defendant to remedy a violation as part of a
sentence and if the defendant does not comply with the court order, the court
may order the violation be remedied by the city with the costs thereof paid by
the defendant as the court directs.
(Ord. 1203, § 43(part), 2008)
§ 9.36.060  PROSECUTION OF OFFENSE DESIGNATED AS VIOLATION.
   A.   Procedures set out in this chapter for the prosecution of violations
shall apply to all violations of city ordinances that are designated as
violations, however, this section is not intended to apply to state traffic
violations covered by
Chapter 10.04, and amendments thereto, and the form and procedures set out in
O.R.S. 221.333 and O.R.S. 810.425 concerning parking cases may be followed when
applicable and the owner of a vehicle is responsible and liable as a defendant
for any city parking violations, including those in the vehicle code.
   B.   Where a city ordinance or Sweet Home Municipal Code section refers to
Chapter 9.36 and states infraction the reference is amended to read violation.
   C.   Enforcement Officer for city ordinance violations includes in its
meaning any person specifically named in an ordinance to enforce its provisions
and any city employee by job description authorized to enforce the ordinance
provisions.
   D.   The City of Sweet Home hereby retains and keeps to itself inviolate the
powers to enforce its city ordinances and Sweet Home Municipal Code sections as
allowed by law.
(Ord. 1203, § 43(part), 2008)
CHAPTER 9.48:  ALARM SYSTEMS
Section
   
9.48.010   Definitions.
   
9.48.020   Alarm user permits required.
   
9.48.030   Application for permit.
   
9.48.040   Duties of alarm businesses.
   
9.48.050   Duties of alarm user.
   
9.48.060   Unauthorized automatic dialing devices.
   
9.48.070   Sound emission cutoff feature.
   
9.48.080   False alarms.
   
9.48.090   Alarm equipment testing.
   
9.48.100   Violation and enforcement.
§ 9.48.010  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   ALARM BUSINESS. The business by any individual, partnership, corporation or
other entity of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering,
replacing, moving or installing any burglar, or robbery/panic alarm system, or
causing to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced,
moved or installed any such alarm system in or on any building, structure or
facility.
   ALARM SYSTEM. Any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical, arranged
to signal the presence of intrusion, illegal activity or other activity
requiring urgent attention.
   ALARM USER. The person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company
or organization, of any kind, in control of premises wherein an alarm system is
operating.
   AUTOMATED DIALING DEVICE. A device which is interconnected to a regular
telephone line and is programmed to select a particular phone number so that a
prerecorded voice message or a signal indicating the existence of a situation
detected by an alarm system may be transmitted to the selected telephone. As
used in this chapter, AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE includes any mechanical or
electrical device wired through telephone lines into the law enforcement
communications center for the purposes of advising of a burglary, robbery or
other emergency situation.
   FALSE ALARM. An alarm signal necessitating response by the emergency
services personnel where an emergency situation does not exist. Alarm signals
occurring due to violent acts of nature or other extraordinary circumstances
not reasonably subject to control by the alarm user are not FALSE ALARMS.
   INTERCONNECT. To connect an alarm system including an automated dialing
device to a telephone line, either directly or through a mechanical device that
utilizes a telephone circuit, for the purpose of using the telephone line to
transmit a message upon the activation of the alarm system.
   LAW ENFORCEMENT COMMUNICATIONS CENTER. The facility operated by the Sweet
Home Police Department and used to receive emergency and general information
from the public.
(Ord. 1092, § 1, 1996)
§ 9.48.020  ALARM USER PERMITS REQUIRED.
   A.   All alarm users shall obtain an alarm user’s permit from the Sweet Home
Police Department upon activating an alarm system. Systems using robbery/panic
and burglar alarm capabilities are required to obtain a permit for each
function. Application of the burglar or robbery/panic alarm permit and a $5 fee
for each must be filed with the Chief of Police for each year or part thereof.
All permits shall expire on the date of December 31. Each permit shall bear the
signature of the issuing official and the Chief of Police and shall be valid
for a period not to exceed one year. The permit shall be physically upon the
premises using the alarm system and there available for inspection by the Chief
of Police or his or her designee.
   B.   Residential alarm users over the age of 65 and being the principal
occupants of the premises wherein no business is conducted are not required to
pay the permit fee, but are required to obtain a permit.
   C.   Applications for permits more than 60 days after the need for such
permits are required shall require the payment of an additional permit fee per
alarm.
   D.   The fees referred to in this section shall be set by City Council
resolution.
(Ord. 1092, § 2, 1996; Ord. 1282, § 12, 2020)
§ 9.48.030  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   An applicant for a permit shall submit the application to the Sweet Home
Police Department. The application shall include the following information:
   A.   The street address and telephone number of the location where the alarm
system is to be used;
   B.   The name, home address and home telephone number of the alarm user;
   C.   The name and address to which notices should be mailed;
   D.   Whether the alarm is a burglary alarm or a robbery/panic alarm and
whether the alarm or the alarms are audible, silent or both;
   E.   If the alarm is audible, whether it is designed to automatically reset
after a certain number of minutes, and if so, the period of time it is designed
to function before automatically resetting;
   F.   In the order of their priority, the name, address and telephone number
of at least three persons, including the alarm user, who can be contacted in
the event of an alarm to assist the police in turning off the alarm or
investigating any suspected criminal activity;
   G.   If applicable, the type of business at the alarm system location;
   H.   If applicable, the type of residence such as a house, condominium,
apartment or other at the alarm system location;
   I.   The alarm user’s date of birth, if over the age of 65 and requesting an
exemption from the permit fee; and
   J.   If so equipped, the location and type (door, movement, etc.) of alarm
within a complex.
(Ord. 1092, § 3, 1996)
§ 9.48.040  DUTIES OF ALARM BUSINESSES.
   A.   Every alarm business selling or leasing to any user an alarm system
which is installed upon premises located within the city limits shall furnish
that person with instructions that provide adequate information to enable
persons using such equipment to operate it properly and where to obtain service
for the equipment at any time.
   B.   If the Chief of Police determines, in the Chief’s reasonable
discretion, that such information is incomplete, unclear or inadequate, the
Chief may require the alarm business to revise the information to meet the
Chief’s approval and then distribute the revised information to alarm users.
   C.   Every alarm business selling or leasing to any user an alarm system
which is installed upon premises located within the city limits shall furnish
that person with information regarding the need for an alarm user permit,
including an application and fee schedule.
(Ord. 1092, § 4, 1996)
§ 9.48.050  DUTIES OF ALARM USER.
   As soon as possible upon request by a police agency or the alarm business,
the alarm user, or a designee, shall respond to the alarm location to assist
the police in turning off the alarm or investigating any suspected criminal
activity.
(Ord. 1092, § 5, 1996)
§ 9.48.060  UNAUTHORIZED AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICES.
   It is unlawful for any person to program an automatic dialing device to
select a telephone line assigned to the law enforcement communications center
and it is unlawful for an alarm user to fail to disconnect or reprogram an
automatic dialing device which is programmed to select or transmit to the law
enforcement communications center telephone line, within 24 hours of notice
that it is so programmed.
(Ord. 1092, § 6, 1996)
§ 9.48.070  SOUND EMISSION CUTOFF FEATURE.
   Alarm systems which emit audible sound which can be heard outside the
building, structure or facility of the alarm user, shall be equipped with a
sound emission cutoff feature which will stop the emission of sound 15 minutes
or less after the alarm is activated.
(Ord. 1092, § 7, 1996)
§ 9.48.080  FALSE ALARMS.
   Signals from an alarm system which are false alarms are declared to be a
public nuisance. The user may have an allowance for three false alarms
occurring within a period of time starting from the date an alarm permit is
issued until it expires. Subsequent false alarms within that period shall be
charged a graduated fee as set forth in a resolution of City Council. Payment
of service charges are payable within 60 days of notification that the charges
are due. In addition to any and all other penalties provided for in this
chapter, failure to pay the assessed service charge shall result in the user’s
permit being suspended.
(Ord. 1092, § 8, 1996; Ord. 1282, § 13, 2020)
§ 9.48.090  ALARM EQUIPMENT TESTING.
   Whenever a user of an alarm system deems it necessary to test or otherwise
intentionally set off or activate an alarm system located on user’s premises,
the user shall notify user’s monitoring station that he or she intends to test
or otherwise intentionally activate that alarm prior to actual tests being
conducted. Audible-only alarm users, which are not monitored by an alarm
business, shall first notify the Sweet Home Police Department of the intent to
test. Failure to do so will result in the user being considered as having had a
false alarm.
(Ord. 1092, § 9, 1996)
§ 9.48.100  VIOLATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   Violation of this chapter constitutes a violation and may be prosecuted
under
Chapter 9.36 of this code as now enacted or hereafter amended.
(Ord. 1237, § 1 (part), 2013; Ord. 1092, § 10, 1996)
 
TITLE 10: VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
      Chapter
         
10.04.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT
         
10.08.   STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
         
10.11.   ABANDONED, DISABLED AND HAZARDOUS VEHICLES
         
10.12.   (RESERVED)
         
10.16.   DESTROYED, ABANDONED AND JUNK VEHICLES
         
10.20.   SKIS, COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES AND SIMILAR DEVICES
         
10.24.   BICYCLES
         
10.28.   TRAILER HOUSES, RECREATIONAL VEHICLES, TRAILER PARKS AND RECREATIONAL
VEHICLE PARKS
         
10.32.   ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES
CHAPTER 10.04:  TRAFFIC REGULATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT
Section
   
10.04.010   Adoption of Oregon Vehicle Code.
   
10.04.020   Definitions.
   
10.04.030   Powers of the City Council.
   
10.04.040   Authority of police and fire officers.
   
10.04.050   Duty to obey traffic signs and signals.
   
10.04.055   Heavy motor truck traffic—Prohibited.
   
10.04.060   Permits required for parades.
   
10.04.070   Trains not to block streets.
   
10.04.080   Boarding or alighting from vehicles.
   
10.04.090   Unlawful riding.
   
10.04.100   Damaging sidewalks and curbs.
   
10.04.110   Obstructing streets.
   
10.04.120   Removing glass and debris.
   
10.04.130   Effect of regulations.
   
10.04.140   Games in street—Restricted.
   
10.04.145   Unlawful transfer on vehicular portion of the right-of-way.
   
10.04.150   Violation—Penalty.
§ 10.04.010  ADOPTION OF OREGON VEHICLE CODE.
   The Oregon Vehicle Code, with all amendments, is incorporated by reference
into this section as though fully set forth herein and any violation of the
Code as now enacted or hereafter amended shall constitute an offense against
the city. The City Attorney shall have the authority to prosecute violations of
this section on behalf of the city.
(Ord. 1126, § 2, 1999; Ord. 1112, § 2, 1997; Ord. 1090, § 2, 1995; Ord. 1065, §
2, 1993; Ord. 1035, § 1, 1991; Ord. 1003, § 1, 1989; Ord. 966, § 1, 1987; Ord.
936, § 1, 1985; Ord. 918, § 1, 1984; Ord. 866, § 1, 1982; Ord. 380, § 1, 1961)
§ 10.04.020  DEFINITIONS.
   In addition to those definitions contained in the adopted sections of the
motor vehicle laws of Oregon, the following words or phrases, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning, shall mean:
   ALLEY. A narrow street through the middle of a block.
   BUS STAND. A fixed area in the roadway adjacent to the curb to be occupied
exclusively by buses for layover in operating schedules or waiting for
passengers.
   CURB. The extreme edge of the roadway.
   HEAVY MOTOR TRUCKS. Motor trucks or combinations of motor trucks and
trailers that have a total gross unloaded vehicle weight exceeding 26,000
pounds and have three or more axles.
   HOLIDAYS. Where used in this chapter or on signs erected in accordance with
this chapter, Sundays, New Year’s Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day and any other legal holidays designated as
such by the statutes of the State of Oregon.
   LOADED. Carrying cargo.
   LOADING ZONE. A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of
vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials or freight.
   PARKWAY. That portion of a street not used as a roadway or as a sidewalk.
   PASSENGER LOADING ZONE. Reserved only for the loading or unloading of
passengers and their luggage.
   PERSON. Every natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation.
   TAXICAB STAND. A fixed area in the roadway adjacent to the curb set aside
for taxicabs to stand or wait for passengers.
   TRAFFIC LANE. That portion of the roadway used for the movement of a single
line of vehicles.
   TRUCK ROUTE. A way over certain streets within the city, as established by
resolution of the City Council, over and along which loaded heavy motor trucks
are allowed to operate.
(Ord. 1088, § 2, 1995; Ord. 1042, § 1, 1992; Ord. 1036, § 2B, 1991; Ord. 380, §
2, 1961)
§ 10.04.030  POWERS OF THE CITY COUNCIL.
   The Council, provided, where required by the motor vehicle laws of Oregon,
approval of the state’s Highway Commission has first been obtained, may by
resolution establish or alter traffic controls and parking controls which shall
become effective upon the installation of appropriate signs, signals or other
markings. All signs, signals, or other markings in place as of January 1, 2020,
shall be considered to be traffic controls and parking controls that have been
given full force and effect.
(Ord. 1203, § 46, 2008; Ord. 488, 1965; Ord. 380, § 3, 1961; Ord. 1282, § 15,
2020)
§ 10.04.040  AUTHORITY OF POLICE AND FIRE OFFICERS.
   A.   It shall be the duty of the Police Department, through its officers, to
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   In the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to
safeguard pedestrians, officers of the Police Department may direct traffic as
conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter.
   C.   Members of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct
or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity.
(Ord. 380, § 4, 1961)
§ 10.04.050  DUTY TO OBEY TRAFFIC SIGNS AND SIGNALS.
   No driver of any vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any traffic sign,
signal, marker, barrier or parking meter placed in accordance with the motor
vehicle laws of Oregon or this chapter, including those erected by any
authorized public utility and department of this city or other authorized
person, unless it is necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or
otherwise directed by a police officer.
(Ord. 1036, § 2C, 1991; Ord. 380, § 5, 1961)
§ 10.04.055  HEAVY MOTOR TRUCK TRAFFIC—PROHIBITED.
   A.   It is a violation of this section for any person to move, operate or
drive, or cause to be moved, operated or driven, any heavy motor truck on any
street except on an established truck route designated under authority of the
city without a route permit issued by the city. All permits will expire within
one year of the date of issue. Permits will be issued on the basis of written
criteria. Permits shall be processed within three days.
   B.   This section shall not apply to the following:
      1.   Emergency vehicles or vehicles owned by public entities that are on
official business or on an emergency call;
      2.   Any detoured heavy motor truck being operated on any officially
established city detour; provided, it would not have been a violation of this
section for the loaded heavy motor truck to be operated on the street from
which the detour was established;
      3.   Any heavy motor truck being operated on a street other than a truck
route for a specific purpose of picking up or discharging goods at any
residence on a one-time basis; or are in the process of servicing construction
sites which have a valid building permit; and
      4.   Any unloaded heavy motor truck traveling to or from the operator’s
residence from the nearest designated truck route.
   C.   A person aggrieved by a decision made by the city, or a person
challenging the implementation of the permit criteria may appeal the decision
by filing a written request with the City Manager’s office for consideration by
the City Council. The appeal shall describe with particularity the decision
from which the person appeals and shall comply with subsection E. of this
section.
   D.   Appeals of decisions must be filed within 15 days of the date of the
decision. The appeal shall state:
      1.   The name and address of the appellant;
      2.   The nature of the determination being appealed;
      3.   The reason the determination is incorrect; and
      4.   What the correct determination of the appeal should be.
   E.   An appellant who fails to file such a statement within the time
permitted waives his or her objections and his or her appeal shall be
dismissed.
   F.   Unless the appellant and the city agree to a longer period, an appeal
shall be heard within 15 days of the receipt of the notice of intent to appeal.
At least seven days prior to the hearing, the city shall mail notice of the
time and location thereof to the appellant.
   G.   The City Council shall hear and determine the appeal on the basis of
the appellant’s written statement and any additional evidence the City Council
deems appropriate. At the hearing, the appellant may present testimony and oral
argument personally or by counsel. The rules of evidence as used by courts of
law do not apply.
   H.   The appellant shall carry the burden of proving that the determination
being appealed is incorrect and what the correct determination should be.
   I.   The City Council shall issue a written decision by resolution within 20
days after the hearing date and that decision shall be final.
(Ord. 1088, § 1, 1995; Ord. 1042, § 2, 1992; Ord. 1282, §§ 16, 17, 2020)
§ 10.04.060  PERMITS REQUIRED FOR PARADES.
   No procession or parade, except a funeral procession, the forces of the
United States Armed Forces and the military forces of the state shall occupy,
march or proceed along any street except in accordance with a permit issued
pursuant to Chapter 5.25 of this code.
(Ord. 1285, § 2, 2020; 380, § 21, 1961)
§ 10.04.070  TRAINS NOT TO BLOCK STREETS.
   No person shall operate any train or train of cars, or permit the same to
remain standing, so as to block the movement of the traffic upon any street for
a period of time longer than ten minutes.
(Ord. 380, § 32, 1961)
§ 10.04.080  BOARDING OR ALIGHTING FROM VEHICLES.
   No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while the vehicle is in
motion.
(Ord. 380, § 33, 1961)
§ 10.04.090  UNLAWFUL RIDING.
   No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed or
intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an
employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty or to a person or persons
riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise as allowed by law.
(Ord. 1036, § 2M, 1991; Ord. 380, § 35, 1961)
§ 10.04.100  DAMAGING SIDEWALKS AND CURBS.
   A.   The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon or within any sidewalk or
parkway area except to cross at an authorized permanent or temporary driveway.
   B.   No person shall place any dirt, wood or other material in the gutter or
space next to the curb of any street with the intention of using the same as a
driveway.
   C.   No person shall remove or damage in any way any portion of any curb or
move any heavy vehicle or thing over or upon a curb or sidewalk without first
notifying the City Engineer and the person shall be held responsible for any
and all damage.
(Ord. 380, § 39, 1961)
§ 10.04.110  OBSTRUCTING STREETS.
   No person shall park or leave any vehicle or any part thereof, or any
trailer, box, ware or merchandise of any description, or any other thing that
in any way impedes traffic, or obstructs the view, upon any street, including
any alley, parking strip, sidewalk or curb, except by the lawful use and
parking of vehicles upon streets and alleys as is allowed by this chapter or
other ordinances of the city.
(Ord. 380, § 40, 1961)
§ 10.04.120  REMOVING GLASS AND DEBRIS.
   Any person causing glass to be broken upon, or any party to a collision or
other vehicle accident upon any street in the city shall immediately remove or
cause to be removed from the street all glass and other foreign substance.
(Ord. 380, § 41, 1961)
§ 10.04.130  EFFECT OF REGULATIONS.
   A.   No parent of any minor child and no guardian of any minor ward shall
authorize or knowingly permit any such minor child or ward to violate any of
the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Provisions of this chapter relating to bicycles shall apply whenever a
bicycle is operated upon any street or upon any public path set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated herein.
(Ord. 380, § 42, 1961)
§ 10.04.140  GAMES IN STREET—RESTRICTED.
   It is unlawful for any person to play in or make use of the streets reserved
for vehicle traffic in the city for any other purpose than for vehicles or to
allow his or her child(ren) or any other child(ren) in his or her care or
charge to make such prohibited use of the street except that the pedestrian may
cross the street at the places designated in this chapter.
(Ord. 1036, § 2L, 1991)
§ 10.04.145  UNLAWFUL TRANSFER ON VEHICULAR PORTION OF THE RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   A.   A person commits the violation of unlawful transfer on a vehicular
portion of the right-of-way if the person, while a driver or passenger in a
vehicle on a public highway, street or road within the boundaries of the City
of Sweet Home, gives or relinquishes possession or control of, or allows
another person in the vehicle to give or relinquish possession or control of
any item of property to a pedestrian.
   B.   This section does not apply if the vehicle is legally parked.
(Ord. 1276, § 1, 2019)
§ 10.04.150  VIOLATION—PENALTY.
   A.   Violations of Oregon Revised Statutes made offenses against the city
are punishable to the same extent provided in the statutes.
   B.   Violation of any other provisions of this chapter constitutes a
violation and may be prosecuted under the provisions of
Chapter 9.36.
(Ord. 1237, § 1 (part), 2013; Ord. 876, § 16E, 1982; Ord. 380, § 46, 1961)
CHAPTER 10.08:  STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
Section
   
10.08.010   Private marking unlawful.
   
10.08.020   Method of parking.
   
10.08.030   Prohibited parking.
   
10.08.040   Use of loading zone.
   
10.08.050   Use of passenger loading zone.
   
10.08.055   Improper use of transit shelters.
   
10.08.060   Stopping, standing or parking of buses and taxicabs regulated.
   
10.08.070   Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands.
   
10.08.080   Moving vehicles.
   
10.08.100   Exemption.
   
10.08.110   Emergency vehicle.
   
10.08.120   Towing of unlawfully parked vehicles.
   
10.08.130   Amendments.
   
10.08.135   Procedures for removal.
   
10.08.140   Sale of vehicles.
   
10.08.150   Parking zones.
   
10.08.160   Violation—Penalty.
§ 10.08.010  PRIVATE MARKING UNLAWFUL.
   It is unlawful for any person to letter, mark or paint in any manner any
letters, marks or signs on any sidewalk, curb, street or alley, or to post on a
parking strip anything designed or intended to prohibit or restrict parking in
front of any sidewalk, dwelling house, business house or in any alley, except
in compliance with the provisions of this chapter or as authorized by the City
Council.
(Ord. 1036, § 2E, 1991; Ord. 380, § 8, 1961)
§ 10.08.020  METHOD OF PARKING.
   A.   No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a street other than parallel
with the edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of lawful traffic
movement and with the curbside wheels of the vehicle within 12 inches of the
edge of the curb, except where the street is marked or signed for angle
parking.
   B.   Where parking space markings are placed on a street, no person shall
stand or park a vehicle other than at the indicated direction and within a
single marked space, unless the size or shape of the vehicle makes compliance
impossible.
   C.   Whenever the owner or driver of a vehicle discovers that the vehicle is
parked immediately in front of or close to a building to which the Fire
Department has been summoned, he or she shall immediately remove the vehicle
from the area, unless otherwise directed by police or fire officers.
(Ord. 380, § 9, 1961)
§ 10.08.030  PROHIBITED PARKING.
   In addition to provisions of the motor vehicle laws of Oregon prohibiting
parking, no person shall park:
   A.   A vehicle upon any bridge, viaduct or other elevated structure used as
a street or within a street tunnel in the city, unless marked or indicated
otherwise;
   B.   A vehicle in any alley, except to load or unload persons or materials
not to exceed 20 consecutive minutes in any two-hour period;
   C.   A vehicle upon any street for the principal purpose of:
      1.   Displaying the vehicle for sale;
      2.   Washing, greasing or repairing the vehicle, except repairs
necessitated by an emergency;
      3.   Selling merchandise from the vehicle, except in a duly established
market place or when so authorized or licensed under the ordinances of this
city; and/or
      4.   Storage or as junkage or dead storage for more than 24 hours.
   D.   A vehicle upon any parkway, except where specifically authorized;
   E.   A vehicle upon any street, except an alley, for more than 48 hours;
   F.   A vehicle in violation of authorized signage or barrier; and
   G.   Vehicles that are parked in violation of subsections C.4. and E. of
this section may be towed and disposed of as if the vehicle were an “abandoned
vehicle”, under O.R.S. 819.110 to O.R.S. 819.215, inclusive. Vehicles that are
parked in violation of subsection F. may be towed and disposed of as if the
vehicle were a “traffic hazard” under O.R.S. 819.120 to O.R.S. 819.215
inclusive with notice being given within 48 hours. The persons involved shall
have all the rights and duties created thereby. This authority to tow and
dispose of the vehicle is in addition to any other authority to tow or dispose
of vehicles.
(Ord. 1240, § 20, 2015; Ord. 1187, § 5, 2006; Ord. 1036, §§ 2F—2I, 1991; Ord.
985, § 1, 1989; Ord. 380, § 10, 1961)
§ 10.08.040  USE OF LOADING ZONE.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of
time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and
loading of materials, freight or passengers in any place designated as a
loading zone during the hours when the provisions applicable to loading zones
are in effect. In no case shall the stop in unmetered loading zone for loading
and unloading of passengers and personal baggage exceed five minutes, nor the
loading or unloading of materials exceed 15 minutes.
(Ord. 380, § 11, 1961)
§ 10.08.050  USE OF PASSENGER LOADING ZONE.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of
time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any
place designated as a passenger loading zone during the hours when the
provisions applicable to passenger loading zones are in effect.
(Ord. 380, § 12, 1961)
§ 10.08.055  IMPROPER USE OF TRANSIT SHELTERS.
   A.   Definitions.
      APPROVED BUS SERVICE. Includes the Linn Shuttle, Sweet Home Shopper and
Dial-a-Bus services.
      TRANSIT SHELTER. All bus stop shelters, and non-covered bench areas
related to bus transportation that are used by the general public for boarding,
disembarking or waiting for an approved bus service.
   B.   Improper use of transit shelter. No person shall:
      1.   Enter or remain upon, occupy or use a transit shelter for purposes
other than boarding, disembarking or waiting for an approved bus service;
      2.   Lie down on or across the seats or the floor of a transit shelter
seating;
      3.   Remain in or upon a transit shelter for a period in excess of two
hours within a 24-hour period;
      4.   Place any object or substance on the seats of a transit shelter
seating that inhibits the proper use of such seats; or
      5.   Block or obstruct the use of the seats or floor area of a transit
shelter.
   C.   Exclusion.  In addition to other measures provided for in city or state
laws, the city may exclude an individual from all transit shelters for a
violation of any provision of this section, or a violation of any city
ordinance of the City of Sweet Home or any statute of the State of Oregon while
in or within 20 feet of a transit shelter as set forth below.
   D.   Issuance of exclusion notice. In addition to any other remedies or
penalties provided by law any police officer may exclude any person who
violates the provisions of this section, city ordinances of the City of Sweet
Home or any statute of the State of Oregon from any and all transit shelters in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
   E.   Procedure for exclusion.
      1.   An exclusion issued under the provisions of this section shall be
for 30 days. If the person to be excluded has been excluded from any transit
shelter at any time within two years before the date of the present exclusion,
the exclusion shall be for 90 days.
      2.   At the time a person is cited to appear and/or arrested a police
officer may deliver to that person a written notice excluding that person from
any or all transit shelters and the area within 20 feet of the shelter. The
exclusion shall take place immediately and apply to all transit shelters. A
violation of a second or subsequent offense of this section during the
specified exclusion time period may result in a charge of criminal trespass in
the second degree (ORS 164.245) and/or interfering with public transportation
(ORS 166.116).
      3.   The notice shall specify the area from which the person is excluded,
the length of the exclusion, the penalty for entering the excluded area and
contain information concerning the right to appeal the exclusion to the City
Manager.
   F.   Appeal and variance.
      1.   Any person receiving an exclusion notice may appeal the issuance of
such notice by appealing to the City Manager. The appeal of the exclusion must
be made to the City Manager within five business days of the date of the
issuance of the exclusion notice. The City Manager or designee shall conduct a
hearing on the appeal within ten days from receipt of the appeal notice. At the
hearing both the appellant and the city shall be given an opportunity to
provide evidence on the exclusion. The City Manager or designee shall decide if
an offense did occur and if the length of expulsion is correct by substantial
evidence on the record. The hearing held under this section may be informal in
nature but the presentation of evidence at the hearing shall be consistent with
the presentation of evidence required for contested cases under O.R.S. 183.450.
An appeal of an exclusion notice automatically stays the exclusion period until
a decision on appeal is issued by the City Manager or designee. The decision
shall be final and not appealable by either party to the hearing.
      2.   An individual with a disability who is transit-dependent shall not
be issued a complete exclusion from the transit shelters unless the person
engaged in violent, seriously disruptive criminal conduct, or in conduct posing
a serious threat to the safety of others or to the operation of the transit
system. Absent such a finding, if the City Manager determines that a violation
occurred, the City Manager shall order a qualified exclusion to permit the
person with a disability to use the transit system for trips of necessity,
including travel to and from medical and legal appointments, school or training
classes, places of employment, obtaining food, clothing and necessary household
items, or for accessing any critical services. Any person asserting the right
to a qualified exclusion on the basis of transit dependence shall have the
burden of establishing transit dependence by a preponderance of the evidence.
      3.   Any qualified exclusion may be granted at any time during the
exclusion period by the Chief of Police, his or her designee or by the City
Manager.
      4.   All qualified exclusions shall be in writing, for a specific period
of time and only to accommodate a specific purpose, all of which shall be
stated in the qualified exclusion.
      5.   The person shall keep the qualified exclusion on his or her person
at all times the person is within the area of exclusion.
      6.   In the event a person is found to be outside the scope of the terms
of the qualified exclusion, the qualified exclusion shall immediately become
void and that person is subject to arrest for the crime of criminal trespass in
the second degree (ORS 164.245) and/or interfering with public transportation
(ORS 166.116).
      7.   Except as otherwise stated above for violations of ORS, violation of
this section constitutes a violation and may be prosecuted under the provisions
of SHMC Chapter 9.36.
(Ord. 1281, 2020)
§ 10.08.060  STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING OF BUSES AND TAXICABS REGULATED.
   The driver of a bus or taxicab shall not stand or park the vehicle upon any
street in any business district at any place other than at a bus stand or
taxicab stand, respectively, except that this provision shall not prevent the
driver of any taxicab from temporarily stopping for the purpose of and while
actually engaged in the loading or unloading of passengers.
(Ord. 380, § 13, 1961)
§ 10.08.070  RESTRICTED USE OF BUS AND TAXICAB STANDS.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus
stand or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, except that the driver of a
passenger vehicle may temporarily stop for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading passengers when the stopping does not interfere
with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter the zone.
(Ord. 380, § 14, 1961)
§ 10.08.080  MOVING VEHICLES.
   The moving of any vehicle within the block shall not be deemed to extend the
time of parking.
(Ord. 380, § 15, 1961)
§ 10.08.100  EXEMPTION.
   The provisions of this chapter regulating the parking or standing of
vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a city department or public utility
while necessarily in use for construction or repair work on the street or any
vehicle owned by the United States while in use for the collection,
transportation or delivery of United States mail.
(Ord. 380, § 17, 1961)
§ 10.08.110  EMERGENCY VEHICLE.
   A.   The provisions of this chapter regulating the operation, parking and
standing of vehicles shall apply to authorized emergency vehicles except as
provided by the Motor Vehicle Laws of Oregon and as follows:
      1.   A driver, when operating the vehicle in an emergency, except when
otherwise directed by a police officer or other authorized persons, may park or
stand notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter; and
      2.   A driver of a police vehicle or Fire Department or patrol vehicle,
when operating the vehicle in an emergency, may disregard regulations governing
turning in specified directions, as long as he or she does not endanger life or
property.
   B.   The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, protect the driver of any
such vehicle from the consequences of his or her reckless disregard of the
safety of others.
(Ord. 380, § 45, 1961)
§ 10.08.120  TOWING OF UNLAWFULLY PARKED VEHICLES.
   O.R.S. 98.805, to and including O.R.S. 98.818, are adopted and incorporated
by reference into this chapter as though fully set forth herein.
(Ord. 1187, § 6, 2006; Ord. 956, § 1, 1986)
§ 10.08.130  AMENDMENTS.
   A.   The provision in O.R.S. 98.812(1) that states “...and placed in storage
at a public garage or public parking lot” is defined to include storage at a
parking or storage area or facility operated by a towing service which has a
valid towing certificate issued by the State of Oregon, and the towing operator
shall have a lien as a garagekeeper or public parking operator under O.R.S.
98.812.
   B.   Where O.R.S. 98.805 refers to “state,” it is defined to include city,
and where O.R.S. 98.812 refers to “local law enforcement agency”, it is defined
to mean Sweet Home Police Department.
   C.   Where O.R.S. 98.830 refers to “owner, or is in lawful possession” it is
defined to include City Manager or designee, city police officer or enforcement
officer of the city code and “private property” is defined to include city
owned property which includes city parking lots but excludes public ways.
(Ord. 956, §§ 3, 4, 1986; Ord. 1282, § 18, 2020)
§ 10.08.135  PROCEDURES FOR REMOVAL.
   The procedures for removal of abandoned motor vehicles under O.R.S. 98.830
to O.R.S. 98.840 inclusive may be used for removing abandoned motor vehicles
from City of Sweet Home-owned property (excluding public ways) in addition to
any other method to remove motor vehicles as provided by law.
(Ord. 1187, § 7, 2006)
§ 10.08.140  SALE OF VEHICLES.
   A.   No person shall park or cause to be parked upon any roadway or private
property any vehicle displaying any sign, picture, transparency, advertisement
or mechanical device for the purpose of advertising or which advertises or
brings notice to any person, verbal or otherwise, the fact that the vehicle is
to be sold.
   B.   Exceptions to subsection A. are as follows:
      1.   Vehicles displayed by a car dealer who is authorized and duly
licensed by the State of Oregon at his or her approved car lot;
      2.   One vehicle displayed on the private property deeded to or being
purchased on contract by the registered owner of the vehicle; provided that, it
is not displayed for the purpose of operating a car sales business, and the
advertising sign and the like is not more than ten by 12 inches and includes
name, address and telephone number of the registered owner of the vehicle; and
      3.   One vehicle displayed on private property rented by the registered
owner of the vehicle where he or she resides or regularly operates a business;
provided that, it is not displayed for the purpose of operating a car sales
business and the advertising sign and the like is not more than ten by 12
inches and includes name, address and telephone number of the registered owner
of the vehicle.
(Ord. 969, § 1, 1987)
§ 10.08.150  PARKING ZONES.
   A.   The City Manager is authorized to establish and maintain zones to be
known as “parking zones” in the following streets:
      1.   Main Street from Highway 228 east of 18th Avenue;
      2.   Long Street from the Ames Creek Bridge east of 18th Avenue;
      3.   9th Avenue from Main Street to Nandina Street;
      4.   10th Avenue from Long Street to Main Street;
      5.   12th Avenue from Kalmia Street to Nandina Street;
      6.   13th Avenue from Kalmia Street to Nandina Street;
      7.   15th Avenue from Main Street to Nandina Street; and
      8.   And from time to time hereafter as traffic conditions required, in
such other streets as are selected by resolution of the city for the location
of such zones.
   B.   In the parking zones, the City Manager shall cause parking spaces to be
designated and shall fix the time limitations for legal parking in such zones,
and the hours during the day and night when time limitations shall be
effective, in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and shall indicate
the time limitations by designating the same by appropriate signs posted in
proximity to the zones.
(Ord. 1036, § 2K, 1991; Ord. 380, § 19, 1961)
§ 10.08.160  VIOLATION—PENALTY.
   A.   Violation of this chapter constitutes a violation and may be prosecuted
under the provisions of
Chapter 9.36 as now enacted or hereafter amended.
   B.   The city may abate any vehicle that violates this chapter by following
the procedures for abatement set forth in
Chapter 10.16 as now enacted or hereafter amended.
   C.   The remedies, which include any penalties, provided for in this chapter
shall be cumulative and not exclusive and shall be in addition to any and all
other remedies available to the city.
(Ord. 1237, § 1 (part), 2013; Ord. 969, § 2, 1987)
CHAPTER 10.11:  ABANDONED, DISABLED AND HAZARDOUS VEHICLES
Section
   
10.11.010   Definitions.
   
10.11.020   State law.
   
10.11.030   Authority to remove.
   
10.11.040   Disposal of vehicle appraised at $500 or less.
Cross-reference:
   Abandoned vehicles on public property (not public way), see §
10.08.135
   Discarded vehicles on private property, see §
10.16.010
   Prohibited parking, see §
10.08.030
   Prohibited parking in parking facility, see §
10.08.120
Statutory reference:
   Abandoned vehicles on private property, see O.R.S. 98.830
   Movement of illegally parked vehicles on highway by police, see O.R.S.
810.430
   Prohibited parking in parking facility, see O.R.S. 98.805
§ 10.11.010  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE. A vehicle left unoccupied and unclaimed on the public way
for a continuous period for more than 48 hours.
   DISABLED VEHICLE. A wrecked, partially dismantled, dismantled and/or junked
vehicle that cannot be lawfully driven upon a public way, a vehicle not
currently licensed and/or a vehicle that cannot be driven in its present
condition whether for safety reasons or operational malfunction.
   HAZARDOUS VEHICLE. A vehicle left in a location or condition that
constitutes an immediate or continuous hazard to the safety of persons using a
public way in the city. For example, not for limitation, the following are
hazardous vehicles:
      1.   Vehicles with leaking petroleum or other potential hazardous fluids;
      2.   Vehicles with broken glass/windows;
      3.   Vehicles storing refuge and garbage as to present a particular
health hazard;
      4.   Vehicles parked so that any part of the vehicle extends within the
paved portion of the travel lane; and
      5.   Vehicles parked so that any part of the vehicle extends within the
highway shoulder or bicycle lane.
   HEARING TIMELY REQUESTED. A hearing is timely requested to prevent the
removal of the vehicle until after a hearing if it is requested before the
vehicle is removed and a hearing is timely requested to object to the removal
and custody of the vehicle and the charges associated therewith if it is
submitted to the City of Sweet Home as the law specifies not more than five
days from the mailing of the notice or affixing the notice to the vehicle. The
five-day period does not include holidays, Saturday or Sundays.
   PUBLIC WAY. Any highway, road, street, alley, thoroughfare and place
including bridges, viaducts and other structures within the boundaries of the
City of Sweet Home open, used or intended for use of the general public for
vehicles or vehicular traffic as a matter of right.
(Ord. 1187, § 2, 2006)
§ 10.11.020  STATE LAW.
   The procedures set forth in O.R.S. 819.110 to and including O.R.S. 819.215
for abandoned, disabled and hazardous vehicles upon a public way shall be
followed as set forth for the City of Sweet Home an authority described therein
with the definitions of this chapter to apply to the concerned vehicle.
(Ord. 1240, § 21, 2015; Ord. 1187, § 3, 2006; Ord. 1282, § 19, 2020)
§ 10.11.030  AUTHORITY TO REMOVE.
   The authority to remove vehicles under this chapter is an addition to any
other authority to remove a vehicle as allowed by law.
(Ord. 1187, § 4, 2006)
§ 10.11.040  DISPOSAL OF VEHICLE APPRAISED AT $500 OR LESS.
   The procedures set forth in O.R.S. 819.215 may be followed to dispose of a
vehicle appraised at $500 or less. The authority under this section to dispose
of vehicles is in addition to any other provided by law.
(Ord. 1203, § 48, 2008)
CHAPTER 10.12:  (RESERVED)
CHAPTER 10.16:  DESTROYED, ABANDONED AND JUNK VEHICLES
Section
   
10.16.010   Definitions.
   
10.16.020   Declaration of public nuisance.
   
10.16.030   Prohibited action—Duty to move.
   
10.16.040   Notice for abatement.
   
10.16.050   Remedies.
   
10.16.060   Notice.
   
10.16.070   Time.
   
10.16.080   Landlord exception.
   
10.16.090   Right to inspect and take property.
   
10.16.100   Context.
   
10.16.110   Police investigations.
Editor’s note:
   Former code §§ 10.16.010, 10.16.020, 10.16.030 and 10.16.150 were repealed
by Ord. 1187, § 8.  The remaining sections have been renumbered to flow
consistently.
§ 10.16.010  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter:
   DISCARDED VEHICLE. A vehicle, whether licensed or unlicensed, of any kind
which is parked, stored or left upon any public property, other than on a
public way, or private property within the city in excess of seven days and is
in one or more of the following conditions: abandoned, inoperative, wrecked,
dismantled, partially dismantled and/or junked, unless the vehicle is
completely enclosed within a building or in an area that is completely enclosed
by a solid fence, other solid structure and/or by vegetation, and is not
visible from a public street, other public area or other private property, or
unless its in connection with a business enterprise properly operated in the
appropriate business zone, but in no case shall an abandoned, inoperative,
wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled and/or junked vehicle be exposed at
the business in excess of 30 days. This section shall not be interpreted to
allow any condition, activity or conduct that is prohibited by other laws.
DISCARDED VEHICLES include major parts of vehicles, including, but not limited
to, bodies, engines, transmissions and rear ends.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any authorized enforcement officer of the city, city
Building Official or police officer.
   PERSON IN CHARGE OF THE PROPERTY. An agent, occupant, lessee, contract
purchaser, owner or person having possession, control or title to property
where a vehicle is located.
   VEHICLE. Any device in, upon or by which a person or property is or may be
transported or drawn on a public highway, except devices moved by human power
or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
   VEHICLE OWNER OR OWNER OF THE VEHICLE. An individual, firm, corporation or
unincorporated association with a claim, either individually or jointly, of
ownership or an interest, legal or equitable, in a vehicle.
(Ord. 990, § 1, 1989; Ord. 952, § 1, 1986)
§ 10.16.020  DECLARATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   The parking, storing or leaving of a vehicle in violation of the provisions
of this chapter is found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of
property; to promote blight, deterioration and unsightliness; to invite
plundering; to create fire hazards; to constitute an attractive nuisance
causing a hazard to the health and safety of minors; to create a harborage for
rodents and insects; and to be injurious to the health, safety and general
welfare of the public. Therefore, the presence of a discarded vehicle on
private or public property is declared to constitute a public nuisance which
may be abated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 952, § 2, 1986)
§ 10.16.030  PROHIBITED ACTION—DUTY TO MOVE.
   No person shall park, store, leave or permit to be parked, stored or left, a
discarded vehicle within the city and it shall be the duty of the owner of the
vehicle and it shall also be the duty of the person in charge of the property
upon which the vehicle is located, to move the discarded vehicle so that it is
in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. A person who is not in
compliance with this section is in violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 952, § 3, 1986)
§ 10.16.040  NOTICE FOR ABATEMENT.
   Before removal of a discarded vehicle under the terms of this chapter,
written notice shall be given as provided herein. The enforcement officer shall
give written notice to the registered or other owner of the vehicle which is in
violation of this chapter and/or give notice to the person in charge of the
property upon which the vehicle is situated to the effect that the parking,
storing, leaving or permitting the parking, storing or leaving of the vehicle
is in violation of this chapter. The disposition of any vehicle shall be as if
it were an “abandoned vehicle” under O.R.S. 819.110 to O.R.S. 819.215 inclusive
and the persons involved shall have all the rights and duties created thereby
except as otherwise provided by this chapter. Further, a vehicle does not have
to be posted as a part of the notice process or have a citation affixed to it
before it is towed when it is on private property.
(Ord. 1240, § 23, 2015; Ord. 1036, § 2Z9, 1991; Ord. 952, § 4, 1986)
§ 10.16.050  REMEDIES.
   A.   Violation of this chapter constitutes a violation and may be prosecuted
under the provisions of SHMC Chapter 9.36. Each day’s violation of a provision
of this chapter shall be a separate offense.
   B.   The remedies, which include any penalties, provided for in this chapter
or section thereof, shall be cumulative and not exclusive and shall be in
addition to any and all other remedies available to the city.
(Ord. 952, § 18, 1986; Ord. 1282, § 20, 2020)
§ 10.16.060  NOTICE.
   Any notice in this chapter sent by mail shall be deemed to have been given
and served by the deposit in the mail of a letter, by certified mail,
containing the notice and addressed to the person at his or her last known
address. Upon completion of the mailing of any notice, the person mailing the
notice shall execute and file a certificate stating the date and place of the
mailing.
(Ord. 952, § 19, 1986)
§ 10.16.070  TIME.
   A.   In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this chapter,
the day of the act, event or default from which the designated period of time
begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period so computed
shall be included, unless it is a Saturday or a legal holiday, including
Sunday, in which event the period runs until the end of the next day which is
not a Saturday or a legal holiday. When the period of time prescribed or
allowed is less than 11 days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal
holidays shall be excluded in the computation. As used in this rule, LEGAL
HOLIDAY means “legal holiday”, as defined in O.R.S. 187.010 and 187.020.
   B.   Whenever a person has the right or is required to do some act or take
some action within a prescribed period after the service of a notice or other
paper upon the person and the notice or paper is served by mail, three days
shall be added to the prescribed period.
(Ord. 952, § 20, 1986)
§ 10.16.080  LANDLORD EXCEPTION.
   Notwithstanding any other provision or section in this chapter, a
residential landlord is not to be held personally liable nor have a lien placed
on the rental property for any costs and expenses, including any administrative
costs and expenses incurred in the removal, preservation, custody, sale and/or
disposition of a renter’s vehicle taken from the rented property.
(Ord. 952, § 22, 1986)
§ 10.16.090  RIGHT TO INSPECT AND TAKE PROPERTY.
   The person or persons charged with inspecting a vehicle or taking a vehicle
into their possession, in accordance with the procedure set out in this
chapter, shall have the right, at reasonable times, to enter on private
property, remain there for so long as it takes to inspect or remove the vehicle
and leave the property. Any person interfering with the inspection or removal
of the vehicle shall be prosecuted under applicable criminal laws as they apply
to the situation.
(Ord. 952, § 23, 1986)
§ 10.16.100  CONTEXT.
   In construing this chapter, and where the context so requires, the singular
includes the plural, the masculine the feminine, and all grammatical changes
shall be implied to make the provisions hereof apply equally to individuals,
firms, partnerships, corporations and associations of persons.
(Ord. 952, § 24, 1986)
§ 10.16.110  POLICE INVESTIGATIONS.
   This chapter does not apply to vehicles being held as part of any criminal
investigation by the Police Department of the city.
(Ord. 952, § 26, 1986)
CHAPTER 10.20:  SKIS, COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES AND SIMILAR DEVICES
Section
   
10.20.010   Use of roller skates and skateboards—Restricted.
   
10.20.020   Skis on streets.
   
10.20.030   Penalties.
§ 10.20.010  USE OF ROLLER SKATES AND SKATEBOARDS—RESTRICTED.
   No person upon in-line skates, roller blades, skates, skateboards or riding
in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicles or similar device shall go upon any
street or area or premises open to the public where the use is prohibited and
no person shall use the devices upon any sidewalk restricted from bicycle use
under §
10.24.010 or on any city-owned or operated parking lot.
(Ord. 1128, § 1, 2000; Ord. 1073, § 1, 1994; Ord. 1036, § 2N, 1991; Ord. 380, §
37, 1961)
§ 10.20.020  SKIS ON STREETS.
   No person shall use the streets for traveling on skis, toboggans, sleds or
similar devices, except upon play streets.
(Ord. 380, § 38, 1961)
§ 10.20.030  PENALTIES.
   Violation of this chapter constitutes a violation and may be prosecuted
under the provisions of Sweet Home Municipal Code
Chapter 9.36 and any amendments thereto.  Each day’s violation of a provision
of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 1203, § 49, 2008)
CHAPTER 10.24:  BICYCLES
Section
   
10.24.010   Registration.
   
10.24.020   Violations.
§ 10.24.010  REGISTRATION.
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to operate or use a bicycle upon any of
the streets, sidewalks, alleys or public highways of the city without first
obtaining from the Police Department a license therefor.
   B.   The Police Department is authorized and directed to issue upon written
application bicycle licenses which each shall be valid for the life of the
bicycle. The license, when issued, shall entitle the licensee to operate the
bicycle for which the license has been issued upon the streets, sidewalks,
alleys and public highways in the city.
   C.   The city shall provide license stickers, together with registration
cards, the registration cards to be issued by the Chief of Police or assistants
designated by him or her. The license stickers and registration cards are to
have numbers stamped thereon in numerical order, beginning with number one, and
the letters “Sweet Home, OR” stamped thereon; the license stickers shall be
suitable for attachment upon the frames of bicycles, at a place designated by
the Police Department, and it shall be the duty of the bicycle owner to attach
one such license sticker to the frame of each bicycle. The Police Department
shall issue a corresponding registration card to the licensee upon the payment
of the license fee which shall be set by City Council resolution. The license
stickers shall remain attached during the existence of the license. The Police
Department shall also keep a record of the date of issue and number of the
license and to whom issued. If ownership of the bicycle changes, or the owner
changes address, it shall be the responsibility of the new owner to notify the
Police Department of the changes.
   D.   No person shall ride or operate any bicycle on any sidewalk on Main
Street between 9th Avenue and 18th Avenue; on Long Street between 10th Avenue
and 15th Avenue; on 10th Avenue, 12th Avenue, 13th Avenue and 15th Avenue
between Long Street and Main Street of the city, except bicycles used for
delivery of papers, merchandise or mail and except such vehicles with more than
two wheels used by a disabled person. Pedestrians shall have the right-of-way
over bicycles on all sidewalks. No person shall ride or operate any bicycle on
any sidewalk in a careless manner, or in any manner that endangers the safety
of the pedestrian or places a pedestrian in fear of his or her safety. No
person shall ride or operate any bicycle on any area or premises open to the
public where the use is prohibited.
   E.   The above restrictions referred to in subsection D. of this section on
operating a bicycle on a public sidewalk on certain streets shall not apply to
a police officer acting in the course of his or her duties.
(Ord. 1128, § 2, 2000; Ord. 1066, § 1, 1993; Ord. 1036, § 2J, 1991; Ord. 1282,
§ 21, 2020)
§ 10.24.020  VIOLATIONS.
   Violation of this chapter constitutes a violation and may be prosecuted
under the provisions of
Chapter 9.36 and any amendments thereto. Each day’s violation of a provision of
this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 1240, § 24, 2015; Ord. 1237, § 1 (part), 2013; Ord. 1066, § 2, 1993)
CHAPTER 10.28:  TRAILER HOUSES, RECREATIONAL VEHICLES,
TRAILER PARKS AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS
Section
   
10.28.010   Definitions.
   
10.28.020   Limited parking; permit parking.
   
10.28.030   Permitted acts.
   
10.28.040   [Reserved].
   
10.28.050   [Reserved].
   
10.28.060   Penalties and remedies.
§ 10.28.010  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter the following words and phrases, unless the context
otherwise requires, shall mean:
   HUMAN OCCUPANCY. The use of a trailer house, recreational vehicle or
recreational structure, other than for storage.
   RECREATIONAL STRUCTURE. A tent, yurt, fabric structure or similar structure
with or without plumbing, heating or cooking facilities intended to be used by
any particular occupant on a limited-time basis for seasonal, emergency or
transitional housing purposes.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A camping or travel trailer, motor home or other
similar unit with or without motive power which is designed for temporary human
occupancy for recreational, travel or vacation uses.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK. A privately-owned place authorized by the city in
accordance with the zoning title and licensed by the State of Oregon to
accommodate recreational vehicles for temporary human occupancy.
   STORAGE. The parking or placing of an unoccupied trailer house, recreational
vehicle or recreational structure during periods when not in use or not on
display for sale.
   TRAILER HOUSE. Any portable structure or vehicle constructed or designed to
permit its occupancy for dwelling or sleeping purposes or any other form of
human occupancy, including mobile homes and travel trailers having permanent
kitchen and bath facilities.
   TRAILER HOUSE OR RECREATIONAL VEHICLE SALES LOT. Any place in accordance
with the zoning title non-occupied trailer houses or recreational vehicles are
located or displayed for purposes of sale to other individuals.
   TRAILER PARK. A privately-owned place authorized by the city in accordance
with the zoning title and licensed by the State of Oregon to accommodate
trailer houses for human occupancy.
(Ord. 1239, § 1, 2014; Ord. 873, § 1, 1982)
§ 10.28.020  LIMITED PARKING; PERMIT PARKING.
   A.   No person shall park or place, or allow to be parked or placed, any
recreational vehicle or recreational structure used for human occupancy within
the city for any period of time exceeding seven days in any one year period
except in a trailer park or recreational vehicle park which has been approved
by the city and issued a valid certificate of sanitation or except where a
permit has been issued and is in good standing as set forth herein. No person
shall violate the provisions of this chapter or terms of any permit issued
thereunder.
   B.   After the seven day period a person shall obtain a permit(s) from the
city upon payment of permit fee(s) set by resolution of the City Council to
park or place any recreational vehicle used for human occupancy within the
city. No permit or series of permits shall exceed 60 days within a one year
period for a parcel of real property within the city and only one recreational
vehicle can be permitted at a time for a parcel of real property.
   C.   An application for a permit issued by the city shall contain
information needed to process the permit including but not limited to the
applicant’s name and signature, number of occupants in the recreational
vehicle, the date the permit begins and the date the permit ends, the owner of
the real property, the owner of the recreational vehicle, a description of the
recreational vehicle including the licence plate number and other legal
identification of the recreational vehicle, and the address and the Tax
Assessor’s lot and map numbers of the parcel of real property. A site map shall
be furnished by the applicant with an application indicating the location of
the recreational vehicle on the real property. As part of the application at
least one of the owners of the real property must sign the application
approving the recreational vehicle placement. The city shall issue a placard to
the applicant that shows the time period of the permit. The placard shall be
displayed within view from the outside of the front door of the recreational
vehicle at all times while the permit time is running.
   D.   In addition to any other authority, upon application for a permit being
issued the City Building Official, Building Inspector, engineering staff or any
other authorized city designee shall inspect the recreational vehicle for
proper and operable water and sewage facilities before a permit is granted.
Each recreational vehicle shall have a proper and operable sink and toilet.
   E.   The time periods described above run with the real property for
calculation of days allowed not the person(s) or recreational vehicle referred
to in this section. The time period set out on a permit shall be the time
period used for calculation of time allowed in any one year period whether the
recreational vehicle was on the real property during that time period or not. A
recreational vehicle or the real property upon which it is placed under this
permit system is hereby declared a public nuisance when it is in violation of
the provisions of this chapter.
   F.   No person shall allow or permit any “gray water” or human waste
products to be disbursed upon the ground or otherwise be outside of the
recreational vehicle while the recreational vehicle is on the real property
except directly into an approved and active city sewer system location or
approved septic system on the real property which hookup shall be a requirement
of each permit that exceeds the first 15 day period for the one year period.
Each recreational vehicle shall be supplied with external running water before
a permit is granted that exceeds the first 15 day period for the one year
period. No permit shall be granted for occupation by more people than the
recreational vehicle is designed by the manufacturer to accommodate. No permit
shall be granted to a person or for real property where a person has been found
by the Judge of the Sweet Home Municipal Court to be in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter, or for real property where a revocation has
occurred until at least one full year has passed from the date of the violation
or revocation.
   G.   The City Building Official, Building Inspector, Code Enforcement
Officer or peace officer can revoke the permit for having no operating sink
and/or toilet; allowing the recreational vehicle to become unsafe structurally
to occupy; allowing the recreational vehicle or area around it to become a
public nuisance, as defined by state law or city ordinance; allowing more than
the number of occupants stated in the permit to occupy the recreational
vehicle; and for not complying with the provisions of this chapter. The
applicant has a right to appeal any revocation by filing with the Sweet Home
Municipal Court a request for a hearing before the Judge of the Sweet Home
Municipal Court on the revocation within five business days of the revocation.
The decision of the Judge of the Sweet Home Municipal Court shall be a final
decision for the city. The Judge of the Sweet Home Municipal Court has the
authority to revoke a permit and order the cleanup of the real property and/or
removal of the recreational vehicle and order the costs thereof be paid by the
appellant or defendant and a lien placed on the property for said costs if paid
by the city.
   H.   Notwithstanding the above time limits, the operation of this section
shall be suspended during a time not to exceed ten days when the electricity to
the real property is not functioning because of a natural emergency.
(Ord. 1239, § 2, 2014; Ord. 1052, § 1, 1992; Ord. 873, § 2, 1982)
§ 10.28.030  PERMITTED ACTS.
   A.   The storage of trailer houses or recreational vehicles not in use
through any form of human occupancy is permitted within the city subject to the
following conditions:
      1.   Providing the trailer house or recreational vehicle is located
within a garage or carport;
      2.   Providing the trailer house or recreational vehicle is parked or
placed in accordance with the lot coverage, yard, setback and area standards
for structures as required by the city’s zoning title; and
      3.   Providing the trailer house or recreational vehicle is maintained in
a structurally safe condition and not permitted to become unsafe by reason of
inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence or abandonment.
   B.   A sales lot for trailer houses or recreational vehicles where allowed
by the city zoning title.
   C.   Any person, firm or corporation that has a trailer house or
recreational vehicle legally parked in the city at the time that this chapter
goes into effect shall be permitted to continue the existing use of the
particular trailer house or recreational vehicle at its present location if the
use was permitted prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this
section. Permitted acts under this section are declared void if any of the
following conditions occur:
      1.   A change in the location;
      2.   A change in the use; and/or
      3.   Permitting the trailer house or recreational vehicle to become
structurally unsafe, dilapidated, obsolete, abandoned and otherwise unsafe by
reason of inadequate maintenance.
   D.   The city shall create a temporary construction residential permit,
herein called the TCR permit, to be of a form and content prescribed by the
Building Official, and required by subsection E. of this section.
   E.   Notwithstanding the provisions of §
10.28.020, a person can occupy a travel trailer or recreational vehicle, herein
referred to as a temporary construction residence, in conjunction with the
building of a structure that is to be used as a residence, upon the following
conditions and terms.
      1.   The temporary construction residence shall be occupied by only the
owner of the real property and his or her immediate family and the owner shall
state on the TCR permit the names and the number of family members to occupy
the temporary construction residence.
      2.   The owner shall have a valid building permit from the city for the
proposed residence before the TCR permit will be issued.
      3.   The real property shall have an approved sewer system in place
before the TCR permit will be issued. The temporary construction residence
shall be connected with the sewer system at the time it is moved onto the real
property, unless a temporary operable self-contained toilet and sewage system
is approved by the Building Official. The temporary construction residence
shall be equipped with and have an operable toilet at all times.
      4.   The real property shall have an approved water source in place
before the TCR permit will be issued. The temporary construction residence
shall be connected with the water source at the time it is moved onto the real
property. The temporary construction residence shall be equipped with and have
an operable sink at all times.
      5.   The temporary construction residence shall be placed on the real
property in accordance with the yard setbacks, and parking standards for
residences as required by the city zoning laws. If other options are not
practicable, the temporary construction residence can be placed in the approved
parking area for the residence. The owner shall indicate on the building plot
plan where the temporary construction residence will be located during the
construction period, before the TCR permit will be issued.
      6.   A TCR permit is valid for six months from the date that it is
issued. A one-time, six-month TCR permit extension may be granted by the
Building Official upon a showing of good cause.
      7.   The owner shall pay an application fee set by City Council
resolution upon applying for the TCR permit, which is nonrefundable.
      8.   No person shall acquire a vested right to have the temporary
construction residence on the real property arising through the TCR permit and
shall verify notice of the same on the TCR permit form.
      9.   The Building Official shall be given access into the temporary
construction residence to inspect it, at reasonable times, for water and sewer
hook-up compliance, as well as for other safety or health considerations, and
the owner shall give his or her permission for the inspection upon the TCR
permit form.
      10.   The Building Official can revoke the TCR permit for the following
reasons:
         a.   No operating toilet and/or sink;
         b.   The temporary construction residence has become unsafe
structurally to occupy;
         c.   The owner has permitted or allowed the temporary construction
residence or area around it to become a public nuisance, as defined by state
law or city ordinance;
         d.   The owner has allowed other people and/or more than the number of
occupants stated on the TCR permit to occupy the temporary construction
residence; and
         e.   The owner is not complying with a provision or term of this
chapter.
      11.   At the time of expiration of the terms of the TCR permit, including
any extension thereof, construction residence shall be immediately brought into
compliance with this chapter, other applicable city ordinances and state law.
The temporary construction residence shall be disconnected from any sewer
system and water source, and no further occupation of the temporary
construction residence shall be permitted, except as otherwise provided by this
chapter.
      12.   The city can cause the temporary construction residence to be
removed from the real property, with the contents thereof (at which time a city
lien is created on the temporary construction residence for the cost of the
removal and storage), and stored for violating this chapter, upon giving the
owner written notice of the city’s intent to remove the temporary construction
residence on or after a date certain, not less than five days from the date on
the notice. The owner shall be personally responsible for and pay any and all
costs and expenses associated with the removal and storage of the temporary
construction residence, and that if not duly paid, the temporary construction
residence can be sold to pay the costs and expenses, and that if the sale
proceeds do not cover the costs and expenses, including costs and expenses of
sale, the remaining unpaid balance shall become a lien on the real property
that the temporary construction residence was taken from by resolution of the
City Council. The lien shall be entered on the city lien docket and shall bear
interest at 9% per annum, and be subject to collection and foreclosure in the
same manner as is now or hereafter provided for the foreclosure of liens under
O.R.S. 223.505 to 223.595 on property within the city. Interest shall accrue
from the date of the entry of the lien in the city lien docket. The owner, by
his or her accepting the TCR permit, shall thereby agree, which agreement shall
be made a part of the TCR permit, that the city can proceed to dispose of his
or her property as set out above. Nothing herein shall limit the city from
proceeding against the owner personally, or using any other remedy open to it
to collect the costs and expenses due. Any contents of the temporary
construction residence taken by the city, pursuant to processes in this
subsection in which the temporary construction residence is being disposed of
under this subsection, shall be returned to the owner or person who has a right
to possession thereof upon the request of the person, and no lien shall attach
to the contents.
      13.   The owner, by his or her acceptance of the TCR permit, agrees to
abide by all the terms and conditions set out in this chapter, a statement of
which shall be made a part of the TCR permit form.
      14.   The owner shall state on the TCR permit the name of all persons
(including entities) that have an interest in the temporary construction
residence and the real property and shall immediately inform the Building
Official of any changes thereto during the temporary residence period.
(Ord. 1239, §§ 3, 4, 5; Ord. 987, § 1, 1989; Ord. 873, § 3, 1982; Ord. 1282, §
22, 2020)
§ 10.28.040  [RESERVED]
§ 10.28.050  [RESERVED]
§ 10.28.060  PENALTIES AND REMEDIES.
   A.   Violation of this chapter constitutes a violation and may be prosecuted
under the provisions of
Chapter 9.36 as now enacted or hereafter amended. The remedies, which include
penalties herein, provided for in this chapter or sections thereof, shall be
cumulative and not exclusive and shall be in addition to any and all other
remedies available to the city.
   B.   Abatement of the violations of this chapter can be accomplished by any
remedy open to the city, including using the procedures set out in
Chapter 8.04 as now enacted or hereafter amended, for abatement of nuisances.
In addition, when abatement is performed by the city pursuant to
Chapter 8.04, the cost thereof shall become a lien on all the personal property
taken by the city pursuant to the abatement process. The lien shall bear
interest at 9% per annum and be subject to collection and foreclosure by
following the procedure set out in O.R.S. 87.152 et al, as services performed,
with all parties having the rights and duties thereof.
   C.   In addition to any other authority given, the City Building Official,
Building Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer or peace officer are authorized
hereby to enforce this SHMC Chapter except for §
10.28.030D. and E. where the Building Official and his or her Building
Inspector shall enforce the TCR provisions. These persons have a right to
inspect the permitted vehicles at reasonable times in accordance with the law.
(Ord. 1239, § 7, 2014; Ord. 1237, § 1 (part), 2013; Ord. 987, § 2, 1989; Ord.
873, § 6, 1982)
CHAPTER 10.32:  ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES
Section
   
10.32.010   Purpose.
   
10.32.020   Definitions.
   
10.32.030   Operation of all-terrain vehicles on streets authorized.
   
10.32.040   Regulations for operation of all-terrain vehicles.
   
10.32.050   Licensed driver 16 years or older required.
   
10.32.060   All-terrain vehicle operator permit required.
   
10.32.070   Safety equipment requirements.
   
10.32.080   Helmet requirements.
   
10.32.090   Safety belt requirements.
   
10.32.100   Speed limits.
   
10.32.110   Prohibition on operating all-terrain while driving privileges
suspended.
   
10.32.120   Financial requirements.
   
10.32.130   Hours of operation rules.
   
10.32.140   Posting.
   
10.32.150   Liability.
   
10.32.160   Snowmobiles.
   
10.32.170   Modifications.
   
10.32.180   Penalties.
§ 10.32.010  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to authorize the operation of all-terrain
vehicles on city streets within the City of Sweet Home subject to the terms,
provisions, rights and responsibilities as set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 1275, § 1, 2019)
§ 10.32.020  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions are hereby
established:
   ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE(S) (ATV(S)). Class I All-Terrain Vehicles, Class II All-
Terrain Vehicles, Class III All-Terrain Vehicles, and/or Class IV All -Terrain
Vehicles.
   ATV OPERATOR PERMIT. The ATV Safety Education Card issued upon completion of
an Oregon Parks and Recreation Departments approved ATV Safety Education course
and passage of the minimum standards test of ATV Safety Education competency as
established by the Oregon Parks and Recreation Department as set forth in OAR
736-004-0015(10).
   CLASS I ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES.
      1.   As defined by O.R.S. 801.190, is a motorized, off-highway
recreational vehicle that:
         a.   Is 50 inches or less in width;
         b.   Has a dry weight of 1,200 pounds or less;
         c.   Travels on three or more pneumatic tires that are six inches or
more in width and that are designed for use on wheels with a rim diameter of 14
inches or less;
         d.   Uses handlebars for steering;
         e.   Has a seat designed to be straddled for the operator; and
         f.   Is designed for or capable of cross-country travel on or
immediately over land, water, sand, snow, ice, marsh, swampland, or other
natural terrain.
      2.   CLASS I ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES may also be known as quads, three-
wheelers, or four wheelers.
   CLASS II ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES.
      1.   As defined by O.R.S. 801.193 is any motor vehicle that:
         a.   Weighs more than or is wider than a Class I All- Terrain Vehicle;
         b.   Is designed for or capable of cross-country travel on or
immediately over land, water, sand, snow, ice, marsh, swampland, or other
natural terrain;
         c.   Is not a Class IV All-Terrain Vehicle; and
         d.   Is street-legal, is registered under O.R.S. 803.420, and has a
roof or roll bar.
      2.   CLASS II ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES may also be known as four-by-fours,
pickups, jeeps, sand rails, dune buggies, and SUV's.
   CLASS III ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE. As defined by O.R.S. 801.194, CLASS III ALL-
TERRAIN VEHICLE means a motorcycle that travels on two tires and that is
actually being operated off highway.
   CLASS IV ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE(S).
      1.   Class IV is any motorized vehicle that:
         a.   Travels on four or more pneumatic tires that are six inches or
more in width and that are designed for use on wheels with a rim diameter of 14
inches or less;
         b.   Is designed for or capable of cross-country travel on or
immediately over, land, water, snow, ice, marsh, swampland or other natural
terrain;
         c.   Has non-straddle seating;
         d.   Has a steering wheel for steering control;
         e.   Has a dry weight of 1,800 pounds or less; and
         f.   Is 65 inches wide or less at its widest point, or current
manufacturing standards of width and weight from the factory.
      2.   CLASS IV ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES may also be known as side-by-sides.
   DRIVER LICENSE. Has the meaning given that term under O.R.S. 801.245.
   HOURS OF OPERATIONS. Daylight hours - means one hour before sunrise to one
hour after sunset.
   MOTORCYCLE HELMET. Has the meaning given that term under O.R.S. 801.366.
O.R.S. 801.366 defines a MOTORCYCLE HELMET as a protective covering for the
head consisting of a hard, outer shell, padding adjacent to and inside the
outer shell and a chin-strap type retention system with a sticker indicating
that the motorcycle helmet meets standards established by the United States
Department of Transportation.
   STREET(S). All roads, streets, and alleys, other than Highway 20 and Highway
228 as located within the boundaries of the City of Sweet Home that are open,
used or intended for use of the general public for vehicles or vehicular
traffic as a matter of right.
   TRAFFIC LAW(S). Any and all Oregon statutes and regulations relating in any
way to the operation or use of motorized vehicles, including, without
limitation, the Oregon Vehicle Code (O.R.S. Chs. 801 to 826) and any
regulations or administrative rules promulgated thereunder.
(Ord. 1275, § 2, 2019)
§ 10.32.030  OPERATION OF ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES ON STREETS AUTHORIZED.
   Subject to the provisions of this chapter, Class IV ATV’s may be operated on
streets subject to the conditions and restriction set forth under O.R.S.
821.200. All-terrain vehicles are prohibited from operating under this chapter
on Highway 20 and Highway 228 as located within the city, except that a person
may, while operating a Class IV ATV, cross the above highways to the extent
permitted under applicable Oregon law, including, without limitation, O.R.S.
821.200(1).
(Ord. 1275, § 3, 2019)
§ 10.32.040  REGULATIONS FOR OPERATION OF ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES.
   All-terrain vehicles operating under this chapter must be operated in
compliance with all applicable Federal, state, and local laws, regulations, and
ordinances, including, without limitation, all applicable traffic law
requirements (including, without limitation, O.R.S. 811.255) and all posted
speed limits.
(Ord. 1275, § 4, 2019)
§ 10.32.050  LICENSED DRIVER 16 YEARS OR OLDER REQUIRED.
   A person operating a Class IV ATV under this chapter must be 16 years of age
or older and hold a valid driver license.
(Ord. 1275, § 5, 2019)
§ 10.32.060  ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE OPERATOR PERMIT REQUIRED.
   A person operating a Class IV All-Terrain Vehicle under this chapter must
hold a valid Class IV ATV Operator Permit issued under O.R.S. 390.577.
(Ord. 1275, § 6, 2019)
§ 10.32.070  SAFETY EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   All-terrain vehicles operated under this chapter must be equipped with the
safety equipment required under all applicable Traffic Laws, including, without
limitation, O.R.S. 821.030, O.R.S. 821.040, O.R.S. 821.220, O.R.S. 821.230, and
OAR 735-116-000.
(Ord. 1275, § 7, 2019)
§ 10.32.080  HELMET REQUIREMENTS.
   A person who is under 18 years of age must wear a motorcycle helmet with a
fastened chin strap while riding as a passenger on an ATV operated under this
chapter.
(Ord. 1275, § 8, 2019)
§ 10.32.090  SAFETY BELT REQUIREMENTS.
   A person must be properly secured with a safety belt or safety harness while
operating or riding as a passenger on an ATV operated under this chapter if
such ATV as required to be equipped with safety belts or safety harnesses at
the time the ATV was manufactured, or safety belts or safety harness have been
installed on the ATV.
(Ord. 1275, § 9, 2019)
§ 10.32.100  SPEED LIMITS.
   All-terrain vehicles operated under this chapter must be operated in
compliance with all posted speed limits and may not be operated:
   A.   At a rate of speed greater than reasonable and proper under the
existing conditions; or
   B.   In a negligent manner so as to endanger or cause injury, death, and/or
damage to the operator or person or property of another.
(Ord. 1275, § 10, 2019)
§ 10.32.110  PROHIBITION ON OPERATING ALL-TERRAIN WHILE DRIVING PRIVILEGES
SUSPENDED.
   A person may not operate an ATV under this chapter while the person's
driving privileges (i.e., driver license) are suspended or revoked.
(Ord. 1275, § 11, 2019)
§ 10.32.120  FINANCIAL REQUIREMENTS.
   All-terrain vehicles operated under this chapter must meet the financial
responsibility requirements under O.R.S. 806. For purposes of this section,
FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY REQUIREMENTS means the ability to respond in damages
for liability, on account of accidents arising out of the ownership, operation,
maintenance, and/or use of an ATV, in a manner provided under O.R.S. 806. The
exemption in 806.020 does not apply to this chapter.
(Ord. 1275, § 12, 2019)
§ 10.32.130  HOURS OF OPERATION RULES.
   All-terrain vehicles may be operated during daylight hours with headlights
and taillights. All-terrain vehicles may be operated during hours of darkness
and when limited visibility conditions exist if it is equipped with lighting
equipment required for a motor vehicle under O.R.S. 816.320 (For example; high
and low beam headlights, taillights, turn signals, and brake lights).
(Ord. 1275, § 13, 2019)
§ 10.32.140  POSTING.
   The City of Sweet Home will post signs giving notice that the operation of
ATVs is permitted upon Streets under the provisions of this chapter. The City
of Sweet Home will post such signs at locations necessary to inform the public
that ATVs are permitted upon streets, which sign locations will be determined
by the City of Sweet Home in its sole discretion.
(Ord. 1275, § 14, 2019)
§ 10.32.150  LIABILITY.
   The operation of an ATV will be undertaken at the sole risk and
responsibility of the owner and/or operator. The City of Sweet Home, by passing
this chapter, assumes no responsibility of the operation of such ATVs and will
be held harmless in any action arising from the operation of such ATVs on or
off any public way within the city limits, including, without limitation,
Streets.
(Ord. 1275, § 15, 2019)
§ 10.32.160  SNOWMOBILES.
   Nothing contained in this chapter applies to the operation of snowmobiles as
that term is defined by O.R.S. 801.490.
(Ord. 1275, § 19, 2019)
§ 10.32.170  MODIFICATIONS.
   The Chief of Police of the City of Sweet Home has the authority to modify
the provisions of this chapter as a result of the occurrence of special events.
Such modifications shall be temporary in nature and shall not violate Traffic
Laws.
(Ord. 1275, § 20, 2019)
§ 10.32.180  PENALTIES.
   Any violation of this chapter that constitutes a violation of a Traffic Law,
the penalty shall be the same as provided for by Oregon statute. Any other
violation of this ordinance shall be commenced by the issuance of a citation
and shall be prosecuted in the Sweet Home Municipal Court as a city violation
as now in effect or as may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 1275, § 16, 2019)
TITLE 11
[Reserved]
TITLE 12: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
      Chapter
         
12.04.   SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR
         
12.08.   PUBLIC WORK PERMITS
         
12.12.   PUBLIC PARK REGULATIONS
         
12.16.   PUBLIC TREES, SHRUBS AND BUSHES
         
12.20.   STREET NAMES AND BUILDING NUMBERING
CHAPTER 12.04:  SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR
Section
   
12.04.010   Owner—Responsibility.
   
12.04.020   Inspections.
   
12.04.030   City Council resolution.
   
12.04.040   Notice.
   
12.04.050   City Council—Authority.
   
12.04.060   Public works permits.
   
12.04.070   Noncompliance.
   
12.04.080   Assessments.
   
12.04.090   Alternative procedure.
   
12.04.100   Violation—Penalty.
§ 12.04.010  OWNER—RESPONSIBILITY.
   A.   It is declared the duty of all owners of land adjoining any street in
the city to construct, reconstruct, repair and maintain in good condition, the
sidewalk, curbs and driveways in front of the land.
   B.   The owner of real property abutting a sidewalk is liable to any person
injured because of failure by the owner to maintain the sidewalk in good repair
and safe condition. If the city is required to pay damages for an injury to any
person caused by the failure of an owner to maintain a sidewalk in good repair
or safe condition, the owner shall reimburse the city for the amount of the
damages thus paid, and for the attorney fees and costs of defending against the
claim for damages. The city may maintain an action in a court of competent
jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this section.
   C.   A bond or other legal instrument approved by the City Engineer binding
an owner and all future owners to construct a sidewalk and/or driveway approach
within a given time frame shall be required prior to occupancy approval as a
condition of all building, development and public work permits for all new
construction on property adjoining an improved street where sidewalks and/or
driveway approaches are not in existence. When new construction is not
adjoining an improved street, the owner shall sign a non-remonstrance agreement
for future improvements (including sidewalk, driveway approach, curb, gutter,
storm drains and street improvements) to be recorded in Linn County deed
records and shall be binding upon all future owners. The method of financing
the improvements shall include LID’S or any other approved fair share methods
assigning costs to an owner.
(Ord. 1067, 1994; Ord. 1063, 1993; Ord. 1010, 1990: Ord. 651, 1975)
§ 12.04.020  INSPECTIONS.
   At its own initiation, or on recommendation of the Public Works Director,
the Council may order an inspection of any land adjoining any street in the
city for the purpose of determining the need for construction, reconstruction
or repair of any sidewalk, curb or driveway adjoining the street.
(Ord. 651, 1975)
§ 12.04.030  CITY COUNCIL RESOLUTION.
   Upon passage of a resolution by the Council recommending that certain work
be undertaken, the City Manager shall notify owners, contract purchasers or
their agent of the land so affected. The resolution must include the following:
   A.   A description of the land adjoining the sidewalk or proposed sidewalk
and the same may be by street address or location and the assessor’s tax lot
and map number designation only;
   B.   The dimensions and material to be used, including any other city
specifications that may be relevant;
   C.   The location of the sidewalks, curbs or driveways to be constructed
and/or repaired;
   D.   The time within which the proposed work is to be completed, such time
to commence following an order by the Council; and
   E.   The time set for a hearing before the Council to hear those who may
present views supporting or opposing the proposed work.
(Ord. 651, 1975)
§ 12.04.040  NOTICE.
   The notice shall be made as follows:
   A.   By serving personally and in person, a copy of the resolution on the
owners or contract purchasers or their agent, of the land affected; or
   B.   By posting a copy of the resolution on the land affected:
      1.   Mailing a copy of the resolution to the last known address of the
owners, contract purchasers or their agent of the land affected; or
      2.   By one publication of the resolution in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city.
   C.   Service of the notice shall be made not less than ten days prior to the
meeting of the Council at which time written or verbal remonstrances, if any,
shall be heard.
(Ord. 651, 1975)
§ 12.04.050  CITY COUNCIL—AUTHORITY.
   The Council may, after the hearing of remonstrances, discontinue the
proposed project, reduce the scope of proposed work or approve and, by motion
or resolution, may order the work to commence and to be completed within a
certain time; and if not done, to authorize the City Manager to cause the work
to be done and assessed to the abutting land. A copy of the motion or
resolution shall be mailed by certified mail to the last known address of the
owners, contract purchasers or their agents of the land affected.
(Ord. 651, 1975)
§ 12.04.060  PUBLIC WORKS PERMITS.
   No property owner, contract purchaser or their agent shall start
construction of a sidewalk, curb or driveway without first obtaining a public
works permit therefor from the city.
(Ord. 1010, 1990; Ord. 651, 1975)
§ 12.04.070  NONCOMPLIANCE.
   In the event the order of the Council is not complied with within the time
and in the manner designated, the City Manager shall cause the construction and
repair work required by the order to be done and keep an accurate account of
the expense as it applies to each parcel of land affected and, upon completion,
make a report thereof to the Council.
(Ord. 651, 1975)
§ 12.04.080  ASSESSMENTS.
   A.   The Council shall inspect the reports and if it deems them reasonable,
it shall approve the same and by ordinance assess against the property fronting
and abutting upon the sidewalk, curb and/or driveway, the total cost thereof;
or if more than one lot or parcel of land is subject to the improvement, the
proportionate share thereof to be borne by each, and declared the assessment
therefor and a lien upon each lot or parcel of land, and order the same to be
entered in the docket of city liens.
   B.   The ordinance fixing and determining assessments hereunder in several
assessments in one assessment ordinance, and the same shall be entered on the
docket of city liens and collected in the same manner as provided for the
collection of assessments for improvements and shall bear interest at the rate
of 7% per annum.
(Ord. 651, 1975)
§ 12.04.090  ALTERNATIVE PROCEDURE.
   Notwithstanding the above procedure set out to be followed through the City
Council, the Public Works Director can initiate or cause to be initiated an
inspection of any land adjacent to any street in the city for purpose of
determining the need for a reconstruction or repair of any sidewalk, curb or
driveway adjoining the street. If the Public Works Director decides that
reconstruction or repair needs to be undertaken, he or she may use the
procedures set out in
Chapter 8.04, Article II, of this code pertaining to abatement procedure. In
addition to any requirement of the procedure, the recorded owner and contract
purchaser or their agents shall be notified per the abatement procedures and
any lien imposed on the land shall be bear interest at 7% per annum.
(Ord. 1057, 1993)
§ 12.04.100  VIOLATION—PENALTY.
   Any owner of land adjoining any street in the city who violates the duty of
the owner to reconstruct, repair and maintain in good condition the sidewalk,
curbs and driveways in front of the land thereby violates this chapter and may
be prosecuted under the provisions of
Chapter 9.36 of this code pertaining to violations. The Public Works Director,
City Engineer, City Planner-Code Enforcement Officer or other person designated
by the City Manager has the authority to enforce this provision. This remedy
through the violation ordinance is in addition to any other remedy set out in
this chapter.
(Ord. 1237, § 1 (part), 2013; Ord. 1057, 1993)
CHAPTER 12.08:  PUBLIC WORK PERMITS
Section
   
12.08.010   Permit required.
   
12.08.020   Permit fee.
   
12.08.030   Security.
   
12.08.040   Permit application requirements.
   
12.08.050   Eligible applicants.
   
12.08.060   Excavations in violation.
   
12.08.070   Permit conditions.
   
12.08.080   Emergency provisions.
   
12.08.090   Waiver of requirements.
   
12.08.100   Denial of permit and appeal.
   
12.08.110   Violation—Penalty.
§ 12.08.010  PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall do work affecting the public right-of-way without first
obtaining a permit from the Public Works Department. Work affecting the right-
of-way includes but is not limited to, construction, reconstruction, grading,
oiling, repair, opening or excavation of a sidewalk, street, curb, driveway,
culvert or ditch in a public right-of-way, but does not include the
construction of improvements performed under city contract.
(Ord. 948, 1986)
§ 12.08.020  PERMIT FEE.
   A permit fee shall be established by Council resolution.
(Ord. 948, 1986)
§ 12.08.030  SECURITY.
   The applicant shall provide security for the proposed work before the
issuance of a permit. Security shall be in the form of cash, certified check or
bond in an amount sufficient to assure satisfactory completion of the work. The
amount of security shall be determined by the Public Works Director/Engineer,
but shall not exceed $500 per excavation, or $1,000 standing security for an
annual permit, except that in the event the Public Works Director/Engineer
determines a greater amount of security is required, he or she shall bring his
or her determination before the City Council for approval of security amounts
over $500. The Public Works Director/Engineer shall use standard construction
estimating techniques to determine the appropriate amount of security. An
appeal process is provided elsewhere in this chapter in the event of a dispute
concerning the appropriate amount of security. The security provided by the
applicant shall be held by the city until the work area is restored to the
satisfaction of the Public Works Director/Engineer.
(Ord. 948, 1986)
§ 12.08.040  PERMIT APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   Plans and specifications shall be submitted with the permit application on
the form provided by the city. The plans and specifications shall be in a form
and with detail as required by the Public Works Director/Engineer.
Specifications shall be the most current revision of American Public Works
Association Specifications, American Water Works Association Specifications or
Oregon Department of Transportation Construction Specifications. Where a
conflict exists between the above named specifications, the Public Works
Director/Engineer shall determine which of the above shall be used. Projects
which involve new construction or involve major reconstruction shall be
submitted at least two weeks prior to the date on which work is expected to
commence. Projects involving all routine repairs of existing facilities shall
require 24 hours’ prior notice.
(Ord. 948, 1986)
§ 12.08.050  ELIGIBLE APPLICANTS.
   This permit is to be issued only to a duly licensed bonded contractor with
proof of current liability and workers compensation insurance except as
provided herein. A property owner who is not a licensed contractor may receive
a permit under the following conditions:
   A.   The total value of the work is not to exceed $1,000;
   B.   No excavation shall exceed one foot in depth;
   C.   Excavations under this section shall be in that area between the back
of the curb and the right- of-way/property line boundary;
   D.   No existing improvements other than sidewalks and/or driveway
approaches are to be disturbed under this section; and
   E.   A security deposit of $100 in the form of cash or certified check shall
be required under this restoration of the work area at the discretion of the
Public Works Director/Engineer. In the event that restoration is not
satisfactory, the deposit shall be retained by the city to defray the cost of
restoration by the Public Works Department.
(Ord. 948, 1986)
§ 12.08.060  EXCAVATIONS IN VIOLATION.
   Any person, company or franchised utility which damages city-owned utilities
while in violation of this chapter shall be subject to double the cost of
repair of the damaged utility. Request for locations of existing utilities are
to be made 24 hours in advance of commencement of the work. The utility locate
requests are to be made to the East Linn Coordinating Council.
(Ord. 948, 1986)
§ 12.08.070  PERMIT CONDITIONS.
   Permit conditions including, but not limited to, the following may be
included as a requirement for permit issuance:
   A.   Physical protection for all excavations (barricades, etc.);
   B.   Adequate traffic control as specified by the Oregon Department of
Transportation;
   C.   Time limits for restoration of the work area;
   D.   Work to be conducted only during specified hours which shall normally
be restricted to normal working hours. Normal working hours is defined as 7:00
a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday;
   E.   Pavement, curb and gutter restoration to be accomplished by the
applicant to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director/Engineer. Inadequate
restoration shall be corrected by the applicant within ten days of
notification. Restoration which is not satisfactorily completed within the time
limits set forth shall be corrected by the Public Works Department and the cost
plus a 10% administration fee shall be charged against the applicant’s bond or
security deposit; and
   F.   All cuts in asphalt paving, portland cement paving, concrete curbs,
gutters and sidewalks shall be saw cuts at least three inches deep unless
excepted as a condition of the permit.
(Ord. 948, 1986)
§ 12.08.080  EMERGENCY PROVISIONS.
   Under the following emergency conditions requirements for notification are
modified as follows. In the event of the following, defined emergency
conditions notice within 24 hours after the event is required. All other
provisions of this chapter remain in effect:
   A.   Declared emergency;
   B.   Emergency involving facilities of a franchised utility (upon the
franchise holder’s authority); and
   C.   Fire Department/Ambulance Division emergency.
(Ord. 948, 1986)
§ 12.08.090  WAIVER OF REQUIREMENTS.
   Permit requirements may be waived by the Public Works Director/Engineer for
the following reasons:
   A.   Activities within the public right-of-way which do not affect or
disturb improvements owned by the city or its franchisees;
   B.   Fees are waived for franchisees where franchise agreements prohibit the
fees, all other provisions of this chapter shall remain in effect; and
   C.   Work in new developments is exempt until such time as the improvements
are accepted by the City Council for maintenance by the city. Contractors are
not released from the requirements of this chapter when working on or
connecting to existing improvements.
(Ord. 948, 1986)
§ 12.08.100  DENIAL OF PERMIT AND APPEAL.
   The Public Works Directors/Engineer may deny issuance of a public works
permit for cause. Sufficient cause shall be failure to comply with past permit
requirements or inability to meet requirements for issuance of a permit. In the
event of a dispute between the applicant and the Public Works Director/
Engineer, the applicant may appeal to the City Council for modification or
release from permit requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 948, 1986)
§ 12.08.110  VIOLATION—PENALTY.
   Violation of this chapter constitutes a violation and may be prosecuted
under the provisions of
Chapter 9.36 and any amendments thereto. Each day’s violation of a provision of
this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 1240, § 25, 2015; Ord. 1237, § 1 (part), 2013; Ord. 948, 1986)
CHAPTER 12.12:  PUBLIC PARK REGULATIONS
Section
   
12.12.010   Purpose.
   
12.12.020   Definitions.
   
12.12.030   Responsibility for administration of rules.
   
12.12.040   Bicycles.
   
12.12.050   Vehicles.
   
12.12.060   Fire.
   
12.12.070   Vandalism and litter.
   
12.12.080   Glass beverage containers.
   
12.12.090   Dangerous equipment and activities.
   
12.12.100   Alcoholic beverages.
   
12.12.110   Use of cigarettes and tobacco products.
   
12.12.120   Fireworks and explosives.
   
12.12.130   Domestic animals.
   
12.12.140   Sound.
   
12.12.150   Hours of use.
   
12.12.160   Exotic and wild animals.
   
12.12.170   Community gardens.
   
12.12.180   Park activities.
   
12.12.190   Park exclusion.
   
12.12.200   Standards for issuance of a permit.
   
12.12.210   Liability.
   
12.12.220   Violation—Penalty.
§ 12.12.010  PURPOSE.
   The parks of the city are established and maintained as areas of recreation,
relaxation and enjoyment for the public. It is intended that they shall be
regulated and used to permit enjoyment for a maximum number of people engaged
in widely diverse interests and activities as may be practical within the
limits of space, design and accommodations available in each park unit.
Limitations may be required to ensure the use of park areas in safety and to
protect the rights of others in surrounding areas. In the parks of the city,
the City Manager or Director can with prior notice for special events grant
exceptions to the park rules for said event. Any activity that would require a
permit under this chapter that involves 75 or more persons shall be regulated
under Chapter 5.25 of this code.
(Ord. 1285, § 2, 2020; 1248, § 1, 2015; Ord. 1203, § 50, 2008; Ord. 777, 1979)
§ 12.12.020  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter:
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE.  Any liquid or solid more than one-half of one percent
alcohol by volume and capable of being consumed by a human being.
   BICYCLE.  A device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride,
having two tandem wheels either of which is more than 14 inches in diameter or
having three wheels in contact with the ground any of which is more than 14
inches in diameter.
   CIGARETTE.  Any product that contains nicotine, is intended to be burned or
heated under ordinary conditions of use and consists of or contains:
      1.   Any roll of tobacco wrapped in paper or in any substance not
containing tobacco;
      2.   Tobacco, in any form, that is functional in the product and that,
because of its appearance, the type of tobacco used in the filler or its
packaging and labeling, is likely to be offered to, or purchased by, consumers
as a cigarette; or
      3.   Any roll of tobacco that is wrapped in any substance containing
tobacco and that, because of its appearance, the type of tobacco used in the
filler or its packaging and labeling, is likely to be offered to, or purchased
by, consumers as a cigarette described in subsection 1. of this definition of
CIGARETTE.
   CITY. The City of Sweet Home.
   COMMUNITY GARDEN.  Land used for the cultivation of fruits, vegetables,
plants, flowers, or herbs by multiple users.
   DIRECTOR. A person as designated by the City Manager immediately in charge
of park facilities, park areas, and their activities, and to whom park
attendants of such facilities/areas are responsible.
   DOMESTICATED ANIMAL.  An animal species or population which has been bred to
become accustomed to human provision, control, and care.
   HIGHWAY. Every public way, road, street, thoroughfare and place, including
bridges, viaducts and other structures within the boundaries of this city,
open, used or intended for use of the general public for vehicles or vehicular
traffic as a matter of right.
   LANDSCAPED PLANTING AREA. An area within a park set aside for the planting
of trees, shrubs, ground cover, flowers, or any combinations of the same.
   LIVESTOCK. Include but not limited to, horses, mules, asses, cattle, sheep,
swine, goats and poultry, of any age or sex.
   OWNER. Person who owns an animal or property including caretaker and person
in charge thereof.
   PARK. A park, reservation, playground or any other area in the city, owned
or used by the city, and devoted to active or passive recreation.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
   PERMIT.  Written permission from the City Manager or Director to carry out a
given activity in a park.
   SOUND AMPLIFYING DEVICE. An external device that makes sound louder than the
original sound device (e.g. external speaker or amplifier)
   TOBACCO PRODUCTS.  Any cigars, cheroots, stogies, periques, granulated, plug
cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed and other smoking tobacco, snuff, snuff flour,
moist snuff, cavendish, plug and twist tobacco, fine-cut and other chewing
tobaccos, shorts, refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings and sweepings of tobacco
and other kinds and forms of tobacco, prepared in such manner as to be suitable
for chewing or smoking in a pipe or otherwise, or both for chewing and smoking.
   VEHICLE. Any wheeled conveyance, whether motor-powered, animal-drawn or
self-propelled. The term includes any trailer in tow of any size, kind or
description. Exception is made by baby carriages and vehicles in the service of
the city parks.
(Ord. 1248, § 2, 2015; Ord. 777, 1979)
§ 12.12.030  RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION OF RULES.
   Responsibility for the acquisition, maintenance, use and operation of parks,
park facilities, and recreation programs shall be that of the City Manager and/
or Director.
(Ord. 1248, § 3, 2015)
§ 12.12.040  BICYCLES.
   A.   Bicycles shall be operated only on streets, roadways, bike paths,
routes and areas specifically designated for bicycle riding.
   B.   All bicycles shall be parked only in areas so designated.
(Ord. 1248, § 4, 2015; Ord. 1066, 1993; Ord. 777, 1979)
§ 12.12.050  VEHICLES.
   Vehicles are prohibited within parks except when traveling on roadways or
parking lots prepared and open for such purposes except service vehicles and
equipment used to maintain or operate the park facilities and park areas or on
duty emergency vehicles.
(Ord. 1248, § 5, 2015)
§ 12.12.060  FIRE.
   A.   Fires are prohibited in parks, except in barbecue stands, pits, or
fireplaces provided for that purpose by the city unless prior approval is
granted from the City Manager or Director.
   B.   No fire shall be left unattended.
   C.   The user must extinguish every fire before leaving the park area.
(Ord. 1248, § 6, 2015; Ord. 777, 1979)
§ 12.12.070 VANDALISM AND LITTER..
   A.   Wood, flowers, seeds, or other vegetation, shall not be picked, cut,
mutilated, or removed from any park without written permission from the City
Manager or Director.
   B.   No person shall mutilate, deface, damage, or remove a table, bench,
building, sign, marker, monument, fence, barrier, fountain, faucet, traffic
recorder, or other structure or facility, or other city property of any kind in
a park.
   C.   Except for city staff and other authorized personnel, no person shall
use paint to mark pavement areas, such as roads, bicycle paths, sidewalks, and
parking lots, or other traffic lanes such as bridge decks.
   D.   No person shall lie, sleep, urinate in, defecate in, or otherwise
damage or deface any area in a park.
   E.   No person shall dig up, deface, or remove earth, stones, rock, or other
substance, make an excavation, lay or set off any blast, roll any stones or
other objects, or assist in doing so in a park except under authority of the
city.
   F.   No refuse shall be left in a park unless placed in the receptacles
designated for that purpose.
   G.   No person shall wash any clothing or other material in a park.
   H.   No person shall clean fish in a lake or stream in a park except at
officially designated and signed fish-cleaning stations.
   I.   Dumping of yard debris and home garbage in a park is prohibited.
(Ord. 1248, § 7, 2015; Ord. 777, 1979)
§ 12.12.080  GLASS BEVERAGE CONTAINERS.
   Except as authorized in writing by the City Manager or Director, no person
shall possess a beverage container made of glass in any park or bring, carry,
or transport any beverage container made of glass into any park.
(Ord. 1248, § 8, 2015)
§ 12.12.090  DANGEROUS EQUIPMENT AND ACTIVITIES.
   No person shall use or engage in any activity that the City Manager or
Director determines, in his or her reasonable discretion, creates an
unreasonable interference or danger to other persons. The activity shall
include, but not be limited to, the use of golf clubs, archery equipment,
aircrafts, rockets, missiles, or firearms.
(Ord. 1248, § 9, 2015; Ord. 777, 1979)
§ 12.12.100  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   A.   No person shall, within any park, sell, consume, or possess an
alcoholic beverage without a permit.
   B.   The City Manager or Director shall have the right to issue a permit for
the use and possession of alcoholic beverages in parks.
   C.   The City Manager or Director shall issue a permit in accordance with §
12.12.180 A. and B.
   D.   If the use and possession of alcoholic beverages in parks is in
conjunction with a special event consisting of 75 or more persons, a permit
must be obtained in accordance with Chapter 5.25 of this code.
(Ord. 1285, § 2, 2020; 1248, § 10, 2015; Ord. 1240, § 26, 2015; Ord. 777, 1979)
§ 12.12.110  USE OF CIGARETTES AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS.
   A.   Cigarettes and tobacco products shall be prohibited within all parks,
except in designated smoking areas.
   B.   This prohibition shall be incorporated in and made a part of all
permits for use of parks, unless a specific exemption has been granted by the
City Manager or Director.
(Ord. 1248, § 11, 2015)
§ 12.12.120  FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES.
   No person in a park shall bring, or have in his or her possession, or set
off or otherwise cause to explode or discharge or burn, any firecrackers,
torpedo, rocket or other fireworks or explosives of inflammable material, or
discharge them or throw them into any such area from land or highway adjacent
thereto. This prohibition includes any substances, compound, mixture or article
that in conjunction with any other substance or compound would be dangerous
from any of the foregoing standpoints.
(Ord. 1248, § 12, 2015; Ord. 777, 1979)
§ 12.12.130  DOMESTIC ANIMALS.
   A.   Inside parks, domesticated animals must be on a leash that does not
exceed eight feet in length at all times except in designated off-leash areas.
   B.   Owners are responsible for the immediate removal of all solid waste
from their domesticated animals inside parks.
   C.   The City Manager or Director can require the owner or caretaker of a
domesticated animal to remove a domesticated animal from a park if necessary to
prevent interference by the domesticated animal with the safety, comfort, or
well-being of park visitors or resources.
   D.   No person shall have livestock in a park without first obtaining a
permit for said livestock from the City Manager or Director.
(Ord. 1248, § 13, 2015; Ord. 777, 1979)
§ 12.12.140  SOUND.
   A.   No person shall use any device to amplify sound in any park unless a
valid permit has been issued by the City Manager or Director.
   B.   The City Manager or Director shall issue a permit authorizing the use
of one more designated devices to amplify sound by one or more designated
persons in a designated area of a park on a designated date between specific
hours if he or she finds, in his or her reasonable discretion, that the number
of persons to be entertained or served by the use of sound can be adequately
and reasonably served only by the amplification of sound. The City Manager or
Director shall  include conditions in such a permit which he or she deems
reasonable and the City Manager or Director shall revoke a permit if the terms
of the permit are violated, or he or she shall deny a permit to a person or a
group of persons who have violated the terms of a permit within the previous
year. No person who holds a valid permit issued by the City Manager or Director
under this type of permit shall amplify sound within a park in violation of any
conditions stated in this permit.
(Ord. 1248, § 14, 2015; Ord. 777, 1979)
§ 12.12.150  HOURS OF USE.
   The permissible hours of use for parks are dawn to dusk except as authorized
by permit issued by the City Manager or Director.
(Ord. 1248, § 15, 2015; Ord. 977, 1988: Ord. 777, 1979)
§ 12.12.160  EXOTIC AND WILD ANIMALS.
   A.   No person shall hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease,
shoot or throw missiles at any animal, reptile or bird; nor shall any person
remove or have in his or her possession the young of any wild animal, or the
eggs or nest, or young of any reptile or bird; nor shall he or she collect,
remove, have in his or her possession, give away, sell or offer to sell, or buy
or offer to buy, or accept as a gift, any specimen alive or dead of any animal,
bird or reptile. Exception to the foregoing is that snakes known to be
poisonous, such as rattlesnakes, moccasins, coral snakes or other poisonous
reptiles, may be killed on sight.
   B.   No person shall bring a wild animal into a park without prior written
permission from the City Manager or Director.
(Ord. 1248, § 16, 2015; Ord. 777, 1979)
§ 12.12.170  COMMUNITY GARDENS.
   No person shall use a Community Garden plot without first obtaining a permit
from the City Manager or Director
(Ord, 1248, § 17, 2015)
§ 12.12.180  PARK ACTIVITIES.
   A person shall obtain a permit from the City Manager or Director before
participating in a park activity requiring the use of a facility or area of the
park.
   A.   The City Manager or Director shall issue a permit hereunder when he or
she finds:
      1.   That the proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably
interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of the park;
      2.   That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere
with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety and
recreation;
      3.   That the proposed activity or use is not reasonably anticipated to
incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct;
      4.   That the proposed activity will not entail unusual, extraordinary or
burdensome expense or police operation by the city; and
      5.   That the facilities/areas desired have not been reserved for others
at the day and hour.
   B.   An applicant shall fill out a city application which shall state:
      1.   The name and address of the applicant;
      2.   The days and hours for which the permit is desired;
      3.   The facility/area for which the permit is desired;
      4.   An estimate of anticipated attendance; and
      5.   Any other information which the City Manager or Director shall find
reasonable to a fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued.
   C.   Revocation of a permit. The City Manager or Director shall revoke a
permit if the terms of the permit are violated, or he or she shall deny a
permit to a person or a group of persons who have violated the terms of a
permit within the previous year. No person who holds a valid permit issued by
the City Manager or Director shall use a park in violation of any conditions
stated in the permit.
(Ord. 1248, § 18, 2015)
§ 12.12.190  PARK EXCLUSION.
   A.   In addition to any other remedies or penalties provided by law any
Police Officer, Code Enforcement Officer, or a Director may exclude any person
who violates the provisions of this chapter, city ordinance or state law from
any and all parks in accordance with the provisions of this section.
   B.   An exclusion issued under the provisions of this section shall be for
30 days. If the person to be excluded has been excluded from any park at any
time within two years before the date of the present exclusion, the exclusion
shall be for 90 days.
   C.   Written notice shall be given to any person excluded. The notice shall
specify the date and length of the exclusion and that the exclusion is for all
parks and shall identify the provision of law the person has violated. The
notice shall inform the excluded person of the right to appeal, including the
time limit and the place of delivering the appeal. It shall be signed by the
issuing party. The notice shall prominently display a criminal trespass warning
describing the potential consequences of entering a park during the exclusion
period.
   D.   Any person receiving an exclusion notice may appeal the issuance of
such notice by appealing to the City Manager. The appeal of the exclusion must
be made to the City Manager within five business days of the date of the
issuance of the exclusion notice. The City Manager or designee shall conduct a
hearing on the appeal within ten days from receipt of the appeal notice. At the
hearing both the appellant and the city shall be given an opportunity to
provide evidence on the exclusion. The City Manager or designee shall decide if
an offense did occur and if the length of expulsion is correct by substantial
evidence on the record. The hearing held under this section may be informal in
nature but the presentation of evidence at the hearing shall be consistent with
the presentation of evidence required for contested cases under O.R.S. 183.450.
   E.   After hearing the evidence the City Manager or designee may modify,
affirm, or reverse the exclusion notice. The City Manager or designee shall
make his or her decision in writing which shall be provided to all parties and
the decision shall be made within five days of the hearing. The decision shall
be final and not appealable by either party to the hearing.
   F.   No person shall enter or remain in any park at any time during which
there is in effect a notice of exclusion issued under this section excluding
the person from the parks except an appeal of an exclusion notice automatically
stays the exclusion period until a decision on appeal is issued by the City
Manager or designee.
(Ord. 1248, § 19, 2015)
§ 12.12.200  STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE OF A PERMIT.
   The Director shall issue a permit hereunder when he or she finds:
   A.   That the proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably
interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of the park;
   B.   That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere with
or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety and recreation;
   C.   That the proposed activity or use is not reasonably anticipated to
incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct;
   D.   That the proposed activity will not entail unusual, extraordinary or
burdensome expense or police operation by the city; and
   E.   That the facilities desired have not been reserved for others at the
day and hour required in the application.
(Ord. 777, 1979)
§ 12.12.210  LIABILITY.
   All persons to whom a park permit is issued must agree in writing to hold
the city harmless and indemnify the city from any and all liability for injury
to persons or property occurring as a result of the activity sponsored by the
permittee. The permittee and any other person who allows or causes damage to
park facilities, park areas, and any other property owned by the city shall be
liable to the city for the damage caused.
(Ord. 1248, § 21, 2015; Ord. 777, 1979)
§ 12.12.220  VIOLATION—PENALTY.
   Except as stated or provided for in the criminal laws of the State of
Oregon, violation of this chapter constitutes a violation and may be prosecuted
under the provisions of
Chapter 9.36.
(Ord. 1248, § 20, 2015; Ord. 1240, § 27, 2015; Ord. 1237, § 1 (part), 2013;
Ord. 876, (part), 1982; Ord. 777, 1979)
CHAPTER 12.16:  PUBLIC TREES, SHRUBS AND BUSHES
Section
   
12.16.010   Purpose.
   
12.16.020   Applicability.
   
12.16.030   Definitions.
   
12.16.040   Park and Tree Committee.
   
12.16.050   Powers and duties of the Park and Tree Committee.
   
12.16.060   Review by the City Council.
   
12.16.070   Street tree planting specifications.
   
12.16.080   Street tree maintenance.
   
12.16.090   Street tree removal.
   
12.16.100   Permit.
   
12.16.110   Private trees.
   
12.16.120   Abuse and mutilation of street and park trees.
   
12.16.130   Enforcement—Penalties.
   
12.16.140   Liability on the city.
§ 12.16.010  PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote and protect the public health,
safety and general welfare by providing for the regulation of the planting,
maintenance and removal of trees, shrubs and other plants within the City of
Sweet Home.
(Ord. 1068, (part), 1994)
§ 12.16.020  APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter provides the city full power over all trees, plants and shrubs
located within street rights-of-way, parks and public places of the city; and
to trees, plants and shrubs located on private property that constitute a
hazard or thereas described herein.
(Ord. 1068, (part), 1994)
§ 12.16.030  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, the following words mean:
   CALIPER. The American Association of Nurseryman standard for trunk
measurement of nursery stock. CALIPER OF THE TRUNK shall be the trunk diameter
measured six inches above the ground for up to and including four-inch caliper
size and 12 inches above the ground for larger sizes.
   CANOPY. The space of the tree above ground including the trunk and branches
measured in volume.
(Prior history: Ord. 1007)
   DRIP LINE. The outermost edge of the tree’s original canopy. When depicted
on a plan, the DRIP LINE will appear as an irregular shaped circle that follows
the canopy edge of the tree branches as seen from overhead.
   GROVE. A stand of three or more trees (of the same species or a mixture),
which form a visual and biological unit.
   HAZARD TREE. Any tree with any structural defect, disease, extreme size or
combinations of these which make it subject to a high probability of failure
which might cause damage to persons or property.
   PARK STRIP. A portion of street right-of-way that is located between a curb
and a sidewalk.
   PARK TREE. A tree, shrub, bush or other woody vegetation located in a public
park or other area owned by the city having an individual name and all other
areas owned by the city, or to which the public has free access as a park.
   PRIVATE TREE. A tree, shrub, bush or other woody vegetation located on
private property other than a dedicated right-of-way or public easement or
public parks and grounds.
   REMOVE or REMOVAL. The act of removing a tree by digging up, cutting down or
any act which causes a tree to die within a period of three years; including
but not limited to damage inflicted on the root system by machinery, storage of
materials or soil compaction; changing the ground level in the area of the
tree’s root system; damage inflicted on the tree permitting infections or
infestation; excessive pruning; or any other action which is deemed harmful to
the tree.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area between the boundary lines of a street or public
easement. This area includes the park strip or tree lawn area between the curb
and sidewalk.
   ROOT ZONE. The area of the ground around the base of the tree measured from
the trunk to five feet beyond the drip line.
   SEVERELY PRUNE. To top a tree or remove more than 20% of the canopy within a
year.
   STREET TREE. A tree, shrub or other woody vegetation on land lying within
the right-of-way along either side of a street, avenue or other way or within a
public easement of the city.
   TOPPING. The severe cutting back of limbs to stubs within the tree’s crown
to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree.
   TREE. Any woody, perennial plant, deciduous, evergreen or coniferous,
characterized by having a main stem or trunk of six inches or more in diameter
four and one-half feet above natural grade. In cases of multi-stemmed or multi-
trunk trees, the diameter shall be the sum of diameters of all individual stems
or trunks.
(Ord. 1068, (part), 1994)
§ 12.16.040  PARK AND TREE COMMITTEE.
   The Park and Tree Committee established in SHMC
Chapter 2.10 shall be the committee to implement the committee provisions of
this chapter.
(Ord. 1265, § 1, 2017; Ord. 1068, (part), 1994)
§ 12.16.050  POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE PARK AND TREE COMMITTEE.
   The Park and Tree Committee has the powers and duties as set out in SHMC
Chapter 2.10.
(Ord. 1265, § 2, 2017; Ord. 1068, (part), 1994)
§ 12.16.060  REVIEW BY THE CITY COUNCIL.
   The City Council may review the conduct, acts and decisions of the Park and
Tree Committee, City Manager and authorized agent. A person may appeal the
ruling or order of the committee, manager or agent to the City Council who
shall hear the matter and make a final decision.
(Ord. 1265, § 3, 2017; Ord. 1068, (part), 1994)
§ 12.16.070  STREET TREE PLANTING SPECIFICATIONS.
   A.   Tree selection. The official city street tree list of acceptable
species for trees, shrubs, bushes and other woody plant material is included in
Appendix E of the 1993 Sweet Home Park and Street Tree Planting Plan. No
person, without the written permission of the city, shall plant a street tree
of a species other than those included on the list.
   B.   Size of tree to be planted. Unless otherwise specified by the City of
Sweet Home, all trees and their cultivars shall conform to the American
Standard for Nursery Stock. The minimum size for planting stock for use along
arterial street is a caliper of two inches or greater and one and one-half
inches or greater along a collector street.
   C.   Tree grade. Unless otherwise specified by the city, all trees shall
have straight trunks, well developed leaders and tops. The root system shall be
characteristic of the species and it shall exhibit evidence of proper nursery
practices.
   D.   Type of planting stock. Unless otherwise specified by the city, all
nursery stock shall conform to the American Standard for Nursery Stock.
   E.   Spacing of plantings. The spacing of street trees shall be in
accordance with the species, size and listed in Appendix E of the Sweet Home
Park and Street Tree Planting Plan and no trees shall be planted closer
together than the following:
 
Spacing Requirements (in Small Trees <35' Medium Trees 35-50' Large Trees >50'
feet)
1.    Total width of planting area        3 - 4'     4 - 8'      >8'
2.    Distance from back of curb or sidewa1.5'       3'          4'
3.    Distance from alley or drive        10'        10'         10'
4.    Distance from crosswalk             4'         6'          6'
5.    Distance from face of curb at cross 20'        20'         20'
street
6.    Distance from stop sign or signal   30 - 50'   30 - 50'    30 - 50'
                                             1/2 of the 1/2 of the  1/2 of the
                                             mature     mature      mature
7.    Distance between trees              crown      crown       crown
                                             spread,    spread,     spread,
                                             approx.    approx. 30' approx. 40'
                                             20' - 30'  - 50'       - 60'
8.    Distance from water meter or sewer  4'         6'          6'
service
9.    Distance from utility or light pole 10'        30'         30'
10.    Distance from building             5'         10'         25'
 
   F.   Utility lines. No street trees other than those species listed in
Appendix E of the 1993 Park and Street Tree Planting Plan may be planted under
or within ten lateral feet of any overhead utility wire or over or within five
lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line, transmission line or
other utility.
(Ord. 1068, (part), 1994)
§ 12.16.080  STREET TREE MAINTENANCE.
   A.   Permit required. Unless specifically exempted in this chapter, no
person shall remove, severely prune or disturb any tree on any street, park or
other public place without first filing an application and procuring a tree
permit from the city. Minor pruning and maintenance does not require a permit.
   B.   Pruning and corner clearance. All public trees overhanging a street
right-of-way within the city shall be pruned so that the branches do not
obstruct the light from a street lamp or obstruct the view of any street
intersection. All dead, diseased, dangerous, broken or decayed limbs which
constitute a menace to the safety of the public shall be removed.
   C.   Clearance height. All public trees shall be maintained so that the
clearance height from a pedestrian walk is not less than eight feet, a
clearance height from a residential street is not less than 12 feet and the
clearance height from a collector or arterial street is 14 feet.
   D.   Adjacent landowner responsibility. In consideration of the value and
benefits derived from the beauty and enjoyment of the street trees, the
property owners abutting dedicated rights-of-way shall share the responsibility
and cost of maintenance and care of the street trees abutting their property,
and shall have the primary duty to regularly inspect and remove, as set out
herein, any conditions that violate this chapter as needed. Failure to do so is
a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 1203, § 52, 2008; Ord. 1068, (part), 1994)
§ 12.16.090  STREET TREE REMOVAL.
   A.   Permit required. Unless specifically exempted in this chapter, no
person may remove a public tree without first filing an application and
procuring a permit from the city.
   B.   Removal of stumps. All stumps of street trees shall be removed below
the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above
the surface of the ground.
   C.   Tree replacement. The city may require the replacement by the abutting
landowner, at the landowner’s expense, of a new tree after removal of an
existing street tree.
(Ord. 1068, (part), 1994)
§ 12.16.100  PERMIT.
   A.   City approval required. Unless specifically exempted by this section,
no person may remove, severely prune or disturb any tree on any street, park or
other public place without first filing an application and procuring a tree
permit and a public works permit from the city. Both permits shall be processed
concurrently. The person receiving the permit shall abide by any conditions
placed on the permit, the standards set forth in this chapter and the
provisions of the 1993 Park and Street Tree Planting Plan.
   B.   Application. The applicant shall file a public works permit and a tree
permit application concurrently with the Public Works Department. The owner or
authorized agent must submit information on the location, type and size of the
tree or trees in question and the reasons for the desired action. The
information and reasons shall address any appropriate criteria based on the
type of area and tree designation.
   C.   Review procedures. The tree permit application will be forwarded to the
City Manager or his or her authorized agent for review prior to the issuance of
a public works permit by the Public Works Director. Review and issuance of the
public works permit shall be in conformance with
Chapter 12.08. The following shall also apply:
      1.   The city may require the verification of any state tree illness,
safety problems, etc., by an arborist certified by the International Society of
Arboriculture, paid for at the applicant’s expense.
      2.   The applicant shall submit any additional or more detailed
information required by the City Manager or his or her authorized agent to
ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the 1993 Park and
Street Tree Planting Plan.
      3.   The City Manager or his or her authorized agent shall ascertain
whether the request is valid under the terms of this chapter. To be valid,
evidence must be submitted by the applicant demonstrating that the tree(s)
identified for pruning or removal poses a threat to the health, safety or
general welfare of the abutting property owner and/or private or public
property.
      4.   If valid, the permit shall be processed by city staff unless
referred to the Park and Tree Committee. All tree permits shall be issued with
the following conditions attached.
         a.   Trees shall be removed or pruned following pruning standards of
the International Society of Arboriculture and shall be provided to the
applicant at the time a permit is issued.
         b.   It is the responsibility of the applicant to assure that all
trees are removed or pruned in a manner which ensures safety to individuals and
public and private property.
         c.   Other conditions as the City Manager or his or her authorized
agent or the Park and Tree Committee shall attach in keeping with the purpose
of this chapter and the 1993 Park and Street Tree Planting Plan.
   D.   Permit exemption.
      1.   Regular maintenance by adjacent property owners which does not
require removal of over 20% of the tree’s canopy or tree topping.
      2.   The trimming, pruning, cutting or removal of any tree or shrub on a
public street or right-of-way or upon any publicly-owned or controlled
property, if the trimming, pruning, cutting or removal is done in the ordinary
maintenance or repair of streets, sidewalks, pavement marking, existing utility
lines, street signs, traffic signs or is done in order to repair or replace the
same as a result of damage or deterioration as a result of accident, casualty
or natural elements such as wind, rain, ice, electrical storm or the like.
      3.   Necessary measures may be taken to protect public safety or private
or public property from imminent danger and to respond to emergencies declared
by the city, county, state or federal governments. The emergencies may include
a windstorm, mud slide, flood, freeze, dangerous and infectious insect
infestation or disease or other disaster.
(Ord. 1265, §§ 4, 5, 2017; Ord. 1068, (part), 1994)
§ 12.16.110  PRIVATE TREES.
   A.   Pruning. The city shall have the authority to enter onto private
property whereon there is located a tree, shrub, plant or plant part that is
suspected to be hazardous or a public nuisance and interferes with the proper
spread of light along the street from a street light, or interferes with the
visibility of any street intersection, traffic control device or sign.
   B.   Clearance height. All private trees shall be maintained so that the
clearance height from a pedestrian walk is not less than eight feet, a
clearance height from a residential street is not less than 12 feet and the
clearance height from a collector or arterial street is 14 feet.
   C.   Removal. The city may cause the removal of all, or part of any dead,
dangerous or diseased tree located on private property that constitutes a
hazard to life or property or harbors insect or disease which constitute a
potential threat to other trees within the city, or may require the property
owner to remove or trim any such tree on private property. Failure of the
property owner to take corrective action within 30 days after receiving notice
by the city is a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 1068, (part), 1994)
§ 12.16.120  ABUSE AND MUTILATION OF STREET AND PARK TREES.
   A.   Abuse. No person shall abuse, destroy or mutilate any street tree, in a
dedicated public right-of-way or any other public place or attach or place any
rope or wire (other than one used to support the tree itself), sign poster,
handbill or other thing to, or on, any tree growing in a public place or to
cause or permit any wire charged with electricity to come into contact with any
such tree, or to allow any gaseous liquid or solid substance, which is harmful
to such tree, to come into contact with their roots or leaves.
   B.   Topping. It is unlawful as a normal practice for any person or firm to
top any street tree, park tree or other tree on public property. Trees severely
damaged by storms or other causes or certain trees under utility wires or other
obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from
this chapter at the determination of the City Planner.
(Ord. 1068, (part), 1994)
§ 12.16.130  ENFORCEMENT—PENALTIES.
   A.   Authority. It shall be the duty of the City Manager or his or her
authorized agent to administer the provisions of this chapter. The City Planner
shall have authority to issue permits, impose conditions, enforce the
provisions and requirements of this chapter and permits issued thereunder, and
establish administrative procedures and guidelines, conduct inspections and
prepare the forms necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
   B.   Authorized actions. In addition to other remedies, the city may bring
injunctive, declaratory or other actions to enforce this chapter.
   C.   Stop work orders/permit revocation.
      1.   The City Manager or his or her authorized agent shall suspend work
or revoke a permit, as appropriate, if he or she finds that:
         a.   The work is not authorized by a valid permit;
         b.   Inaccurate information was used to obtain the permit;
         c.   The permittee is not complying with the terms of the permit or
approved plans; and
         d.   The work is, in the City Manager or his or her authorized agent’s
judgment, a hazard to property or public safety, is adversely affecting or
about to adversely affect adjacent property or rights-of-way, a drainage way,
watercourse, environmentally sensitive area or storm water facility or
otherwise adversely affecting the public health, safety or welfare.
      2.   The City Manager or his or her authorized agent shall issue the
permittee/violator a written notice specifying the nature of the violation or
problem which must be remedied prior to resuming other work on the project. If
the permittee does not comply with the order within the time specified, the
city may enter the project site and perform the required work. All costs
incurred by the city in performing the work shall be charged to the applicant
and/or the city may place a lien against the property in the amount of the
funds expended to perform the required work.
   D.   Abatement/restoration. Violators of this chapter or of a permit issued
thereunder shall be responsible for restoring unlawfully damaged areas in
conformance with a plan, approved by the City Manager or his or her authorized
agent, which provides for repair of any environmental and property damage, and
restoration of the site; and which results in a site condition that, to the
greatest extent practical, equals the site condition that would have existed in
the absence of the violation(s). If the violator does not restore the damaged
area, then the city may restore the area and the cost thereof shall be charged
to the violator and/or be a lien upon the property as set forth in subsection
C.2. of this section.
   E.   Penalty. A person who fails to comply with the requirements of this
chapter or the terms of a permit issued hereunder, who undertakes an activity
regulated by this chapter without obtaining a permit, or fails to comply with a
stop work order issued under this chapter is in violation of this chapter and
the violation constitutes a violation and may be prosecuted under the
provisions of
Chapter 9.36.
(Ord. 1237, § 1 (part), 2013; Ord. 1068, (part), 1994)
§ 12.16.140  LIABILITY ON THE CITY.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to impose any liability upon the
city or upon any of its officers or employees, or to relieve the owner or
occupant of any private property from the duty to keep in safe and healthy
condition the trees upon their property or upon a public right-of-way over
their property.
(Ord. 1068, (part), 1994)
CHAPTER 12.20:  STREET NAMES AND BUILDING NUMBERING
Section
   
12.20.010   Street naming.
   
12.20.020   House numbering.
   
12.20.030   System of naming streets.
   
12.20.040   System of numbering houses.
   
12.20.050   Substitution of names on streets already named.
   
12.20.060   Assignment of numbers.
   
12.20.070   Cabin camps, etc.
   
12.20.080   Final determination.
   
12.20.090   Character of house numbers and letters.
   
12.20.100   Duty—Penalty—Lien.
§ 12.20.010  STREET NAMING.
   There is established a system of naming all streets which have been, or
hereafter shall be, accepted as streets by act of the City Council of the city.
(Ord. 102, 1944)
§ 12.20.020  HOUSE NUMBERING.
   There is established a uniform system of numbering all buildings, except
minor sheds and outbuildings, now or hereafter built within the city.
(Ord. 102, 1944)
§ 12.20.030  SYSTEM OF NAMING STREETS.
   A.   With 1st Avenue as a base line, all streets running generally north and
south shall be called “avenues” and shall be numbered consecutively from west
to east, e.g., “1st Avenue”, “2nd Avenue”, etc.
   B.   West of 1st Avenue, all streets running north and south shall be
assigned names and shall be designated as “lanes”.
   C.   With the south city limits as a base line, all streets running
generally east and west shall be called “streets” and shall be assigned names
of locally familiar trees and shrubs and shall be alphabetically arranged from
south to north, e.g. “Alder Street”, “Birch Street”, etc.
   D.   All north-south streets north of Holley Road and Main Street shall be
designated “North 1st Avenue”, etc. All streets south of the streets shall be
designated “South 1st Avenue”, etc. All east-west streets west of 1st Avenue
shall be designated “West Nandina Street”, etc.
(Ord. 427, 1965; Ord. 284, 1955; Ord. 102, 1944)
§ 12.20.040  SYSTEM OF NUMBERING HOUSES.
   Buildings located on the north side of east-west streets (“streets”) and the
west side of north-south streets (“avenues”) shall be assigned even numbers.
Odd numbers shall be assigned to buildings on the south side of “streets” and
the east side of “avenues”.
(Ord. 102, 1944)
§ 12.20.050  SUBSTITUTION OF NAMES ON STREETS ALREADY NAMED.
   A.   Following is a list of existing street names and the corresponding
names placed in effect by this chapter:
 
Old Name New Name
1st Place                                                  Westwood Lane
2nd Place                                                  Sunset Lane
3rd Place                                                  Meadowlark Lane
4th Place                                                  Evergreen Lane
10th Avenue (east of P Street)                             11th Avenue
11th Avenue (from Oak Terrace, for 1,100 feet east)        Oak Terrace
11th Avenue (from A Street to 1,100 feet east of Oak       10th Avenue
Terrace)
11th Lane                                                  11th Avenue
20th Avenue (south off of Grape Street)                    Grape Loop
22nd Avenue (from Ames Creek Road to Turbyne Road)         Mountain View Road
A Lane                                                     Birch Street
A Street                                                   Alder Street
B Street                                                   Cedar Street
C Street                                                   Cedar Street
C Street, east of 9th Avenue                               Catalpa Street
D Street                                                   Dogwood Street
E Street                                                   Elm Street
F Street, east of 9th Avenue                               Grape Street
F Street, except east of 9th Avenue                        Fir Street
Fir Lane (south off of Grape Street)                       Grape Loop
G Lane                                                     Fir Street
G Street                                                   Grape Street
Green River Road (also named as Green River Drive and C.R. 47th Avenue
931 from Osage Street to north city limits)
H Street                                                   Hawthorn Street
Hawthorne Way (north off of Juniper Street)                32nd Court
I Street                                                   Ironwood Street
J Street                                                   Juniper Street
K Street                                                   Kalmia Street
L Lane                                                     Larch Street
L Street                                                   Long Street
M Lane                                                     Maple Street
M Street                                                   Main Street
N Street                                                   Nandina Street
O Street                                                   Osage Street
Oak Terrace (from Holley Road to 11th Avenue)              Oak Terrace
Oak Terrace (from 11th Avenue to L Street)                 Terrace Lane
Osage Street (from 47th Avenue to Green River Road)        47th Avenue
P Street                                                   Poplar Street
Q Street                                                   Quince Street
R Street                                                   Redwood Street
S Street                                                   Spruce Street
Strawberry Hill Loop                                       Strawberry Loop
T Street                                                   Tamarack Street
Unnamed 40' R.O.W. C.R. 909, West of Clark Mill Road       Zelkova Street
 
   B.   Other numbered streets to remain the same.
(Ord. 1201, § 1, 2008; Ord. 427, 1965; Ord. 284, 1955; Ord. 102, 1944)
§ 12.20.060  ASSIGNMENT OF NUMBERS.
   The numbering shall be such that each ten feet of frontage shall be assigned
a number by the Building Inspector. Points of departure for numbering on
“streets” shall be the east boundaries of intersecting avenues” and “lanes”,
and on “avenues” and “lanes” shall be the north boundaries of intersecting
“streets”. Groups of 100 numbers shall be assigned such that the 100 series on
“streets” shall be between First Avenue and Second Avenue, and also between
First Avenue and Westwood Lane, and on “avenues” and “lanes” shall lie between
Alder Street and Birch Street.
(Ord. 427, 1965; Ord. 102, 1944)
§ 12.20.070  CABIN CAMPS, ETC.
   Cabin camps, apartments, etc., shall be assigned a number for the main
building or office and other buildings within the group shall be assigned
individual numbers or letters.
(Ord. 102, 1944)
§ 12.20.080  FINAL DETERMINATION.
   In case of doubt or where a question arises as to the proper number to be
assigned to any lot or building, the City Manager, or his or her
representative, shall decide the question and assign a number for the same.
(Ord. 102, 1944)
§ 12.20.090  CHARACTER OF HOUSE NUMBERS AND LETTERS.
   A.   Only numbers and letters of type, size, location and denomination
prescribed by this chapter shall be placed or painted on buildings, which, for
this chapter, includes mobile homes, within the city.
   B.   To comply with this chapter, the numbers and letters shall be placed or
painted on a building so as to be plainly visible and readable by the naked eye
from the street or road fronting the property, shall be at least three inches
in height, and shall be of a contrasting color to the part of the building upon
which they are affixed or painted.
   C.   Notwithstanding the above, if the numbers and letters required to be
placed or painted on a building as described above cannot be seen from the
street or road fronting the property, then additional numbers and letters as
described above shall be placed or painted on a mailbox, post or similar
object, so as to comply with the above visibility requirements, but do not have
to comply with the height requirement.
   D.   Further, a direction sign shall be placed in a conspicuous location at
the entrance of an apartment complex, planned unit development, mobile home
park or other types of building complexes that cannot be seen from the street
or road fronting the complex, and at each intersection of private streets in
the complex. The direction sign shall indicate address numbers and letters of
individual units and indicate the direction of individual units.
(Ord. 1005, 1989: Ord. 102, 1944)
§ 12.20.100  DUTY—PENALTY—LIEN.
   It is the duty of every owner or agent in charge of any building or complex
to comply with the provisions of this chapter. The numbers and letters required
to be placed on properties in furtherance of this chapter shall be placed
within 30 days after the passage of this chapter (future annexed property
within 30 days of annexation), and it shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant
or any person under the control or at the direction of either to remove, alter
or deface any building number or letter, or to substitute any other building
number or letter therefor, unless replaced and/or brought into conformance with
this chapter within 24 hours of the action. It is unlawful for any owner or
agent in charge of any property not to have his or her property in conformance
with this chapter. Violation of this chapter constitutes a violation and may be
prosecuted under the provisions of
Chapter 9.36 and any amendments thereto. After notice, if any owner does not
comply with the provisions of this chapter, then the city may place numbers and
letters on the building and property as the chapter requires, and have the
costs and expenses associated with the placement become a personal obligation
of the owner and/or lien on the property as set out in Sweet Home Municipal
Code
Chapter 8.04 and any amendments thereto under the abatement procedure.
(Ord. 1237, § 1 (part), 2013; Ord. 1005, 1989: Ord. 102, 1944)
TITLE 13: PUBLIC SERVICES
      Chapter
         
13.04.   WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
         
13.06.   EROSION CONTROL
         
13.08.   SEWER SERVICE SYSTEM
         
13.09.   STORMWATER DRAINAGE
         
13.12.   WATER AND SEWER HOOKUP FEES AND SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGES
         
13.16.   MANDATORY WATER TESTING PROGRAM
         
13.20.   CONNECTION TO WATER SYSTEM REQUIRED IN CRITICALLY AFFECTED AREA
         
13.24.   WATER CONSERVATION
CHAPTER 13.04:  WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
Section
   
13.04.010   Definitions.
   
13.04.020   Water service—Responsibility.
   
13.04.030   Billing, payment delinquencies and penalties.
   
13.04.040   Fees.
   
13.04.050   Rates.
   
13.04.060   Water account deposits.
   
13.04.070   Revenues.
   
13.04.080   New water service.
   
13.04.090   Authority.
   
13.04.100   Yard valves.
   
13.04.110   Backflow prevention.
   
13.04.120   Customer notification for cross connection program inspection.
   
13.04.130   Inspections.
   
13.04.140   Water turnoff from mains.
   
13.04.150   Provision of water for steam boilers.
   
13.04.160   Damage to water system.
   
13.04.170   Fluoridation.
   
13.04.180   Violation—Penalty.
   
13.04.190   Severability.
   
13.04.200   Classification.
§ 13.04.010  DEFINITIONS.
   AFTER HOURS. Any time other than that defined by “normal working hours”
herein.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. All “backflow prevention devices” required under
this chapter shall be of a type and model approved by the Oregon Heath Division
and the Division maintains a current list of backflow prevention devices
approved for use in Oregon.
   CITY. The City of Sweet Home, Oregon, and the area within its boundaries
including its boundaries as extended in the future and all property owned by
the city, outside the city limits. It means all officers, employees and
representatives of the City of Sweet Home.
   CITY ENGINEER. The City Engineer of the City of Sweet Home, or such person
as may be designated by the Public Works Director for the administration of
this chapter. DESIGNATED PERSON includes Public Works Director and any
qualified engineer.
   CITY MANAGER or MANAGER. The City Manager of the City of Sweet Home or such
person as may be designated by the Manager for the administration of this
chapter.
   COMMODITY CHARGE. The sum of the following expense components as defined in
the City Council approved rate study of April 2000; base expense; maximum day
expense and maximum hour expense.
   CONNECTION FEE. The fee paid to the city by the owner for the direct cost of
the city to provide a water service connection and meter from the public water
mainline to the owner(s) property line. Cost shall be for the time, materials
and equipment of inspection and connection by the city and shall be set by
resolution.
   CROSS CONNECTION. Any physical arrangement whereby a public water supply is
connected, directly or indirectly, with any other water supply system, sewer,
drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture or other service
which contains, or may contain, contaminated water, sewage or other waste or
liquid of unknown or unsafe quality which may be capable of imparting
contamination to the public water supply as a result of backflow (bypass
arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or change-over
devices and other temporary or permanent devices through which, or because of
which, backflow could occur are considered to be cross connections).
   CUSTOMER CHARGE. Also referred as MONTHLY BASE CHARGE. A sum of the billing
expense and the general expense as identified in the Council Approved Rate
Study of April 2000.
   DELINQUENT ACCOUNT. Any billing and/or associated fee for service that is
not paid by the fifteenth of the month following the month in which the service
was provided and/or charges incurred.
   DIRECT RESPONSIBLE CHARGE. Also referred as DRC. Designation of certified
operator, pursuant to applicable Oregon Administrative Rules (OAR), responsible
for, supervising the technical operations of the water distribution system or
wastewater collection system; establishing and executing specific practices and
policies for operating the system in accordance with the policies and practices
of the owner and the requirements of public water/wastewater system rules, and;
are engaged in the actual day to day operation or supervision of the system.
   DOUBLE CHECK DETECTOR ASSEMBLY. A backflow prevention device consisting of a
line size double check assembly in parallel with a detector meter and meter
size double check valve assembly. Each double check valve assembly is to be
equipped with properly located test cocks and tightly closing shutoff valve at
the end of the assembly. If it is necessary to put a double check detector
assembly below the grade, upon the approval of the City Engineer, it may be
installed in a vault such that there is a minimum of 12 inches between the
bottom of the vault and the bottom of the assembly so the top of the assembly
is not more than a maximum of eight inches below grade, and there is a minimum
of 24 inches of clearance between the side of the vault and the side of the
assembly. There shall be a minimum of 12 inches clearance from the end of the
assembly to the end wall surface of the vault. In vaults without a fully
removable top, minimum headroom of six feet zero inches is required. An access
opening a minimum of 24 inches square is required on all vault lids. The vault
must have adequate drainage to prevent flooding. Special consideration must be
given to double check valve assemblies of the “Y” type. These devices must be
installed on their “side” with the test cocks in a vertical position so that
either check valve may be removed for service without removing the assembly.
   DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY. A backflow prevention assembly composed of at
least two independently acting check valves including tightly closing shutoff
valves on each side of the check valve assembly and test cocks available for
testing the water tightness of each check valve. The assembly shall be located
as close as practical to the user’s connection and shall be installed
horizontally above grade and in a manner where it is readily accessible for
testing and maintenance. If it is necessary to put a double check valve
assembly below the grade, upon the approval of the City Engineer it may be
installed in a vault such that there is a minimum of 12 inches between the
bottom of the vault and the bottom of the assembly so the top of the assembly
is not more than a maximum of eight inches below grade, and there is a minimum
of 24 inches of clearance between the side of the vault and the side of the
assembly. There shall be a minimum of 12 inches clearance from the end of the
assembly to the end wall surface of the vault. In vaults without a fully
removable top, minimum headroom of six feet zero inches is required. An access
opening a minimum of 24 inches square is required on all vault lids. The vault
must have adequate drainage to prevent flooding. Special consideration must be
given to double check valve assemblies of the “Y” type. These devices must be
installed on their “side” with the test cocks in a vertical position so that
either check valve may be removed for service without removing the assembly.
   FIRE SERVICE. Any service installed for the specific purpose of fire
protection (hose connection or sprinklers).
   HOSE BIB VACUUM BREAKER. A back-siphonage prevention device to be placed
onto an existing water faucet consisting of a single check valve mechanism with
an atmospheric vent. The hose bib vacuum breaker is not a backflow prevention
device and cannot be tested.
   NORMAL WORKING HOURS. For administrative purposes, any normal workday Monday
through Friday (except holidays) between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
TREATMENT PLANT NORMAL WORKING HOURS are 7:00 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. everyday of the
week.
   PRESSURE VACUUM BREAKER. A back-siphonage prevention device consisting of a
single spring-loaded check valve and an independently operated, spring-loaded
air inlet valve, two tightly closing gate or ball valves and two test cocks. It
is not adequate protection in a situation where backpressure could occur;
consequently, it is not approved for premise isolation.
   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE ASSEMBLY. A backflow prevention assembly which
has three main components consisting of a #1 check valve, #2 check valve and a
pressure differential relief valve and two tightly closing shutoff valves on
each side of the assembly. The assembly shall be installed as close to the
service connection as is practical. The device shall be installed a minimum of
12 inches above grade and no more that 36 inches above grade measured from the
bottom of the device without a permanently installed testing platform approved
by the City Engineer. The device shall be installed with a minimum of 12 inches
side clearance. All test cocks shall be readily accessed and capped.
   RESIDENCE or RESIDENCES. A building used as a home.
   RULE. Any written standard, directive, interpretation, policy, regulation,
procedure or other provision, adopted by the City Council as a resolution to
carry out the provisions of this chapter.
   USER. Any person, corporation or other entity using water through an
established service line.
   WATER MAIN. Any pipe owned by the City of Sweet Home, laid in a street,
alley, easement or on city property, and used or intended to be used for the
distribution of potable water to customers through service lines.
(Ord. 1174, 2005)
§ 13.04.020  WATER SERVICE—RESPONSIBILITY.
   A.   The person who owns the premises served by the water service shall be
ultimately responsible for payment of the water user charge for that property
not withstanding the fact that the property may be occupied by a tenant or
other occupant who may be required by the owner to pay the charges. The person
(s) opening a water account and/or person(s) occupying the premises served
shall be responsible for payment of all charges prescribed in this chapter.
Service may be denied to any person who has left an unpaid water bill at
another address within the city limits of Sweet Home, until the bill is paid.
Service may be denied to property that has unpaid water bills against it
whether they were incurred by a current or prior property owner, prior tenant,
or prior occupant.
   B.   The users of the water service shall be billed for services in
accordance with the rate schedule set by resolution as authorized by this
chapter.
   C.   Where water is supplied through one service line to more than one user,
the city may decline to furnish water until separate customer service lines are
provided. However, when more than one house or premises is permitted to connect
to one water meter, the customer service lines shall be arranged so that the
supply to each separate residence or premises shall be controlled by a separate
valve. The property owner shall be responsible to pay for all the water used
through such meter. Approval for such a connection is required by the City
Engineer prior to connection.
(Ord. 1266, §§ 1, 2, 2017; Ord. 1174, 2005)
§ 13.04.030  BILLING, PAYMENT DELINQUENCIES AND PENALTIES.
   A.   Rates shall generally be charged for the use of the water service using
a monthly base charge established by meter size selection and a commodity
charge based on the volume of water used and the charges based upon the rates
shall be payable at City Hall. All bills are due when mailed and shall be
considered delinquent if not paid by the fifteenth of the month following the
month in which the service was provided and/or charges incurred.
   B.   If the bill is not paid by the time it becomes delinquent, a delinquent
notice shall be mailed to the customer notifying him or her of the
possibilities of termination and the procedure for challenging a disputed
bill.  If the bill is not paid by the date and time specified in the delinquent
notice, or appropriate arrangements made at City Hall-Water Department, the
City Manager shall, by rule, have the authority to deprive the property
concerned of the water service by means of shut off, lockout, meter removal
and/or methods appropriate for discontinuance of water service until all
delinquent user charges including interest accrued and the expense of removal,
closing and restoration have been fully paid. The expense of the
discontinuance, removal or closing, as well as the expense of restoring service
shall be a debt due to the city and a lien upon the property and may be
recovered by civil action in the name of the city against the property owner,
the person or both. Water service shall not be restored until all charges,
including interest accrued and the expense of removal, closing and restoration
shall have been paid.
   C.   A late fee and interest at a rate set by resolution shall accrue on all
accounts from the date of delinquency. A service charge, as determined by
resolution shall be paid to the city whenever service is reinstated after
having been discontinued due to nonpayment.
   D.   Service may be denied to any person until restitution has been made for
any damage or loss of revenue resulting from tampering with or bypassing water
meters or locking devices.
   E.   Adjustment of utility bills when water pipes break on the customer’s
side of the water meter maybe adjusted upon customer request and upon proof the
water pipe(s) have been repaired/replaced.
   F.   Changes of ownership or occupancy of premises found delinquent shall
not be cause of reducing or eliminating these penalties.
   G.   Water user charges levied in accordance with this chapter shall be a
debt due to the city and a lien upon the property. If this debt is not paid
within 30 days after it shall be due and payable, it shall be deemed delinquent
and may be recovered by civil action in the name of the city against the
property owner, the person or both.
(Ord. 1266, §§ 3, 4, 2017; Ord. 1203, § 53, 2008; Ord. 1174, 2005)
§ 13.04.040  FEES.
   A.   Fees shall be made as established by City Council resolution for:
      1.   Reinstating water service to any property deprived of the service
under the foregoing §
13.04.030 of this chapter;
      2.   Turning water service on that has been turned off without permit
under §
13.04.080 of this chapter;
      3.   Turning off and turning on water service during regular and after
hours;
      4.   Re-reading the water meter at the request of the user, if the
previous reading was correct;
      5.   Calibration or re-installation of water meters at the request of the
user if the previous meter was registering correctly;
      6.   Hydrant meter deposit;
      7.   Vacationer’s water on/off;
      8.   Tampering with water meter effecting register;
      9.   Special potable water usage fee;
      10.   Water deposits;
      11.   Temporary water service fee;
      12.   Plan review fee for required backflow devices;
      13.   Notifying user of delinquent bill by hanging the notice on door;
      14.   Service charge;
      15.   Late fee for delinquent accounts; and
      16.   Interest rate for delinquent accounts.
   B.   The City Manager shall have authority to adjust or waive fees as
appropriate.
(Ord. 1266, § 5, 2017; Ord. 1174, 2005)
§ 13.04.050  RATES.
   A.   The rates for water use shall be set by City Council resolution.
   B.   Costs for installing city service lines and water meters outside the
city, but within the urban growth boundary (UGB), shall be calculated on an
individual basis. The city will own and maintain the water meter. No new
installations are to be allowed outside the UGB.
   C.   For existing water users outside the city limits, the rate charge shall
be one and one-half times the rate charge to water users within the city
limits.
   D.   Under no circumstances shall service be extended to persons or
properties located outside of the city limits without the expressed permission
of the City Council by resolution. The Council may grant service outside the
city only under the following circumstances:
      1.   As a temporary measure to alleviate a health hazard; and
      2.   Under emergency.
   E.   All private fire lines shall be metered by the city at the owner’s
expense, if the owner is found to be using the water for other than fire
protection.
   F.   The City Manager shall cause a review of water rates to be made each
February of the year to determine what rate changes, if any, are to be
considered by the City Council.
(Ord. 1174, 2005)
§ 13.04.060  WATER ACCOUNT DEPOSITS.
   A.   A deposit as set by resolution shall be required in advance on each new
water account and for each customer whose water service has been turned off for
non-payment before water service is to be commenced or resumed, except in the
case of authorized rental property managers requiring temporary water service
of 72 hours or less. The authorized rental property manager will pay a non-
refundable service fee as set by resolution in advance for each request for
temporary service, plus actual water usage in excess of 100 cubic feet.
Temporary service for more than 72 hours shall require a full deposit plus
actual water usage more than 100 cubic feet. The temporary service deposit will
be refunded on the regularly scheduled billing date, less the dollar amount for
actual water usage more than 100 cubic feet. Temporary service in all cases is
30 days or less. Minimum charge for temporary service shall be no less than as
set by resolution, plus actual water usage more than 100 cubic feet.
   B.   Upon any termination of the water service, the deposit shall be applied
as payment on the account and the balance shall be refunded.
   C.   Deposits will be available for refund or may be waived altogether for
property owners, based upon a showing of good credit. The determination of
whether a customer has established “good credit” shall be made by rule. Fees
for special portable metered, or estimated, water usage, i.e., swimming pool
fills, tanker fills and street sweeper fills and other usage as required, shall
be established by Council resolution. The usage must be with permit as approved
by the City Engineer.
   D.   No person(s) may cut, change, remove, disconnect, connect, operate,
repair, interfere or tamper in any manner with a fire hydrant owned by the city
unless a permit has been issued. This section does not apply to the Sweet Home
Public Works or Fire and Ambulance District. Violations of this subsection will
be prosecuted under the criminal laws of Sweet Home and the State of Oregon. A
state-licensed and bonded professional plumber may receive a special annual
permit from the City Engineer to operate residential service valves when making
repairs. There shall be no fee for the permit.
(Ord. 1266, § 6, 2017; Ord. 1174, 2005)
§ 13.04.070  REVENUES.
   All revenues received by the city from such waterworks system shall be
separately kept by the Treasurer of the City of Sweet Home from all other funds
and shall show all receipts in and disbursements from the fund and the purposes
to which the disbursements have been applied.
(Ord. 1174, 2005)
§ 13.04.080  NEW WATER SERVICE.
   No new water service shall be installed by the city until the potential
customer has installed a cutoff, or “yard valve”, between the meter and the
outlet. The City of Sweet Home reserves the right to refuse or discontinue
water service to any premises where the City Engineer of the City of Sweet Home
has determined that the plumbing facilities, appliances and/or equipment using
water are not installed and/or operating in accordance with the Oregon State
Health rules and Plumbing Code of the City of Sweet Home and endanger the
public health. Water service may be refused to any premises as long as the
conditions exist. However, water service that is being furnished to an occupied
premises may be discontinued only after notice of the condition of the plumbing
that endangers the public health has been mailed by certified or registered
mail to the owner of record, and the notice also has been given to the occupant
of the premises, either personally, by posting the notice on the premises or by
mailing the notice to said occupant by certified or registered mail at least
seven days prior to the time that the water service is terminated unless
immediate emergency action is required. If shortage of water exists, the city
may restrict the use of water as determined by the city.
(Ord. 1203, § 54, 2008; Ord. 1174, 2005)
§ 13.04.090  AUTHORITY.
   The City Manager may, by rule, establish any/all procedures as necessary for
carrying out the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 1174, 2005)
§ 13.04.100  YARD VALVES.
   All residences are required to have a yard valve on their water lateral
line. The yard valve shall be installed on the owner’s side of the meter
according to city specifications and be the property of the owner to have and
forever maintain.
(Ord. 1174, 2005)
§ 13.04.110  BACKFLOW PREVENTION.
   A.   The city is authorized by the “Safe Drinking Water Act” Pub. Law No.
93-523, being 42 USC 300f et seq. and Oregon Administrative Rules Chapter 333,
“Public Water System”, to achieve compliance with any cross connection control
requirements set forth by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. cross
connections shall be prohibited and protection provided against such cross
connection. The City may require that all backflow assemblies installed on fire
protection services be tested annually.
   B.   No person shall connect, unless an approved backflow prevention device
is used, any pump or other apparatus to any water main or service connection
connected to the City of Sweet Home water system which is capable of
introducing any foreign liquid or material into the system. The existence of
any cross connection, whether open or not, shall be found cause for the water
to be turned off and/or completely disconnected from the city service line.
   C.   An approved backflow device shall be installed to isolate the fire
suppression pipe network from the potable water system. An additional backflow
device shall be installed on the service line as near to the meter as possible
for protection of the city water supply or as determined by the City Engineer.
   D.   Premises where there is an auxiliary water supply which can be
connected to the city water supply piping, such as being hooked to city water
and continuing to use a well for irrigation purposes, an approved backflow
prevention device for protecting community water systems shall be installed on
the service connection.
   E.   Approved backflow assemblies shall have at least the same cross
sectional area as the water meter size or the line diameter if smaller. If a
continuous water supply is necessary, two sets of approved backflow assemblies
shall be installed in parallel. Where parallel assemblies are required, the sum
of the cross sectional areas shall be equivalent to the cross sectional area of
the meter.
   F.   There shall be no outlet, tee, tap or connection of any sort between
the water meter and the approved backflow assembly. A “Y” strainer and/or
pressure reducing valve installed before the approved backflow assembly are the
only exceptions.
   G.   Approved backflow assemblies shall not be bypassed, made inoperative or
removed without specific written authorization from the City Engineer.
      1.   Removal. The use of a device may be discontinued and the device
removed from service upon presentation of sufficient evidence to the City
Engineer to verify that a hazard no longer exists or is not likely to be
created in the future.
      2.   Relocation. An assembly may be relocated following confirmation by
the City Engineer that the relocation will continue to provide the required
protection and satisfy installation requirements. A retest will be required
following the relocation of the device.
      3.   Repair. An assembly may be removed for repair; provided, the water
use is either discontinued until repair is completed and the device is returned
to service or the service connection is equipped with other backflow protection
approved by the City Engineer. A retest will be required following the repair
of the assembly.
      4.   Replacement. An assembly may be removed and replaced provided the
water use is discontinued until the replacement assembly is installed. All
replacement assemblies must be approved by the Oregon Health Division and
commensurate with the degree of hazard.
   H.   Owners of any premises on which, or on account of which, backflow
assemblies are installed, shall have the assemblies tested by a certified
backflow prevention assembly tester licensed by the Oregon Health Department
(Drinking Water Division). Backflow assemblies must be tested at a minimum of
annually and immediately after installation, relocation or repair. The City
Engineer may require a more frequent testing schedule if it is determined to be
necessary. No device shall be placed in service unless it is functioning as
required. A report form provided by the city must be filed with the Public
Works Office each time the device is tested, relocated or repaired. These
devices shall be serviced, overhauled or replaced whenever they are found
defective and all costs of testing, repair and maintenance shall be born by the
water user. The Public Works Department will supply affected water users with a
list of persons certified by the State of Oregon Health Department (Drinking
Water Division) upon request.
   I.   The City Engineer shall review all requests for new services to
determine if backflow protection is required. Plans and specifications must be
submitted to the City Engineer upon request for review of possible cross
connection hazards as a condition of service. No review fee will be required if
no hazard or potential hazard exists. If it is determined that a backflow
prevention assembly is necessary to protect the public water system, a review
fee as set by resolution will be required for each device installed. The
required device must be installed before service will be granted.
(Ord. 1174, 2005)
§ 13.04.120  CUSTOMER NOTIFICATION FOR CROSS CONNECTION PROGRAM INSPECTION.
   A.   The City Engineer may require an on-premises inspection to evaluate
cross connection hazards. Any customer who cannot or will not allow on-premises
inspection of their piping system shall be required to install the backflow
prevention assembly that the City Engineer considers necessary.
   B.   The City Engineer may require a re-inspection for cross connection
hazards of any premises to which water is serviced by the Water Department. Any
customer who cannot or will not allow on-premises inspection of their piping
system shall be required to install the backflow prevention assembly that the
City Engineer considers necessary.
      1.   The City Engineer shall notify the water user of the cross
connection inspection findings, listing corrective action to be taken if
required. A period of 30 days shall be given to complete all corrective actions
required including installation of backflow prevention assemblies.
      2.   A second notice shall be sent to each water user that does not take
the required corrective action prescribed in the first notice within the 30-day
period allowed. The second notice shall give the water user a two-week period
to take the required corrective action. If no action is taken within the two-
week period, the water service to the affected water user shall be terminated
until the required corrective actions are taken.
      3.   The City Engineer shall notify each affected water user when it is
time for the backflow prevention assembly installed on their service connection
to be tested. This written notice shall give the water user 30 days to have the
device tested and supply the Public Works Department with the necessary form
documenting the test.
      4.   A second notice shall be sent to each water user who does not have a
backflow prevention device tested as prescribed in the first notice within the
30-day period allowed. The second notice shall give the water user a two-week
period to have the backflow prevention assembly tested. If no action is taken
within the two-week period, the City Engineer will terminate water service to
the affected water user until the subject device is tested.
      5.   When the City Engineer encounters water use(s) that represent a
clear and immediate hazard to the potable water supply that cannot be
immediately abated, the City Engineer shall institute the procedure for
terminating the water service. Conditions or water uses that create a basis for
immediate water termination are as follows:
         a.   Refusal to install the required backflow prevention assembly;
         b.   Refusal to test a backflow prevention assembly;
         c.   Refusal to repair a faulty backflow prevention assembly;
         d.   Refusal to replace a faulty backflow prevention assembly;
         e.   Removal and/or bypassing without prior approval of a backflow
assembly where required;
         f.   Direct or indirect connection between the public water system and
a sewer line;
         g.   Unprotected direct or indirect connection between the public
water system and a system or equipment containing contaminants;
         h.   Unprotected direct or indirect connection between the public
water system and an auxiliary water system;
         i.   A situation that presents an immediate health hazard to the
public water system; and/or
         j.   Non-submission of records of tests, repairs and maintenance to
the Department upon a second letter request of their submission.
(Ord. 1174, 2005)
§ 13.04.130  INSPECTIONS.
   The City Engineer may inspect, at reasonable hours of the day, the exterior
parts of the building and premises in which water is delivered from the city
mains to determine the condition of the pipes and fixtures and the manner in
which the water is used, or interior portions as allowed by law. The designated
representative will present proper identification, if requested.
(Ord. 1174, 2005)
§ 13.04.140  WATER TURNOFF FROM MAINS.
   Water may be turned off from the mains without notice for repair or other
necessary purposes. The city is not responsible for any consequential damages.
(Ord. 1174, 2005)
§ 13.04.150  PROVISION OF WATER FOR STEAM BOILERS.
   Water for steam boilers shall not be furnished by direct pressure from the
city mains.
(Ord. 1174, 2005)
§ 13.04.160  DAMAGE TO WATER SYSTEM.
   Any damage to the city water system or service line because of faulty
customer equipment or backflow shall be the responsibility of the customer or
user.
(Ord. 1174, 2005)
§ 13.04.170  FLUORIDATION.
   The city is authorized and directed to provide for the fluoride
supplementation of its public water supplies. The supplementation is to be made
in conformance with the regulations of the Oregon State Board of Health
controlling fluoridation of public water supplies.
(Ord. 1174, 2005)
§ 13.04.180  VIOLATION—PENALTY.
   Unless the cut-off valve is on the user’s side of the water meter, it is
unlawful for any person to turn on or off any cut-off valve controlling water
service to any property, or to not obtain a permit from the City Engineer prior
to taking water from the city water system. Violations of this chapter may be
prosecuted under the provisions of Sweet Home Municipal Code
Chapter 9.36 and any amendments thereto in addition to any other legal remedies
available to the city. Each day that a violation exists is a separate offense.
(Ord. 1240, § 28, 2015; Ord. 1174, 2005)
§ 13.04.190  SEVERABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter are severable, and it is the intention to
confer the whole or any part of the powers herein provided for. If any clause,
section or provision of this chapter shall be declared unconstitutional or
invalid for any reason or cause, the remaining portion of this chapter shall be
in full force and effect and be valid as if the invalid portion thereof had not
been incorporated herein. It is hereby declared to be the City Council’s intent
that this chapter would have been adopted had such an unconstitutional
provision not been included herein.
(Ord. 1174, 2005)
§ 13.04.200  CLASSIFICATION.
   The City Council determines that any fee, rates or charges imposed by this
chapter are not a tax subject to the property tax limitations of Article XI, §
11(b) of the Oregon Constitution.
(Ord. 1174, 2005)
CHAPTER 13.06:  EROSION CONTROL
Section
   
13.06.010   General policy.
   
13.06.020   Definitions.
   
13.06.030   Erosion control.
   
13.06.040   Fish and wildlife habitat.
   
13.06.050   Natural vegetation.
   
13.06.060   Contaminated soils.
   
13.06.070   Enforcement.
§ 13.06.010  GENERAL POLICY.
   A.   The policies of this section shall apply during construction and until
permanent measures are in place following construction. It is the policy to
require temporary and permanent measures for all construction projects to
lessen the adverse effects of site alteration on the environment. The owner,
agent, contractor or employee shall properly install, operate and maintain both
temporary and permanent work, as provided in this section or in an approved
plan to protect the environment during the useful life of the project.
   B.   These erosion control rules apply to all parcels within the authority
of the city. Nothing in this section shall relieve any person from the
obligation to comply with the regulation or permits of any federal or state
authority.
(Ord. 1157, § 1, 2003)
§ 13.06.020  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply:
   CLASS I. Any violation that poses a major risk of harm to public health or
environment, or violation of any compliance schedule contained in a city permit
of a city order, including but not limited to:
      1.   Violation of a city order or approved plan;
      2.   Intentional unauthorized discharges;
      3.   Negligent spills or discharges that pose a major risk of harm to
public health or the environment;
      4.   Discharge of waste to surface waters without first obtaining a
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit;
      5.   Failure to immediately notify the city of a spill or upset condition
that results in any permitted discharge to public waters that poses a major
risk of harm to public health or the environment;
      6.   Violation of a permit compliance schedule;
      7.   Failure to provide access to premises or records;
      8.   Any other violation related to water quality that poses a major risk
of harm to public health or the environment; and
      9.   Two Class II violations or one Class II and two Class III violations
or three Class III violations.
   CLASS II. Any violation that poses a moderate risk of harm to public health
or the environment, including, but not limited to:
      1.   Violation of a city order or approved plan;
      2.   Waste discharge peimit limitation violations that pose a moderate
risk of harm to public health or the environment;
      3.   Negligent spills that pose a moderate risk of harm to public health
or the environment;
      4.   Failure to submit a report or plan as required by permit or license;
and
      5.   Any other violation related to water quality, that poses a moderate
risk of harm to public health or the environment.
   CLASS III. Any violation that poses a minor risk of harm to public health or
the environment, including, but not limited to:
      1.   Violation of a city order or an approved plan;
      2.   Negligent spills or discharges that pose a minor risk of harm to
public health or the environment;
      3.   Violation of a waste discharge permit limitation that poses a minor
risk of harm to public health or the environment;
      4.   Any other violation related to water quality that poses a minor risk
of harm to public health or the environment.
   MAGNITUDE OF VIOLATION. The extent of a violator’s deviation from the city’s
ordinances, rules, permits or orders taking into account such factors as, but
not limited to, pollutant or concentration, turbidity, volume, duration,
toxicity or proximity to human or environmental receptors. Deviations shall be
classified as major, moderate or minor.
   RISK OF HARM. The level of risk created by the likelihood of exposure,
either individual or cumulative or the actual damage either individual or
cumulative, caused by a violation to public health or the environment. RISK OF
HARM shall be categorized as major, moderate or minor.
   VIOLATION. A transgression of any ordinance, rule, order, license, permit or
any part thereof and includes both acts and omissions.
(Ord. 1157, § 1, 2003)
§ 13.06.030  EROSION CONTROL.
   It is the city’s policy to prevent erosion and to minimize the amount of
sediment and other pollutants reaching the public storm and/or surface water
system resulting from development, construction, grading, filling, excavating,
clearing and any other activity that accelerates erosion.
   A.   Erosion prohibited. No visible or measurable erosion shall leave the
property during construction or during activity described above. The owner of
the property, together with any person who causes the action from which the
visible or measurable erosion occurs, shall be responsible for clean up, fines
and damages. Clean up responsibilities involve public facilities and sensitive
areas including, but not limited to:
      1.   Creeks;
      2.   Drainage ways;
      3.   Wetlands;
      4.   Catch basins and storm drains; and
      5.   Sensitive areas, impacted by a project.
   B.   General requirements. Site plans for storm drainage, grading and
erosion control plans will be required for all grading activities, including
single-family residential construction, residential, commercial, industrial and
recreational developments. New developments impacting areas of 10,000 square
feet or greater must obtain an erosion control permit. All sites shall submit
an erosion control plan for review, regardless of size. At a minimum, the
erosion control plan shall include:
      1.   The methods and/or facilities to be used to prevent erosion and
pollution created from the development both during and after construction.
Site-specific considerations shall be incorporated;
      2.   Limits of clearing by flagging boundaries in the field before
starting site grading or construction. Staging areas shall be included;
      3.   An analysis of source controls, such as detention and storage during
construction as an alternative method to control erosion from storm water
runoff;
      4.   A drainage plan during construction;
      5.   Show existing contours as well as all sensitive areas, creeks,
streams, wetlands and open areas;
      6.   A description of historic localized flooding problems resulting from
surface water runoff, FEMA or flooding problems known to the community or the
city;
      7.   Erosion control plan shall include a schedule for implementation of
erosion measures. The schedule shall include:
         a.   Measures to cover bare soil within 14 days following final
grading;
         b.   Implementation of wet weather measures between October 1 and
April 30, unless otherwise approved by the city; and
         c.   On sites where vegetation and ground cover have been removed,
city-approved ground cover shall be re-established by seeding and mulching on
or before September 1 with the ground cover established by October 15. As an
alternative to seeding and mulching, or if ground cover is not established by
October 15, the open areas shall be protected through the wet season with straw
mulch, erosion blankets or other approved methods, where appropriate, with
long-term maintenance plan.
      8.   Water containing sediment shall not be discharged into the surface
water management system, wetlands or streams without first passing through an
approved sediment filtering facility or device. Discharge from temporary
sedimentation ponds or detention facilities used for sedimentation during
construction shall be constructed to city standards to provide adequate
sediment filtration.
   C.   Site plan. A site-specific plan prepared by an engineer shall be
required and additional erosion control measures may be required for sites
having one or more of the following characteristics:
      1.   Sites greater than five acres disturbed;
      2.   Sites with slopes greater than 15% on any portion of the site;
      3.   Sites with highly erodible soils;
      4.   Sites adjacent to sensitive areas; and
      5.   Sites where grading and clearing activities are likely between
October 1 and April 30.
   D.   Additional measures. Additional erosion control measures may include
one or more of the following:
      1.   Limited area cleared at any one time;
      2.   Additional drainage requirements during construction;
      3.   Filtering or treatment of runoff;
      4.   Additional water quality;
      5.   Additional erosion control to cover portions of the site;
      6.   Maintaining a vegetated buffer strip between site and sensitive
area;
      7.   Additional facilities to reduce volume and velocity of water runoff;
      8.   If there are no workable alternatives, limit clearing and grading in
some areas between October 1 and April 30; and
      9.   All disturbed land areas that shall remain unworked for 14 days or
more shall be physically covered in the wet weather season.
   E.   NPDES erosion control permit. All construction activities disturbing an
area that is one or more acres of land shall obtain a NPDES erosion control
permit for construction activities issued by the city.
   F.   Performance. The city may require the applicant to submit a bond,
cashiers check or irrevocable letter of credit from an acceptable financial
institution to secure performance of the requirements of this section. Upon
default, the city may perform work or remedy violations and draw upon the bond
or fund. If the city does not require a bond and the developer does not perform
the erosion control plan in whole or in part, the city may, but shall not be
obligated to, perform or cause to be performed corrective work and charge the
developer. The amount shall bear interest and shall become a lien upon the
property, foreclosable in accordance with O.R.S. Chapter 88.
   G.   Erosion control certification.
      1.   Developers/contractors of building activities requiring erosion
control permits who have a certified individual on staff with authority over
erosion control and who is responsible for erosion control of the site, are
eligible for a discount of their erosion control fees. On large or complex
sites, the city may require an individual certified in erosion control to be on
site at all times. Developments with certified erosion control staff are
subject to all of these rules and regulations. Violation of these Rules and
Regulations resulting in enforcement procedures described in Sweet Home
Municipal Code §
13.06.070 will result in revocation of the certifications and payment of the
erosion control fee. Recertification is required following erosion control
violations resulting in enforcement actions.
      2.   Certification shall involve training in erosion control techniques,
issues and implementation strategies. A minimum of four hours of classroom
instruction shall be required every two years.
   H.   Maintenance. The applicant shall maintain the facilities and techniques
contained in the approved erosion control plan so as to continue to be
effective during construction or other permitted activity. If the facilities
and techniques approved in an erosion control plan are not effective or
sufficient as determined by the city’s site inspector, the permittee shall
submit a revised plan within three working days of written notification by the
city. In cases where erosion is occurring, the city may require the applicant
to implement interim control measures prior to submittal of a revised erosion
control plan and without limiting the city’s right to undertake enforcement
measures. Upon approval of the revised plan by the city, the permittee shall
immediately implement the revised plan. The developer shall implement fully the
revised plan within three working days of approval by the Public Works Director
or his or her designee.
   I.   Inspection. The erosion control measures shall be installed by the
owner or his, her or its representative and shall be inspected by the city
prior to the start of any excavation work.
   J.   Deposit of sediment. No person shall drag, drop, track or otherwise
place or deposit, or permit to be deposited, mud, dirt, rock or other such
debris upon a public street or into any part of the public storm and surface
water system, including natural drainage systems, or any part of a private
storm and surface water system that drains or connects to the public storm and
surface water system, with the exception of sanding for ice and snow and
maintenance such as crack or chip sealing. Any such deposit of material shall
be immediately removed using hand labor or mechanical means. No material shall
be washed or flushed into the road/street or any part of the storm and surface
water system without erosion control measures installed to the satisfaction of
the city and any such action shall be an additional violation.
   K.   Permit fee. The city may collect all fees for the review of plans,
administration, enforcement and field inspection(s) to carry out the rules
contained herein as established and amended by the city. The amount of any fees
shall be determined by Council through resolution.
(Ord. 1203, § 55, 2008; Ord. 1157, § 1, 2003)
§ 13.06.040  FISH AND WILDLIFE HABITAT.
   Construction shall be done in a manner to minimize adverse effects on
wildlife and fishery resources pursuant to the requirements of local, state and
federal agencies charged with wildlife and fish protection.
(Ord. 1157, § 1, 2003)
§ 13.06.050  NATURAL VEGETATION.
   Natural native vegetation shall be protected in areas designated with a
Natural Resource Overlay Zone. Work within this zone must meet the requirements
of
Chapter 17.72.
(Ord. 1157, § 1, 2003)
§ 13.06.060  CONTAMINATED SOILS.
   In the event the construction process reveals soils contaminated with
hazardous materials or chemicals, all parties shall stop work immediately to
ensure no contaminated materials are hauled from the site, remove work forces
from the contaminated areas, leaving all machinery and equipment, and secure
the areas from access by the public until such time as a mitigation team has
evaluated the situation and identified an appropriate course of action. The
owner and the contractor shall notify OSHA and DEQ of the situation upon
discovery. The owner and the contractor must comply with OSHA and DEQ statues
and rules.
(Ord. 1157, § 1, 2003)
§ 13.06.070  ENFORCEMENT.
   The city may impose civil penalties, including, but not limited to, stop
work orders, fines, modification or revocations of permit and/or cessation or
services, or seek and injunction or other relief provided by law when any user
or person violates any condition or provision of this chapter or any rule
adopted thereto or any final order entered with respect thereto as well as
violation of federal or state statutes, regulations or administrative rules.
The city shall address all documented violations in order of seriousness at the
most appropriate level of enforcement necessary to achieve the goals set forth
herein under the particular circumstances of each violation. The violators who
do not comply with initial enforcement action shall be subject to increasing
levels of enforcement until compliance is achieved.
   A.   Procedure for enforcement.
      1.   Prior notice and exceptions. Except as otherwise provided, prior to
the assessment of any civil penalty, the city shall serve a notice of violation
upon the respondent. The written notice shall be served, either personally, or
by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, specifying the
violation and stating that the city will assess a civil penalty if a violation
continues or occurs after five days following the receipt of the notice.
      2.   The above notice shall not be required where the respondent has
otherwise received actual notice of the violation not less than five days prior
to the assessment of civil penalty. No advance notice, written or actual, shall
be required if:
         a.   The act of omission constituting the violation is intentional;
         b.   The violation would normally not be in existence for five days;
and
         c.   The water pollution might leave or be removed from the
jurisdiction of the city.
   B.   Notice of noncompliance. A notice of noncompliance is an enforcement
action which:
      1.   Informs a person of the existence of a violation, the actions
required to resolve the violations and the consequences of the continued
noncompliance. The notice may specify the time by which compliance is to be
achieved and that the need a for formal enforcement action will be evaluated;
      2.   Shall be issued under the direction of the Public Works Director or
designee;
      3.   Shall be issued for all classes of documented violations; and
      4.   The report shall detail the event, steps taken to correct the
problem and steps to prevent future events.
   C.   Notice of violation and intent to assess a penalty. The notice of
violation and intent to assess a civil penalty is a formal enforcement action
which:
      1.   Includes a time schedule by which compliance is to be achieved;
      2.   Shall be issued by the Public Works Director or designee; and
      3.   Shall be issued for the first occurrence of a documented Class I
violation that is not excepted or the repeated or continued occurrence of
documented Class II or III violations where notice of noncompliance has failed
to achieve compliance or satisfactory progress toward compliance.
   D.   Notice of civil penalty assessment. A notice of civil penalty
assessment is a formal enforcement action which:
      1.   Shall be issued by the Public Works Director or designee; and
      2.   May be issued for the occurrence of any class of documented
violation; for any class of repeated or continuing documented violations or
where a person has failed to comply with a notice of violation and intent to
assess a civil penalty or other order or stipulated final order.
   E.   Memorandum of agreement and order. A memorandum of agreement and order
is a formal enforcement action that is in the form of an agreement or consent
order issued by the Public Works Director that may be negotiated between the
city and the subject party prior to or after any notice set forth above, shall
be signed by the Public Works Director or designee on behalf of the city and
the authorized representative of the subject party, and shall set forth action
to be taken and set civil penalties. This may be issued for any class of
violations.
   F.   Other remedies. The formal enforcement action as described in these
sections in no way limits the city for seeking other legal or equitable
remedies in the proper court as provided by city code and Oregon law.
   G.   Civil penalty schedule matrices.
      1.   In addition to any liability, duty or other penalty provided by law,
the Public Works Director may assess a civil penalty for any violation
pertaining to the city’s ordinances, regulations, permits or orders by service
of a written notice of assessment of civil penalty upon the respondent(s) set
forth above. Civil penalty issued by the Public Works Director pursuant to this
matrix shall be for each day of each violation.
      2.   The amount of any civil penalty shall be determined by Council
through resolution and be reflected in the following magnitude:
 
Class     Magnitude of Violation
          Major Moderate Minor
Class I   5X    2.5X     1X
Class II  2X    1X       .5X
Class III .5X   .25X     .1X
 
   G.   Stop work orders. In addition to civil penalties, violations will be
enforced by on-site control activities to mitigate existing violations and
prevent future violations to the greatest extent possible.
      1.   Initial violations will result in a written description of
requirements for repair of the problem and a 24-hour time period for compliance
or a specified time for compliance.
      2.   If the repair is not performed, or violations continue, the
inspector will issue a stop work order on the project, which will remain in
effect until the violation is repaired to the requirements.
      3.   If the violation is not remedied or the person fails to commence
diligently remedying the violation within 24 hours, the city may enter upon the
property to abate the violation.
      4.   Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, if the city
reasonably believes the violation constitutes an emergency or other
circumstance requiring immediate action, the city may take reasonable and
necessary remedial action with or without notice to the owner as deemed
appropriate by the city considering the circumstance.
      5.   Any costs incurred by the city to remedy a violation shall be paid
by the owner. If the required repairs are not completed within the specified
time frame or if violations continue that require additional site visits,
additional daily charges will be assessed to the owner of the property.
   H.   Abatement. Nothing herein shall prevent the city, following seven days
written notice to the discharger and discharger’s failure to act, from entering
upon the property and disconnecting, sealing or otherwise abating any
unauthorized connection to the storm water or system discharger violating any
permit, this chapter or water quality standards. The city may perform tests
upon the property to trace sources of water quantity or water quality
violations at the property owner/developer’s expense.
   I.   In addition to any other remedy provided for the city herein violation
of this chapter constitutes a violation and may be prosecuted under the
provisions of Sweet Home Municipal Code
Chapter 9.36 and any amendments thereto.  Each day’s violation of a provision
of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 1203, § 56, 2008; Ord. 1157, § 1, 2003)
CHAPTER 13.08:  SEWER SERVICE SYSTEM
Section
Article I. General Provisions
   
13.08.010   Purpose.
   
13.08.020   Applicability.
   
13.08.030   Administration.
   
13.08.040   Abbreviations.
Article II. Definitions
   
13.08.050   Definitions.
Article III. Use of Public Sewers Required
   
13.08.060   Use of public sewers required.
   
13.08.070   Construction—Generally.
Article IV. Private Sewage Disposal
   
13.08.080   Private sewage disposal.
Article V. Building Sewers and Connections
   
13.08.090   Building sewers and connections.
Article VI. Use of Public Stormwater Sewers
   
13.08.100   Use of public stormwater sewers.
   
13.08.110   Prohibited discharge standards.
   
13.08.120   Categorical pretreatment standards.
   
13.08.130   State pretreatment standards.
   
13.08.140   Local limits.
   
13.08.150   Right of revision.
   
13.08.160   Dilution.
   
13.08.170   Public Works Director authority.
   
13.08.180   Water quality manholes.
   
13.08.190   Measurements, tests and analyses.
Article VII. Pretreatment of Wastewater
   
13.08.200   Pretreatment facilities.
   
13.08.210   Additional pretreatment measures.
   
13.08.220   Accidental discharge/slug control plans.
   
13.08.230   Hauled wastewater.
Article VIII. Wastewater Discharge Permit Application
   
13.08.240   Wastewater analysis.
   
13.08.250   Wastewater discharge permit requirement.
   
13.08.260   Wastewater discharge permitting—Existing connections.
   
13.08.270   Wastewater discharge permitting—New connection.
   
13.08.280   Contents.
   
13.08.290   Application signatories and certification.
   
13.08.300   Wastewater discharge permit decisions.
Article IX. Wastewater Discharge Permit Issuance Process
   
13.08.310   Duration.
   
13.08.320   Contents.
   
13.08.330   Appeals.
   
13.08.340   Modification.
   
13.08.350   Transfer.
   
13.08.360   Revocation.
   
13.08.370   Reissuance.
   
13.08.380   Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions.
Article X. Reporting Requirements
   
13.08.390   Baseline monitoring reports.
   
13.08.400   Compliance schedule progress reports.
   
13.08.410   Report on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard
deadline.
   
13.08.420   Periodic compliance reports.
   
13.08.430   Report of changed conditions.
   
13.08.440   Reports of potential problems.
   
13.08.450   Reports from unpermitted users.
   
13.08.460   Notice of violation—Repeat sampling and reporting.
   
13.08.470   Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste.
   
13.08.480   Analytical requirements.
   
13.08.490   Sample collection.
   
13.08.500   Timing.
   
13.08.510   Recordkeeping.
Article XI. Compliance Monitoring
   
13.08.520   Right of entry—Inspection and sampling.
   
13.08.530   Search warrants.
Article XII. Confidential Information
   
13.08.540   Confidential information.
Article XIII. Publication of Users in Significant Noncompliance
   
13.08.550   Publication of users—In significant noncompliance.
Article XIV. Administrative Enforcement Remedies
   
13.08.560   Notification of violation.
   
13.08.570   Consent orders.
   
13.08.580   Show cause hearing.
   
13.08.590   Compliance orders.
   
13.08.600   Cease and desist orders.
   
13.08.610   Administrative fines.
   
13.08.620   Emergency suspensions.
   
13.08.630   Termination of discharge.
Article XV. Judicial Enforcement Remedies
   
13.08.640   Injunctive relief.
   
13.08.650   Civil penalties.
   
13.08.660   Criminal prosecution.
   
13.08.670   Remedies nonexclusive.
Article XVI. Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations
   
13.08.680   Upset.
   
13.08.690   Prohibited discharge standards.
   
13.08.700   Bypass.
Article XVII. Miscellaneous Provisions
   
13.08.710   Pretreatment charges and fees.
Article XVIII. Protection from Damage
   
13.08.720   Protection from damage.
Article XIX. Powers and Authority of Inspectors
   
13.08.730   Powers and authority of inspectors.
Article XX. Sewer User Charges
   
13.08.740   Sewer user charges.
Article XXI. Review and Revision of Rates
   
13.08.750   Review and revision of rates.
Article XXII. Responsibility, Payment Delinquencies and Penalties
   
13.08.760   User charge payment responsibility, delinquencies and penalties.
Article XXIII. Handling of Funds
   
13.08.770   Handling of funds.
Article XXIV. Reserved for Industrial Cost Recovery
Article XXV. Infiltration and Inflow
   
13.08.780   Infiltration and inflow.
Article XXVI. Reserved
   
13.08.790   Reserved.
Article XXVII. Penalties
   
13.08.800   Violations—Penalties.
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 13.08.010  PURPOSE.
   A.   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly
owned treatment works (POTW) for the city and enables the city to comply with
all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C.
§§ 12561 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 C.F.R. part
403). The objectives of this chapter are:
      1.   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will
interfere with its operation;
      2.   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW, which will
pass through the POTW, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or otherwise
be incompatible with the POTW;
      3.   To protect both POTW personnel who may be affected by wastewater and
sludge in the course of their employment and the general public;
      4.   To improve opportunities for reuse and recycling of wastewater and
sludge from the POTW;
      5.   To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of
operation, maintenance and improvement of the POTW; and
      6.   To enable the city to comply with its National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements and
any other federal or state laws to which the POTW is subject.
   B.   This chapter authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits;
provides for monitoring, compliance and enforcement activities; establishes
administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the
setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the
program established herein.
(Ord. 1127, Art. 1 (§ 1), 1999)
§ 13.08.020  APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter shall apply to all users of the POTW.
(Ord. 1127, Art. 1 (§ 2), 1999)
§ 13.08.030  ADMINISTRATION.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, the control authority, as defined in
this chapter, shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this
chapter. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the control authority may
be delegated by the control authority to his or her authorized representative.
(Ord. 1127, Art. 1 (§ 3), 1999)
§ 13.08.040  ABBREVIATIONS.
   The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings.
   BOD. Biochemical oxygen demand.
   CCB. Construction Contractors Board.
   C.F.R. Code of Federal Regulations.
   DEQ. Department of Environmental Quality.
   EPA. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
   gpd. Gallons per day.
   mg/l. Milligrams per liter.
   NPDES. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
   POTW. Publicly owned treatment works.
   RCRA. Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.
   TSS. Total suspended solids.
   U.S.C. United States Code.
(Ord. 1127, Art. 1 (§ 4), 1999)
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
§ 13.08.050  DEFINITIONS.
   Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms
used in this chapter shall be as follows.
   ACT or THE ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the
Clean Water Act, as amended 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.
   APPROVAL AUTHORITY. The State of Oregon Department of Environmental Quality
(DEQ).
   APPURTENANCE. Those items at the endpoints of the mainline segments being
cleanouts or manholes that are publicly administered and maintained.
   AUTHORIZED SIGNATORY OF THE USER.
      1.   If the user is a corporation:
         a.   The president, secretary, treasurer or a vice-president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who
performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or
         b.   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production or operation
facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or
expenditures exceeding $25,000,000 (in second-quarter 1980 dollars), and if
authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in
accordance with corporate procedures.
      2.   If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship; a general
partner or proprietor, respectively.
      3.   If the user is a federal, state or local government facility; a
director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation
and performance of the activities of the government facility or his or her
designee.
      4.   The individuals described in subsections 1. through 3. of this
definition may designate another authorized representative if the authorization
is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position
responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge
originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the
company, and the written authorization is submitted to control authority.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five days at 20°C., expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l).
   BUILDING DRAIN. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five feet (one and one-half meters) outside the inner face of the
building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain up to and including
the connection fitting on the public sewer or other place of disposal.
   CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL STANDARD. Any regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with §
307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which apply to a specific category
of users and which appear in 40 C.F.R. Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405—471.
   CITY. The City of Sweet Home or the City Council of Sweet Home or its
authorized representative.
   CITY MANAGER. The chief executive officer of the city, responsible to the
City Council.
   COLLECTION SYSTEM. The system of public sewer to be operated by the city
designed for the collection of sanitary sewage.
   COMMERCIAL USER. Any premises used for commercial or business purposes,
which are not an industry, as defined in this chapter.
   COMPOSITE SAMPLE. The sample resulting from the combination of individual
wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an increment of either
flow or time, as specified by the control authority.
   CONTROL AUTHORITY. The City of Sweet Home; the person(s) authorized by the
city to supervise, administer, implement or otherwise perform activities of the
industrial pretreatment program and who is charged with these duties and
responsibilities by this chapter.
   DIRECTOR. The Public Works Director of the City of Sweet Home or his or her
authorized deputy, agent or representative.
   DOMESTIC WASTE. Any wastewater emanating from dwellings.
   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA). The U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency or its authorized representative.
   EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT (ERU). A volume of wastewater which incurs the
same costs from operations and maintenance as the average volume of domestic
waste discharged from an average residential dwelling unit in the treatment
works service area. For purposes of making this determination, the city shall
utilize the metered water use records or other metering device approved by the
Public Works Director. Where a user believes his or her wastewater discharge to
treatment works is substantially different than his or her water consumption,
an appropriate adjustment shall be made; providing, the user demonstrates to
the satisfaction of the Director the actual wastewater discharge. The volume
attributed to an ERU where the BOD, suspended solids or other characteristic of
the wastewater discharged by a user is significantly greater than a domestic
waste shall be adjusted to account for the difference in the costs of
treatment.
   EXISTING SOURCE. Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of
which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical
pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard
is thereafter promulgated in accordance with § 307 of the Act.
   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
   GRAB SAMPLE. An individual sample collected over a period of time not to
exceed 15 minutes.
   INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE. The introduction of pollutants into the
POTW from any non-domestic source regulated under § 307(b), (c) or (d) of the
Act.
   INDUSTRIAL USER.
      1.   A discharger into the POTW of nondomestic wastewater and or any non-
governmental, nonresidential user of the POTW which is identified in the
Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, Office of Management and
Budget, as amended and supplemented, under the following divisions:
         a.   Division A - Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing;
         b.   Division B - Mining;
         c.   Division D - Manufacturing;
         d.   Division E - Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and
Sanitary Services; and
         e.   Division I - Services.
      2.   A user in these divisions may be excluded from the industrial
category if it is determined that it will introduce domestic waste and waste
from sanitary conveniences.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. That portion of the wastewater emanating from an
industrial user, which is not domestic waste, or waste from sanitary
convenience.
   INFLOW AND INFILTRATION. The volume of both infiltration water and inflow
water found in the sanitary sewer system. INFILTRATION is the volume of
groundwater entering sanitary sewage facilities from the soil, through
defective joints, broken or cracked pipe, improper connections, manhole walls,
etc. INFLOW is the volume of surface water discharged into sanitary lines from
such sources as roof leaders, cellar and yard area drains, foundation drains,
manhole lids in the low lying areas and cross connections from the storm and
surface water system to the sanitary sewage system.
   INTERFERENCE. A discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment
processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   MEDICAL WASTE. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood
products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding,
surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory waste and dialysis wastes.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT. A permit
issued to a POTW or other discharger pursuant to § 402 of the Act.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
body of surface or ground water.
   NEW SOURCE.
      1.   Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there
is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced
after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under § 307(c) of the
Act which will be applicable to the source if the standards are thereafter
promulgated in accordance with that section; provided that:
         a.   The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed
at a site at which no other sources are located;
         b.   The building, structure, facility or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
         c.   The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation is substantially independent of
an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility
is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should
be considered.
      2.   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria
of subsections 1.b. or c. of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces or
adds to existing process or production equipment.
      3.   Construction of a NEW SOURCE, as defined under this paragraph, has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
         a.   Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site
construction program:
            (1)   Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
            (2)   Significant site preparation work including clearing,
excavation or removal of existing building, structure or facilities which is
necessary for the placement, assembly or installation of new source facilities
or equipment.
         b.   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of
facilities or equipment, that is intended for use in its operation within a
reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or
modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering
and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this
paragraph.
   NONCONTACT COOLING WATER. Water used for cooling which does not come into
direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product and waste product or
finished product.
   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE. Activities required ensuring the dependable and
economical function of collection and treatment works.
      1.   MAINTENANCE. Preservation of functional integrity and efficiency of
equipment and structures. This includes preventive maintenance, corrective
maintenance and replacement of equipment.
      2.   OPERATION. Control of the unit processes and equipment that make up
the collection and treatment works. This includes keeping financial and
personnel management records, laboratory control, process control, safety and
emergency operation planning, employment of attorneys and consultants, payment
of court costs or fees reasonably associated with any of the above.
   PASS THROUGH. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United
States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any
requirement of the city’s NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude
or duration of a violation).
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation,
partnership, co-partnership, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents or
assigns. This definition includes all federal, state or local governmental
entities.
   pH. A measure of acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed in standard
units.
   POLLUTANT. Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological
materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock,
sand, cellar dirt, agricultural and industrial wastes, and the characteristics
of the wastewater (i.e., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, chemical
oxygen demand (COD), toxicity or odor).
   PRETREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of
pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater prior to (or in lieu of) introducing such pollutants into the POTW.
This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or
biological processes; by process changes; or by other means (except by diluting
the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable
pretreatment standard).
   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. Any substantive or procedural requirement, other
than a pretreatment standard, related to pretreatment and imposed on a user.
   PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED DISCHARGES. Prohibitions
against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in §
13.08.110B. of this chapter.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any
dimension.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer in which owners of assessed properties have equal
rights, is controlled by public authority, where two or more private building
sewers are attached to the city sanitary public sewer system. Any length of
three-inch, six-inch or eight-inch or larger pipe size may be considered public
regardless of the presence or not of sewer appurtenances.
   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW). A treatment works, as defined by §
212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292) which is owned by the city. This definition
includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment,
recycling and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and
any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant.
   REPLACEMENT. Obtaining and installing equipment accessories or appurtenances
that are necessary during the design or useful life, whichever is longer, of
the collection and treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance
form which the works were designed and constructed.
   RESIDENTIAL USER. User of a single-family dwelling.
   RULE. Any written standard, directive, interpretation, policy, regulation,
procedure or other provision, adopted by the City Council as a resolution to
carry out the provisions of this chapter.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer, which carries sewage, and to which storm, surface
and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
   SEPTIC TANK WASTE. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical
toilets, campers, trailers and septic tanks.
   SERVICE AREA. All the area served by the treatment works and for which there
is one uniform user charge system.
   SERVICE LATERAL. The building sewer up to and including the connection
fitting on the pubic sewer.
   SEWAGE. A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such
ground, surface and stormwaters as may be present.
   SEWAGE WORKS. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing
of sewage.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER.
      1.   A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards;
      2.   A user that:
         a.   Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater
to the POTW (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler blowdown
wastewater);
         b.   Contributes a process wastestream which makes up 5% or more of
the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment
plant; or
         c.   Is designated as such by the control authority on the basis that
it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s operation or
for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
      3.   Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection 2. of
this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the
control authority may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a
petition received from a user (and in accordance with procedures in 40 C.F.R. §
403.8(f)(6)) determine that the user should not be considered a SIGNIFICANT
INDUSTRIAL USER.
   SLUG LOAD. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a
violation of the prohibited discharge standards in this chapter or any
discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an
accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge.
   STORM DRAIN (sometimes termed STORM SEWER). A sewer which carries storm and
surface waters and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and
industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of
or is suspended in water, wastewater or other liquid and which is removable by
laboratory filtering,
   USER. A discharger into the POTW.
   USER CHARGE. The monthly charges levied on all users of the POTW, and shall,
at a minimum, cover each user’s proportionate share of the cost of operation
and maintenance (including replacement) of the works as provided under § 204(b)
(1)(A) of the Clean Water Act.
   WASTEWATER. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from
residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing
facilities and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are
contributed to the POTW.
   WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously
or intermittently.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT. Any arrangement of devices and structures used
for treating sewage.
(Ord. 1175, § 1, 2005; Ord. 1127, Art. II (§§ 1-60), 1999)
ARTICLE III. USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED
§ 13.08.060  USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED.
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal
excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
   B.   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
   C.   Except as provided by permitting regulations of the DEQ, it is unlawful
to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other
facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
   D.   The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes that use water or produce
wastewater situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-
of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public
sanitary sewer of the city, is hereby required at the owner’s expense to
install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities
directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, within 90 days after date of official notice to do so; provided that,
the public sewer is within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of the property line.
(Ord. 1127, Art. III (§§ 1-4), 1999)
§ 13.08.070  CONSTRUCTION—GENERALLY.
   A.   The city requires that any public infrastructure required by this
chapter be constructed to the opposite extent of the property from the boundary
side providing the existing utility. On a case by case basis, the Public Works
Director may allow the extension of public utilities to front a portion of the
property to be served with the following conditions.
      1.   The public frontage of the property to be served shall be greater
than 100 feet.
      2.   The allowed constructed frontage of the public utility serving the
property will be a nominal ten feet.
      3.   The public utility is to be designed for the full extent of the
property boundary frontage.
      4.   The remaining portion of the public utility may be extended at the
discretion of the city, request of the property owner or at the development of
the adjacent “upstream” property owner.
      5.   An agreement shall be signed and recorded by the property owner
binding the present and future property owner(s) heirs, successors and assigns
for future construction costs when the utility is to be extended.
   B.   Private development requiring extensions of mainline public sanitary
sewer shall conform to current American Public Works Association construction
standards, or as so revised. All extensions of public sanitary sewer shall be
engineered and have prior DEQ approval. All extensions of public sanitary sewer
on private lands shall require a minimum 15-foot wide easement. Access and
utility easements shall be signed, notarized and recorded prior to issuance of
right-of-way permit.
(Ord. 1127, Art. III (§§ 5, 6), 1999)
ARTICLE IV. PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL
§ 13.08.080  PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
   A.   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provision of
Article III of this chapter, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this article.
   B.   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal
system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit from the Oregon State DEQ
prior to being issued a Building Department plumbing permit.
   C.   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private sewage disposal system as provided in
Article III in this chapter, a direct connection shall be made to the public
sewer in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools and
similar private sewage disposal facility shall be abandoned in accordance with
state law at no expense to the city. This connection shall be accomplished
within 90 days of written notice of the availability of public sewers.
   D.   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the city.
   E.   No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Oregon State
Department of Environmental Quality.
   F.   The Director shall have the authority to inspect any private sewage
disposal system to determine and ensure compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 1127, Art. IV (§§ 1-6), 1999)
ARTICLE V. BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
§ 13.08.090  BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.
   A.   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the Director.
   B.   1.   There shall be two classes of permits:
         a.   For residential and commercial service; and
         b.   For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
      2.   The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the
Director.
   C.   All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the
city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by
the installation of the building sewer.
   D.   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building sewer. However, the connection must meet the
following standards:
      1.   Minimum building sewer size from public sewer to front building: six
inches;
      2.   Minimum building sewer size from front building to rear building:
four inches;
      3.   Existing service size does not need to be upgraded when requested
for medical hardship for members of the immediate family living in a second
dwelling. Request must be through and approved by the city Planning Commission;
      4.   Minimum building sewer service requirements for duplex dwelling
units shall be two individual four-inch service laterals. In cases where one
four-inch service lateral is present to the property, a second four-inch
building sewer shall be installed;
      5.   Multifamily dwelling units of three or more units shall provide to
public works plumbing specification documents verifying available capacity to
use a four-inch, six-inch or eight-inch service lateral; and
      6.   Sanitary sewer system development charges will apply to any second
structure or building if building sewer is provided to that building.
   E.   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the Director to meet all
requirements of this chapter. Any instances of service laterals found to be
made of “orange-burg” type material will require removal and replacement with
an approved material.
   F.   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and back-filling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of
the Building and Plumbing Code and the most current specifications of the
American Public Works Association. Clean-outs shall be placed at the property
right-of-way line on new construction of building sewers.
   G.   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain or fixture is too low to permit gravity flow to the public
sewer, sanitary sewage carried by the building drain shall be lifted by a
residential sewage pump and vault designed for the storage and transport of
domestic sanitary sewage and approved by the Director.
   H.   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation
drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface run-off or groundwater to a
building sewer or building drain that in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
   I.   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code and the most
current specifications of the American Public Works Association. All
connections of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be performed by
DEQ licensed and bonded contractors. All such connections shall be made gas-
tight and watertight. The Director before installation must approve any
deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials.
   J.   The applicant for the permit shall notify the Director when the
building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The
connection shall be made under the supervision of the Director or his or her
representative.
   K.   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course
of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. A public
works permit is required when working in any public right-of-way. At the time
of permit application, contractors must provide company name(s), address(es),
telephone number(s), CCB number and DEQ number.
   L.   Maintenance and repair of the building sewer is the responsibility of
the owner of the property served. The building sewer may extend any distance of
three-inch, four-inch, six-inch, eight-inch or larger pipe size to a public
main as defined with segment endpoints with appurtenances or to a point on the
building sewer where a second building sewer from a second property is
connected.
   M.   Extension for any length of the city sanitary public sewer system at
the request of a developer and not as part of a local improvement district or
subdivision action, shall conform to the following:
      1.   Projects shall be engineered and reviewed and approved by DEQ;
      2.   As built submittals shall be to the standards of the control
authority; and
      3.   Developers shall extend service to potential properties within the
project limits at the discretion of the control authority.
   N.   Upon acceptance by the city of public infrastructure within
subdivisions, it is the responsibility of the property owner to provide any new
sewer service to any new property if any future property partitions and/or lot
line adjustments of tax lots within the subdivision take place.
(Ord. 1127, Art. V (§§ 1-14), 1999)
ARTICLE VI. USE OF PUBLIC STORMWATER SEWERS
§ 13.08.100  USE OF PUBLIC STORMWATER SEWERS.
   A.   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural
outlet approved by the Director. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process
waters may be discharged, on approval of the Director or the appropriate
jurisdictional authority, to a storm sewer or natural outlet.
   B.   Stormwater sewer or channel sizing shall conform to all master storm
drainage plan requirements.
   C.   Standard culvert material shall be of portland cement concrete. Smooth
bore plastic pipe with an “n” value of 12 shall have concrete headwalls and may
be approved at the discretion of the control authority.
(Ord. 1127, Art. VI (§ 1), 1999)
§ 13.08.110  PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS.
   A.   General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced
into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater, which causes pass through or
interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether
or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other
national, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
   B.   Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce, or cause to be
introduced into the POTW, the following pollutants, substances or wastewater:
      1.   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a close-cup flashpoint of less
than 140°F (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 C.F.R. § 262.21;
      2.   Wastewater that has a pH less than six or more than nine and one-
half, or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or
equipment, unless specifically authorized by the control authority;
      3.   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction
of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference but in no case solids greater
than one-half inch in any dimension;
      4.   Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutant (BOD, etc.),
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference
with the POTW;
      5.   Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150°F, or which will
inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference,
but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into
the treatment plant to exceed 104°F (40°C);
      6.   Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral
oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through;
      7.   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems;
      8.   Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated
by the control authority;
      9.   Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids or other wastewater
which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to
create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the
sewers for maintenance or repair;
      10.   Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in
compliance with applicable state or federal and approved by the control
authority;
      11.   Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof
runoff subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized
water, noncontact cooling water and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically
authorized by the control authority;
      12.   Sludges, screenings or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes, unless specifically authorized by the control authority;
      13.   Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the control
authority in a wastewater discharge permit; and/or
      14.   Any material into a manhole through its top unless specifically
authorized by the control authority.
   C.   Pollutants, substances or wastewater prohibited by this section shall
not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to
the POTW.
(Ord. 1127, Art. VI (§ 2), 1999)
§ 13.08.120  CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
   The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 C.F.R. Chapter I,
Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 are incorporated.
   A.   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of
either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the control
authority may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with
40 C.F.R. § 403.6(c).
   B.   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed
with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the control authority shall
impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula in 40 C.F.R. §
403.6(3).
   C.   A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard
if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in
40 C.F.R. § 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally
different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical
pretreatment standard.
   D.   A user may obtain a new gross adjustment to a categorical standard in
accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.15.
(Ord. 1127, Art. VI (§ 3), 1999)
§ 13.08.130  STATE PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
   State pretreatment standards and any other applicable state standards or
requirements are incorporated.
(Ord. 1127, Art. VI (§ 4), 1999)
§ 13.08.140  LOCAL LIMITS.
   The city reserves the right to, at any time, establish specific pollutant
limits for protections against pass through and interference.
(Ord. 1127, Art. VI (§ 5), 1999)
§ 13.08.150  RIGHT OF REVISION.
   The control authority reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in
wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on
discharges to the POTW.
(Ord. 1127, Art. VI (§ 6), 1999)
§ 13.08.160  DILUTION.
   No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt
to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly
authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The control
authority may impose mass limitations on users that are using dilution to meet
applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the
imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
(Ord. 1127, Art. VI (§ 7), 1999)
§ 13.08.170  PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR AUTHORITY.
   A.   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged
to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in §
13.08.110 of this article, and which in the judgment of the Director may have a
deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving
waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public
nuisance, the Director may:
      1.   Reject the wastes;
      2.   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers;
      3.   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
      4.   Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions
of this article.
   B.   If the Director permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject
to the review and approval of the Director and subject to the requirements of
all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
(Ord. 1127, Art. VI (§ 8), 1999)
§ 13.08.180  WATER QUALITY MANHOLES.
   A.   When required by the Director, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the
wastes. The manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and
shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Director. The
manhole shall be installed by the owner at his or her expense and shall be
maintained by the owner so as to be accessible and safe at all times.
   B.   When required by the Director, the owner of any property serviced by a
storm drain carrying parking lot runoff, shall install a suitable control
manhole with appurtenances to detain, filter or settle waste from the storm
drainage. The manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located,
and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Director. The
manhole shall be installed by the owner at his or her expense, and shall be
maintained by the owner so as to be accessible and safe at all times.
(Ord. 1127, Art. VI (§ 9), 1999)
§ 13.08.190  MEASUREMENTS, TESTS AND ANALYSES.
   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and
shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples
taken at the control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream
manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is
connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constants upon the sewage works and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb and property. (The particular analyses
involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a
premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample of sample should be taken.
Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from
24-hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pHs are determined from periodic
grab samples.)
(Ord. 1127, Art. VI (§ 10), 1999)
ARTICLE VII. PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER
§ 13.08.200  PRETREATMENT FACILITIES.
   Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this
chapter and shall achieve compliance with all national pretreatment standards,
local limits and the prohibitions set out in
Article VI, §
13.08.110 of this chapter within the time limitations specified by EPA, the
state or the control authority, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities
necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated and maintained at the
user’s expense. Detailed plans describing the facilities and operating
procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying
the facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the control
authority under the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 1127, Art. VII (§ 1), 1999)
§ 13.08.210  ADDITIONAL PRETREATMENT MEASURES.
   A.   Whenever deemed necessary, the control authority may require users to
restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain
wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate
points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams
and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine
the user’s compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   B.   The control authority may require any person discharging into the POTW
to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable
storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater
discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.
   C.   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the control authority, they are necessary for the proper handling of
wastewater containing excessive amounts grease and oil, sand, any flammable
wastes or other harmful ingredients; except that the interceptors shall not be
required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall
be of a type and capacity approved by the control authority and shall be
located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. The
interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned and repaired regularly, as needed, by
the user at the user’s expense.
   D.   Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be
required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter.
(Ord. 1127, Art. VII (§ 2), 1999)
§ 13.08.220  ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE/SLUG CONTROL PLANS.
   A.   At least once every two years the control authority shall evaluate
whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug
control plan. The control authority may require any user to develop, submit for
approval and implement such a plan. An accidental discharge/slug control plan
shall address, at a minimum, the following:
      1.   Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges;
      2.   Description of stored chemicals;
      3.   Procedures for immediately notifying the control authority of any
accidental or slug discharge, as required by
Article X, §
13.08.440. The notification must also be given for any discharge which would
violate any of the prohibited discharges in
Article XVI, §§
13.08.690; and
      4.   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. The procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building
of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
   B.   The review and/or approval of the plans will in no way relieve the user
from the responsibility of modifying the plans or facilities as necessary to
comply with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 1127, Art. VII (§ 3), 1999)
§ 13.08.230  HAULED WASTEWATER.
   A.   Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations
approved by the control authority and at such times as are established by the
control authority. The wastes shall not violate
Article VI of this chapter or any other requirements established by the control
authority. The control authority may require septic tank waste haulers to
obtain wastewater discharge permits.
   B.   The control authority shall require haulers of industrial waste to
obtain wastewater discharge permits. The control authority may require
generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits.
The control authority also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial
waste. The discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other
requirements of this chapter.
   C.   Industrial waste haulers may only discharge loads designated by the
control authority. No load may be discharged without prior consent of the
control authority. The control authority may collect samples of each hauled
load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The control authority may
require the hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge.
   D.   Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste tracking form for every
load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the waste
hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of
waste and volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type
of industry, known or suspected waste constituents, and whether any wastes are
RCRA hazardous wastes.
(Ord. 1127, Art. VII (§ 4), 1999)
ARTICLE VIII. WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION
§ 13.08.240  WASTEWATER ANALYSIS.
   When requested by the control authority, a user must submit information on
the nature and characteristics of the user’s wastewater. The control authority
is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require
users to update the information. Failure to provide the information shall be
reasonable grounds for denying or terminating service to the user and shall be
considered a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 1127, Art. VIII (§ 1), 1999)
§ 13.08.250  WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REQUIREMENT.
   A.   No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW
without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the control
authority, except a significant industrial user that has filed a timely
application pursuant to §
13.08.260 of this article may continue to discharge for the time period
specified therein.
   B.   The control authority may require other users to obtain wastewater
discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
   C.   Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge
permit shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and subject the wastewater
discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in Articles
XIII through
XVI of this chapter. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a
permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment
standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state and
local law.
(Ord. 1127, Art. VIII (§ 2), 1999)
§ 13.08.260  WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITTING—EXISTING CONNECTIONS.
   Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was
discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this chapter and who wishes to continue such discharges
in the future, shall, within 90 days after such date, apply to the control
authority for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with §
13.08.280 of this article, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW
to continue after 150 days of the effective date of such ordinance except in
accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the control authority.
(Ord. 1127, Art. VIII (§ 3), 1999)
§ 13.08.270  WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITTING—NEW CONNECTIONS.
   Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit that proposes to
begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit prior to
the beginning or recommencing of the discharge. An application for this
wastewater discharge permit in accordance with §
13.08.250 of this article must be filed at least 60 days prior to the date upon
which any discharge will begin or recommence.
(Ord. 1127, Art. VIII (§ 4), 1999)
§ 13.08.280  CONTENTS.
   A.   All users required to obtain a wastewater permit must submit a permit
application. The control authority may require a user to submit as part of an
application the following information:
      1.   The information required by
Article X, §
13.08.390;
      2.   Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals’ used or stored
at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be,
discharged to the POTW;
      3.   Number of employees, hours of operation and proposed or actual hours
of operation;
      4.   Each product produced by type amount, process or processes and rate
of production;
      5.   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per
day);
      6.   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details
to show all sewers, floor drains, chemical storage areas and appurtenances by
size, location and elevation and all points of discharge;
      7.   Time and duration of discharges; and
      8.   Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the control
authority to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application.
   B.   Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be
returned to the user for revision.
(Ord. 1127, Art. VIII (§ 5), 1999)
§ 13.08.290  APPLICATION SIGNATORIES AND CERTIFICATION.
   All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed
by an authorized signatory of the user and contain the following certification
statement:
      “I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the
information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage
the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware there are significant penalties
for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations.”
(Ord. 1127, Art. VIII (§ 6), 1999)
§ 13.08.300  WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DECISIONS.
   The control authority will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may
require additional information. Within 60 days of receipt of a complete
wastewater discharge permit application, the control authority will determine
whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The control authority
may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit.
(Ord. 1127, Art. VIII (§ 7), 1999)
ARTICLE IX. WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT ISSUANCE PROCESS
§ 13.08.310  DURATION.
   Wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for a specified time period,
not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater
discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five years, at the
discretion of the control authority. Each wastewater discharge permit will
indicate a specific date upon which it will expire.
(Ord. 1127, Art. IX (§ 1), 1999)
§ 13.08.320  CONTENTS.
   Wastewater discharge permits shall include such conditions as are deemed
reasonably necessary by the control authority to prevent pass through or
interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment
plant’s effluent, protect worker health and safety, protect the public,
facilitate sludge management and disposal and protect against damage to the
POTW.
   A.   Wastewater discharge permits must contain:
      1.   A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration,
which in no event shall exceed five years;
      2.   A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is non-
transferable;
      3.   Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards;
      4.   Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and recordkeeping
requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants
to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency and sample type based on
federal, state and local law; and
      5.   A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation
of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance
schedule. The schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that
required by applicable federal, state or local law.
   B.   Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to,
the following conditions:
      1.   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
      2.   Requirements for the installation and maintenance of pretreatment
technology, pollution control or construction of appropriate containment
devices, designed to reduce, eliminate or prevent the introduction of
pollutants into the treatment works;
      3.   Requirements for the development and implementation of accidental
discharge/slug control plans or other special conditions including management
practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated or non-
routine discharges;
      4.   Requirements for the development and implementation of waste
minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
      5.   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment;
      6.   A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit
does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all
applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which
become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and
      7.   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the control authority to
ensure compliance with this chapter and state and federal laws, rules and
regulations.
(Ord. 1127, Art. IX (§ 2), 1999)
§ 13.08.330  APPEALS.
   The control authority shall provide public notice of the issuance of a
wastewater discharge permit. Any person, including the user, may petition the
control authority to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit
within 30 days of notice of issuance of the discharge permit.
   A.   Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a
waiver of the administrative appeal.
   B.   In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater
discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection and the
alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge
permit.
   C.   The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be
stayed pending the appeal.
   D.   If the control authority fails to act within thirty days of receipt of
the request, the request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied.
Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a
wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit,
shall be considered final administrative actions for purposes of judicial
review.
   E.   Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative
wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the
Circuit Court for Linn County, State of Oregon within 60 days from the date of
the decision.
(Ord. 1127, Art. IX (§ 3), 1999)
§ 13.08.340  MODIFICATION.
   The control authority may modify the wastewater discharge permit for good
cause including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
   A.   To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local pretreatment
standards or requirements;
   B.   To address significant alterations or additions to the user’s
operation, processes or wastewater volume or character since the time of
wastewater discharge permit issuance;
   C.   A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
   D.   Information indicating the permitted discharge poses a threat to the
POTW, POTW personnel, the public or the receiving waters;
   E.   Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge
permit;
   F.   Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting;
   G.   Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment
standards pursuant to 40 C.F.R. § 403.13; and
   H.   To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge
permit.
(Ord. 1127, Art. IX (§ 4), 1999)
§ 13.08.350  TRANSFER.
   Wastewater discharge permits may not be assigned or transferred to a new
owner and/or operator.
(Ord. 1127, Art. IX (§ 5), 1999)
§ 13.08.360  REVOCATION.
   A.   The control authority may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good
cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
      1.   Failure to notify the control authority of significant changes to
the wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
      2.   Failure to provide prior notification to the control authority of
changed conditions pursuant to
Article X, §
13.08.430;
      3.   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the wastewater discharge permit application;
      4.   Falsifying self-monitoring or other reports;
      5.   Tampering with monitoring equipment;
      6.   Refusing to allow the control authority timely access to the
facility premises and records;
      7.   Failure to meet effluent limitations;
      8.   Failure to pay fines;
      9.   Failure to pay sewer charges;
      10.   Failure to meet compliance schedules;
      11.   Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge
permit application; or
      12.   Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms
of the wastewater discharge permit of this chapter.
   B.   Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of
operations. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are
void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user.
(Ord. 1127, Art. IX (§ 6), 1999)
§ 13.08.370  REISSUANCE.
   A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for
wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit
application, in accordance with
Article VIII, §
13.08.270, a minimum of 60 days prior to the expiration of the user’s existing
wastewater discharge permit.
(Ord. 1127, Art. IX (§ 7), 1999)
§ 13.08.380  REGULATION OF WASTE RECEIVED FROM OTHER JURISDICTIONS.
   A.   If another jurisdiction, or user located within another jurisdiction,
contributes wastewater to the POTW, the control authority shall enter into an
inter-jurisdictional agreement with the contributing jurisdiction.
   B.   Prior to entering into an agreement required by subsection A. of this
section, the control authority shall request the following information from the
contributing jurisdiction:
      1.   A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to
the POTW by the contributing jurisdiction;
      2.   An inventory of all users located within the contributing
jurisdiction and discharging to the POTW; and
      3.   Such other information as the control authority may deem necessary.
   C.   An inter-jurisdictional agreement, as required by subsection A. of this
section, shall contain, at a minimum, the following conditions:
      1.   A requirement for the contributing jurisdiction to adopt a sewer use
ordinance which is at least as stringent as this chapter and local limits which
are at least as stringent as those set out in
Article VI, §
13.08.140. The requirement shall specify that such ordinance and limits must be
revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the city’s ordinance and/or
local limits;
      2.   A requirement for the contributing jurisdiction to submit a revised
user inventory on at least an annual basis;
      3.   A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation activities,
including wastewater discharge permit issuance, inspection and sampling, and
enforcement, will be conducted by the contributing jurisdiction; which of these
activities will be conducted by the control authority; and which of these
activities will be conducted jointly by the contributing jurisdiction and the
control authority;
      4.   A requirement for the contributing jurisdiction to provide the
control authority with access to all information the contributing jurisdiction
obtains as part of its pretreatment activities;
      5.   Limits on the nature, quality and volume of the contributing
jurisdiction’s wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW;
      6.   Requirements for monitoring the contributing jurisdiction’s
discharge;
      7.   A provision insuring the control authority access to the facilities
of users located within the contributing jurisdiction’s boundaries for the
purpose of inspection, sampling and any other duties deemed necessary by the
control authority; and
      8.   A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of
the inter-jurisdictional agreement.
(Ord. 1127, Art. IX (§ 8), 1999)
ARTICLE X. REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
§ 13.08.390  BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS.
   A.   Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical
pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category
determination under 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing
categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the
POTW shall submit to the control authority a report which contains the
information listed in subsection B. of this section. At least 90 days prior to
commencement of their discharge, new sources and sources that become
categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical
standard, shall be required to submit to the control authority a report which
contains the information listed in subsection B. of this section. A new source
shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable
categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its
anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged.
   B.   Users described above shall submit the information set forth below:
      1.   Identifying information. The name and address of the facility,
including the name of the operator and owner;
      2.   Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits
held by or for the facility;
      3.   Description of operations. A brief description of the nature,
average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the
operation(s) carried out by the user. This description should include a
schematic process diagram, which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from
the regulated processes;
      4.   Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and
maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process
streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined
wastestream formula set out in 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(e);
      5.   Measurement of pollutants.
         a.   The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each
regulated process;
         b.   The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and
concentration (and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the control
authority) of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated
process. Instantaneous, daily maximum and long-term average concentrations (or
mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of
daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in
§
13.08.480 of this article; and
         c.   Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out
in §
13.08.490 of this article.
      6.   Certification. A statement, reviewed by the users authorized
signatory and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment, is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements;
      7.   Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be
required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the
user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date
in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for
the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this
section must meet the requirements set out in §
13.08.400 of this article; and
      8.   Signature and certification. All baseline-monitoring reports must be
signed and certified in accordance with
Article VIII, §
13.08.290.
(Ord. 1127, Art. X (§ 1), 1999)
§ 13.08.400  COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE PROGRESS REPORTS.
   The following conditions shall apply to any schedule required by this
chapter or the control authority:
   A.   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for
the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and
operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the
applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to,
hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts
for major components, commencing and completing construction, beginning and
conducting routine operation);
   B.   No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months;
   C.   The user shall submit a progress report to the control authority no
later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of
compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps
being taken by the user to return to the established schedule;
   D.   In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress
reports to the control authority; and
   E.   No compliance schedule shall exceed 18 months.
(Ord. 1127, Art. X (§ 2), 1999)
§ 13.08.410  REPORT ON COMPLIANCE WITH CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD
DEADLINE.
   Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject
to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the control
authority a report containing the information described in §
13.08.390B.4. through 6. of this article. For users subject to equivalent mass
or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40
C.F.R. § 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user’s
long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per
unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include
the user’s actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All
compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with
Article VIII, §
13.08.290.
(Ord. 1127, Art. X (§ 3), 1999)
§ 13.08.420  PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS.
   A.   All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by
the control authority but in no case less than every six months, submit a
report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge
which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated
average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic
compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with
Article VIII, §
13.08.290.
   B.   All wastewater samples must be representative of the user’s discharge.
Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly
operated, kept clean and maintained in good working order at all times. The
failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall
not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative
of its discharge.
   C.   If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors
any pollutant more frequently than required by the control authority, using the
procedures prescribed in §§
13.08.480 and
13.08.490 of this article, the results of this monitoring shall be included in
the report.
(Ord. 1127, Art. X (§ 4), 1999)
§ 13.08.430  REPORT OF CHANGED CONDITIONS.
   Each user must notify the control authority of any planned significant
changes to the user’s operations or system which might alter the nature,
quality or volume of its wastewater at least 30 days before the change.
   A.   The control authority may require the user to submit such information
as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the
submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under
Article VIII, §
13.08.280.
   B.   The control authority may issue a wastewater discharge permit under
Article VIII, §
13.08.300, or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under
Article IX, §
13.08.340, in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions.
   C.   No user shall implement the planned changed condition(s) until and
unless the control authority has responded to the user’s notice.
   D.   For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are
not limited to, flow changes of 20% or greater, and the discharge of any
previously unreported pollutants.
(Ord. 1127, Art. X (§ 5), 1999)
§ 13.08.440  REPORTS OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS.
   A.   In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental
discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch
discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems for the POTW
(including a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in
Article VI, §
13.08.110), the user shall immediately telephone and notify the control
authority of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the
discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective
actions taken by the user.
   B.   Within five days following the discharge, the user shall, unless waived
by the control authority, submit a detailed written report describing the cause
(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent
similar future occurrences. The notification shall not relieve the user of any
expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of
damage to the POTW, natural resources or any other damage to person or
property; nor shall the notification relieve the user of any fines, civil
penalties or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this chapter.
   C.   Failure to notify the control authority of potential problem discharges
shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.
   D.   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user’s bulletin board or
other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a
discharge described in subsection A. of this section. Employers shall ensure
that all employees are advised of the emergency notification procedure.
(Ord. 1127, Art. X (§ 6), 1999)
§ 13.08.450  REPORTS FROM UNPERMITTED USERS.
   All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide
appropriate reports as may be required by the control authority.
(Ord. 1127, Art. X (§ 7), 1999)
§ 13.08.460  NOTICE OF VIOLATION—REPEAT SAMPLING AND REPORTING.
   If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify
the control authority as soon as possible, but no later than 24 hours after
becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also immediately repeat the
sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the
control authority within the time period specified by the control authority,
but at no time greater than 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. The
user may not be required to resample if the control authority monitors at the
user’s facility at least once a month, or if the control authority samples
between the user’s initial sampling and when the user receives the results of
this sampling.
(Ord. 1127, Art. X (§ 8), 1999)
§ 13.08.470  NOTIFICATION OF THE DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS WASTE.
   A.   Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify
the control authority, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director and
state hazardous waste authorities (in writing) of any discharge into the POTW
of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste
under 40 C.F.R. part 261. The notification must include the name of the
hazardous waste as set forth in 40 C.F.R. part 261, the EPA hazardous waste
numbers, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch or other). If the user
discharges more than 100 kilograms of the waste per calendar month to the POTW,
the notification shall also contain the following information to the extent the
information is known and readily available to the user: an identification of
the hazardous constituents in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and
concentration of such constituents contained in the wastestream discharged
during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in
the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. All
notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the discharge
commences. Any notification under this subsection need be submitted only once
for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed
discharges must be submitted under §
13.08.430 of this article. The notification requirement in this section does
not apply to pollutants already reported under the self-monitoring requirements
of §§
13.08.390,
13.08.410 and
13.08.420 of this article.
   B.   Discharges are exempt from the requirements of subsection A. of this
section during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15
kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as
specified in 40 C.F.R. §§ 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15
kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity
of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 C.F.R. §§ 261.30(d) and 261.33(e),
requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user
discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require
additional notification.
   C.   In the case of any new regulations under § 3001 of RCRA identifying
additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional
substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the control authority, the
EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director and state hazardous waste
authorities of the discharge of the substance within 90 days of the effective
date of the regulations.
   D.   In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall
certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of
hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically
practical.
   E.   This reporting provision does not create a right to discharge any
substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a permit
issued thereunder or any applicable federal or state law.
(Ord. 1127, Art. X (§ 9), 1999)
§ 13.08.480  ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS.
   All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as
part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed
in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 C.F.R. part 136, unless
otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40
C.F.R. part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the
pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance
with procedures approved by the EPA.
(Ord. 1127, Art. X (§ 10), 1999)
§ 13.08.490  SAMPLE COLLECTION.
   A.   Except as indicated in subsection B. of this section, the user must
collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection
techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the control
authority may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of
four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a
representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab
samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits.
   B.   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides
and volatile organic chemicals must be obtained using grab collection
techniques.
(Ord. 1127, Art. X (§ 11), 1999)
§ 13.08.500  TIMING.
   Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date post-
marked. For reports that are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility
serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report
shall govern.
(Ord. 1127, Art. X (§ 12), 1999)
§ 13.08.510  RECORDKEEPING.
   Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall retain,
and make available for inspection and copying, all records or information
obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this chapter and any
additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities
undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include
the date, exact place, method and time of sampling and the name of the person
(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the
analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used, and the results of the
analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three
years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any
litigation concerning the user or the control authority or where the user has
been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the control
authority.
(Ord. 1127, Art. X (§ 13), 1999)
ARTICLE XI. COMPLIANCE MONITORING
§ 13.08.520  RIGHT OF ENTRY—INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.
   The control authority shall have the right upon presentation of proper
credentials to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is
complying with all requirements of this chapter and any wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the control authority ready
access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling,
records examination and copying, including photographing or videotaping on the
user’s premises, and the performance of any additional duties.
   A.   Where a user has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall
make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation
of suitable identification, the control authority will be permitted to enter
without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
   B.   The control authority shall have the right to set up on the user’s
property, or require installation of, the devices as are necessary to conduct
sampling and/or metering of the user’s operations.
   C.   The control authority may require the user to install monitoring
equipment as necessary. The user at its own expense shall maintain at the
facility’s sampling and monitoring equipment all times in a safe and proper
operating condition. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality
shall be calibrated at least annually by a certified technician to ensure their
accuracy. Calibration records shall be made available to the control authority
upon request.
   D.   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user
at the written or verbal request of the control authority and shall not be
replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user.
   E.   Unreasonable delays in allowing the control authority access to the
user’s premises shall be a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 1127, Art. XI (§ 1), 1999)
§ 13.08.530  SEARCH WARRANTS.
   If the control authority has been refused access to a building, structure or
property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to
believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need
to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program
of the control authority designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any
permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health,
safety and welfare of the community, then the control authority may seek
issuance of a search warrant from the municipal court of the city, or any other
court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 1127, Art. XI (§ 2), 1999)
ARTICLE XII. CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
§ 13.08.540  CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater
discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits and monitoring
programs, and from the control authority’s inspection and sampling activities,
shall be available to the public without restriction according to the public
disclosure laws of the State of Oregon, unless the user specifically requests,
and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the control authority, that
the release of the information would divulge information, processes or methods
of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state
law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the
information or data. Subject to the public records laws of the State of Oregon,
when requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such
information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might
disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for
inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request
to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment
program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the
report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other “effluent data”
as defined by 40 C.F.R. § 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential
information and will be available to the public without restriction.
(Ord. 1127, Art. XII, 1999)
ARTICLE XIII. PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE
§ 13.08.550  PUBLICATION OF USERS—IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE.
   The control authority shall publish annually, in the largest weekly
newspaper published in the municipality where the POTW is located, a list of
the users which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant
noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE shall mean:
   A.   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which 66% or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month
period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant
parameter by any amount;
   B.   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter
during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum
limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria: 1.4 for BOD,
TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH;
   C.   Any other discharge violation that the control authority believes has
caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass
through (including endangering the health of the city personnel or the general
public);
   D.   Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to
the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the control authority’s
exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
   E.   Failure to meet, within 90 days of the schedule date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement
order for starting construction, completing construction or attaining final
compliance;
   F.   Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, any required
reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with
categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports
and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
   G.   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
   H.   Any other violation(s) that the control authority determines will
adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment
program.
(Ord. 1127, Art. § XIII, 1999)
ARTICLE XIV. ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
§ 13.08.560  NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION.
   When the control authority finds that a user has violated (or continues to
violate) any provision of
Article VII or subsequent articles pertaining to such, a wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, the control authority shall serve upon a representative of the
user, the representative meeting the criteria of authorized signatory, a
written notice of violation. Within five days of the receipt of this notice, an
explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and
prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by
the user to the control authority. Submission of this plan in no way relieves
the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of
the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of
the control authority to take any action, including emergency actions or any
other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation.
(Ord. 1127, Art. XIV (§ 1), 1999)
§ 13.08.570  CONSENT ORDERS.
   The control authority may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary
compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user
responsible for noncompliance. The documents will include specific action to be
taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified
by the document. The documents shall have the same force and effect as the
administrative orders issued pursuant to §§
13.08.590 and
13.08.600 of this article and shall be judicially enforceable.
(Ord. 1127, Art. XIV (§ 2), 1999)
§ 13.08.580  SHOW CAUSE HEARING.
   The control authority may order a user which has violated or continues to
violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear
before the control authority and show cause why the proposed enforcement action
should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and
place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for the
action and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement
action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served
personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at
least 14 days prior to the hearing. The notice shall be served on a
representative of the user who meets the criteria of an authorized signatory. A
show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any
other action against the user. In the event that a user fails to appear at a
show cause hearing, without good cause for the failure to appear, the control
authority shall proceed to take such actions or orders as may be appropriate
under the circumstances. Failure of the user to receive actual personal notice,
subject to the above notice requirements, shall not prevent the control
authority proceeding with the hearing and take such actions that are otherwise
appropriate.
(Ord. 1127, Art. XIV (§ 3), 1999)
§ 13.08.590  COMPLIANCE ORDERS.
   When the control authority finds that a user has violated or continues to
violate any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the
control authority may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge
directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the
user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may
be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related
appurtenances are installed and property operated. Compliance orders may also
contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional
self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of
pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the
deadline for compliance established for a national pretreatment standard or
requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any
violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order
shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action
against the user.
(Ord. 1127, Art. XIV (§ 4), 1999)
§ 13.08.600  CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS.
   When the control authority finds that a user has violated (or continues to
violate) any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that
the user’s past violations are likely to recur, the control authority may issue
an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and
directing the user to:
   A.   Immediately comply with all requirements; and
   B.   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to
properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting
operations and/or terminating the discharge. Issuance of a cease and desist
order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other
action against the user.
(Ord. 1127, Art. XIV (§ 5), 1999)
§ 13.08.610  ADMINISTRATIVE FINES.
   A.   When the control authority finds that a user has violated or continues
to violate any provision of
Article VII or subsequent articles of this chapter pertaining to such, a
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the control authority may fine such user
in an amount not to exceed $1,000. Any and all such fines shall be assessed on
a per violation, per day basis. The control authority may add the costs of
preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to
the fine, as well as other expenses actually associated with enforcement
activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any
actual damages or fines incurred by the control authority.
   B.   Interest shall accrue on any unpaid charges, fines or penalties after
60 days from their assessment at the rate of 9% per year. The city recorder
shall enter the assessments in the city lien docket, which assessments shall be
liened and charged upon the respective properties against which they are
placed. The liens shall be first and prior to all other liens or encumbrances,
insofar as the laws of Oregon allow, and shall be foreclosed as provided by
law.
   C.   Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for
the control authority to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the
fine amount within 30 days of being notified of the fine. The control authority
shall convene a hearing on the matter within 30 days of receiving the request
from the user. In the event the user’s appeal is successful, the payment shall
be returned to the user. In the event that the user’s appeal is unsuccessful,
the user may appeal to the City Council by filing a written request with the
City Manager within 15 days of the decision upon reconsideration of the control
authority. The City Manager shall schedule a hearing upon the appeal before the
City Council within 60 days from the date the appeal is filed. The appeal can
be heard at a regular or special meeting of the City Council, with notice to be
given to the user no less than ten calendar days prior to the hearing. The
hearing shall be conducted in a summary manner, with all parties allowed the
right to present evidence. Neither the decision of the control authority, nor
the payment of the fine imposed by the control authority, shall be stayed
during the pendency of the appeal. In the event that the users appeal is
successful before the City Council, the payment of the fine shall be returned
to the user.
   D.   Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(Ord. 1127, Art. XIV (§ 6), 1999)
§ 13.08.620  EMERGENCY SUSPENSIONS.
   A.   The control authority may immediately suspend a user’s discharge, after
informal notice to the user, whenever the suspension is necessary to stop an
actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an
imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The
control authority may also immediately suspend a user’s discharge, after notice
and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of
the POTW, or which presents or may present an endangerment to the environment.
      1.   Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately
stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user’s failure to
immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the control authority
shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the
sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving
stream or endangerment to any individuals. The control authority shall allow
the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the control authority that the period of endangerment has
passed, unless the termination proceedings in §
13.08.630 of this article are initiated against the user.
      2.   A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement,
describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to
prevent any future occurrence, to the control authority within five days.
   B.   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing
prior to any emergency suspension under this section.
(Ord. 1127, Art. XIV (§ 7), 1999)
§ 13.08.630  TERMINATION OF DISCHARGE.
   Any user that violates the conditions in
Article VI of this chapter is subject to discharge termination. The user will
be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an
opportunity to show cause under §
13.08.580 of this article why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise
of this option by the control authority shall not be a bar to, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(Ord. 1127, Art. XIV (§ 8), 1999)
ARTICLE XV. JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
§ 13.08.640  INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   When the control authority finds that a user has violated (or continues to
violate) any provision of
Article VII or subsequent articles of this chapter pertaining to such, a
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the control authority may petition the
Circuit Court for Linn County, Oregon through the control authority’s attorney
for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which
restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge
permit, order or other requirement imposed by this chapter on activities of the
user. The control authority may also seek such other action as is appropriate
for legal and/or equitable relief, including requirements for the user to
conduct environmental remediation and/or make reparations for damages to the
POTW. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.
(Ord. 1127, Art. XV (§ 1), 1999)
§ 13.08.650  CIVIL PENALTIES.
   A.   A user who has violated or continues to violate any provision of
Article VII or subsequent articles of this chapter pertaining to such, a
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the control authority
for a maximum civil penalty of $10,000, but not less than $1,000 per violation,
per day.
   B.   The control authority may recover reasonable attorneys’ fees, court
costs and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including
sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages or fines
incurred by the control authority.
   C.   In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall be taken
into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the
extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration, any
economic benefit gained through the user’s violation, corrective actions by the
user, the compliance history of the user and any other factor as justice
requires.
   D.   Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.
(Ord. 1127, Art. XV (§ 2), 1999)
§ 13.08.660  CRIMINAL PROSECUTION.
   A.   A user who has intentionally or knowingly violated any provision of
Article VII or subsequent articles of this chapter pertaining to such, a
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $5,000 per violation, per day,
or imprisonment for not more than one year, or both.
   B.   A user who has intentionally or knowingly introduced any substance into
the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty of at least
$5,000 and/or be subject to imprisonment for one year. The penalty shall be in
addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage
available under state law.
   C.   A user who intentionally or knowingly makes any false statements,
representations or certifications in any application, record, report plan or
other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this
chapter, wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who
falsified, tampered with or knowingly rendered inaccurate any monitoring device
or method required under this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine not to exceed $5,000 per violation, per day, or
imprisonment for not more than one year, or both.
(Ord. 1127, Art. XV (§ 3), 1999)
§ 13.08.670  REMEDIES NONEXCLUSIVE.
   The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive. The control
authority may take any, all or any combination of these actions against a
noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in
accordance with the control authority’s enforcement response plan. However, the
control authority may take other action against any user when the circumstances
warrant.
(Ord. 1127, Art. XV (§ 4), 1999)
ARTICLE XVI. AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS
§ 13.08.680  UPSET.
   A.   For the purposes of this section, UPSET means an exceptional incident
in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical
pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the
user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by
operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate
treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance or careless or improper
operation.
   B.   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought
for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements
of subsection C. of this section are met.
   C.   A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall
demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs or other
relevant evidence that:
      1.   An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the
upset;
      2.   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures; and
      3.   The user has submitted the following information to the control
authority as soon as possible, but no later than 24 hours of becoming aware of
the upset. If this information is provided orally, a written submission must be
provided within five days:
         a.   A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance;
         b.   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or,
if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue; and
         c.   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent
recurrence of the noncompliance.
   D.   In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
   E.   Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any
claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards.
   F.   Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power
of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails.
(Ord. 1127, Art. XVI (§ 1), 1999)
§ 13.08.690  PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS.
   A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought
against it for noncompliance with the prohibitions in
Article VI, §
13.08.110 if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that
its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources,
would cause pass through or interference and that either:
   A.   A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in
compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or
interference; or
   B.   No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially
in nature or constituents from the user’s prior discharge when the control
authority was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of
interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal
requirements.
(Ord. 1127, Art. XVI (§ 2), 1999)
§ 13.08.700  BYPASS.
   A.   For the purposes of this section:
      BYPASS. The intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a
user’s treatment facility.
      SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE. Substantial physical damage to property, damage
to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or
substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be
expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE does not
mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
   B.   A user may allow the bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment
standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential
maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to
the provision of subsections C. and D. of this section.
   C.   1.   If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall
submit prior notice to the control authority, at least ten days before the date
of the bypass, if possible.
      2.   A user shall submit oral notice to the control authority of an
unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards as soon as
possible but no later than 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the
bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the
time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain
a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass,
including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the
anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to
reduce, eliminate and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The control authority
may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has
been received within 24 hours.
   D.   1.   Bypass is prohibited, and the control authority may take an
enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:
         a.   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury
or severe property damage;
         b.   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
         c.   The user submitted notices as required under subsection C. of
this section.
      2.   The control authority may approve an anticipated bypass, after
considering its adverse effects, if the control authority determines that it
will meet the three conditions listed in subsection D.1. of this section.
(Ord. 1127, Art. XVI (§ 3), 1999)
ARTICLE XVII. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
§ 13.08.710  PRETREATMENT CHARGES AND FEES.
   The control authority may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of the
costs of development and administration of the control authority’s pretreatment
program, which may include:
   A.   Fees for wastewater discharges permit applications including the cost
of processing the applications;
   B.   Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures including
the cost of collection and analyzing a user’s discharge, and reviewing
monitoring reports submitted by users;
   C.   Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures
and construction;
   D.   Fees for filing appeals; and
   E.   Other fees as the control authority may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered
by this chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines and penalties
chargeable by the control authority.
(Ord. 1127, Art. XVII, 1999)
ARTICLE XVIII. PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE
§ 13.08.720  PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE.
   A.   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, intentionally,
knowingly, recklessly or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or
tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the
sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to the
criminal laws of the city and the State of Oregon.
   B.   It is unlawful to permit the growth of hydrotropic species of trees
such as members of the populus and salix genera which have root systems that
tend to be attracted to and enter into the city’s sewer system, within 25 feet
of any public sewer. Trees located farther than 25 feet from a city sewer
lateral shall be removed if it is determined that the root system may interfere
with a public sewer. Removal of the trees existing on property other than
public rights-of-way shall be at the property owner’s expense.
(Ord. 1127, Art. XVIII (§§ 1, 2), 1999)
ARTICLE XIX. POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS
§ 13.08.730  POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.
   A.   The Director and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling
and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The Director or
his or her representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any
processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or
other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and
source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste
treatment.
   B.   While performing necessary work on private properties referred to in
subsection A. of this section, the Director or duly authorized employees of the
city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by
the company; and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the
city employees; and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage
to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for
personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out
of the gauging or sampling operation, except as such may be caused by
negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in
Article VI, §
13.08.190.
   C.   The Director and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the
purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying
within the easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly
negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
(Ord. 1127, Art. XIX (§§ 1-3), 1999)
ARTICLE XX. SEWER USER CHARGES
§ 13.08.740  SEWER USER CHARGES.
   A.   User charges shall be levied on all users of the POTW and set by
resolution. The charges shall cover the cost of operation and maintenance,
replacement and other administrative costs of such POTW. The user charge system
shall distribute these costs in proportion to each user’s contribution to the
wastewater loading of the POTW.
   B.   There shall be assigned to each multifamily residential user a number
of ERUs and this number shall represent the ratio of the cost incurred by the
wastewater from the user to the cost incurred by the wastewater from the
residential dwelling unit.
   C.   The user charge shall be calculated by multiplying the total number of
ERUs for each user by a constant cost factor. This cost factor shall be set by
resolution.
   D.   Should any user believe that he or she had been incorrectly assigned a
number of ERUs, that user may apply to City Council for review of his or her
wastewater contribution.
   E.   If it has been determined by the city that a user’s wastewater
contribution is incorrectly assigned, the city shall reassign a more
appropriate value to that user and shall notify that user of the reassignment.
   F.   Records of all assigned wastewater contributions forming the basis of
the charges shall be kept on file with the City Recorder and shall be open for
public inspection.
   G.   The sewer user charge for all occupied property shall begin 60 days
after the sewer main becomes available or the day that connection is made to
the public sewer, whichever occurs first. There shall be no user charge for
unoccupied property. Once the sewer user charge has commenced, no credit shall
be given for vacancy unless it can be demonstrated by the sewer user that water
service to that property from any and all sources has been discontinued. The
regular user charge shall be reinstated as soon as water service to that
property from any source has begun. If the date upon which the user charge is
commenced or altered does not fall on the first day of a billing period, the
rates shall be appropriately prorated.
   H.   Industrial sewer users and commercial sewer users shall be charged on
the basis of sewage flow in units of 100 cubic feet being equal to one unit
plus a monthly customer charge.
   I.   The rate per unit for and the monthly customer charge for industrial
and commercial users shall be set by resolution.
   J.   Non-flat rate customers with sewage strengths greater than average
residential sewage shall pay a surcharge for the strength loading in excess of
average residential strength loading.
   K.   The surcharge for extra strength loadings shall be set by resolution.
   L.   Once a year each user shall be notified, in conjunction with a regular
bill, of that portion of the user charges which are attributable to the
operation, maintenance and replacement of the wastewater collection, treatment
and disposal system. In lieu of the above notification requirement, a newspaper
public notice with a posting of the notice at City Hall will satisfy the notice
requirement. The notice will be given during the month of May each year.
(Ord. 1127, Art. XX (§ 1-12), 1999)
ARTICLE XXI. REVIEW AND REVISION OF RATES
§ 13.08.750  REVIEW AND REVISION OF RATES.
   The sewer user charges established in
Article III of this chapter shall, at a minimum, be reviewed annually and
revised periodically to reflect actual costs of operation, maintenance and
replacement of the POTW and to maintain the equitability of the user charges
with respect to proportional distribution of the costs of operation and
maintenance in proportion to each user’s contribution to the total wastewater
loading of the POTW.
(Ord. 1127, Art. XXI (§ 1), 1999)
ARTICLE XXII. RESPONSIBILITY, PAYMENT DELINQUENCIES AND PENALTIES
§ 13.08.760  USER CHARGE PAYMENT RESPONSIBILITY, DELINQUENCIES AND PENALTIES.
   A.   The person who owns the premises served by the sewerage system shall be
responsible for payment of the sewer user charge for that property
notwithstanding the fact that the property may be occupied by a tenant or other
occupant who may be required by the owner to pay the charges.
   B.   The users of the sewerage system shall be billed for services in
accordance with the rate schedule set by resolution as authorized by this
chapter.
   C.   The date of billing shall be established by the rate setting resolution
as provided in
Article XX of this chapter.
   D.   Sewer user charges shall be due and payable as established by the rate
setting resolution provided in
Article XX of this chapter.
   E.   Sewer user charges levied in accordance with this chapter shall be a
debt due to the city and a lien upon the property. If this debt is not paid
within 30 days after it shall be due and payable, it shall be-deemed delinquent
and may be recovered by civil action in the name of the city against the
property owner, the person or both.
   F.   A late fee and interest at a rate set by resolution shall accrue on all
accounts from the date of delinquency.
   G.   In the event of failure to pay sewer charges after they have become
delinquent, the city shall have the right to remove or close sewer connections
and enter upon the property for accomplishing the purposes. The expense of the
discontinuance, removal or closing, as well as the expense of restoring
service, shall be a debt due to the city and a lien upon the property and may
be recovered by civil action in the name of the city against the property
owner, the person or both.
   H.   Sewer service shall not be restored until all charges, including
interest accrued and the expense of removal, closing and restoration shall have
been paid.
   I.   Changes of ownership or occupancy of premises found delinquent shall
not be cause of reducing or eliminating these penalties.
   J.   If a sewer user charge is not paid when due, the city may shut off
water service until all delinquent sewer user charges are fully paid.
(Ord. 1267, § 1, 2017; Ord. 1175, § 2, 2005; Ord. 1127, Art. XXII (§§ 1-10),
1999)
ARTICLE XXIII. HANDLING OF FUNDS
§ 13.08.770  HANDLING OF FUNDS.
   A.   Bills for sewer user charges shall be mailed to the address specified
in the application for permit to make the connection unless or until the
different owner or user of the property is reported to the Finance Department.
   B.   All collections of sewer user charges shall be made by the city
recorder by and through the Finance Department. Sewer user charges shall be
computed as provided in
Article XX of this chapter and shall be payable as provided in
Article XXII of this chapter.
   C.   The City Recorder is directed to deposit in the sewer fund all of the
gross revenues received from charges, rates and penalties collected for the use
of the sewerage system as herein provided.
   D.   The revenues thus deposited in the sewer fund shall be used exclusively
for the operation, maintenance and repair of the sewerage system;
administration costs; expenses of collection of charges imposed by this chapter
and payments of the principle and interest on any debts of the sewerage system
of the city.
(Ord. 1127, Art. XXIII (§§ 1-4), 1999)
ARTICLE XXIV. RESERVED FOR INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY
ARTICLE XXV. INFILTRATION AND INFLOW
§ 13.08.780  INFILTRATION AND INFLOW.
   A.   All property owners identified by the city as contributors to excessive
or improper infiltration or inflow into the treatment works shall be advised of
their infiltration and inflow problems. This article does not apply to
discharges as described in
Article VI, Use of Public Storm Water Sewers.
   B.   Drainage from roofs, foundation drains, gutters, uncontaminated cooling
water or surface or ground water drains shall not be permitted to enter the
city’s Sanitary Sewer System. Leaks from private sewage systems, including but
not limited to building and side sewers, into the city’s Sanitary Sewer System
shall not be permitted. Neither temporary nor permanent drainage from
excavations into the city’s Sanitary Sewer System shall be allowed. Overflows
or drains from private or public swimming pools shall not be permitted without
prior written approval of the city.
   C.   All such situation properties shall be provided an opportunity in which
to correct the infiltration and inflow problems in a timely manner as
identified by the city.
   D.   Upon correction of identified infiltration and inflow problems, each
property owner shall notify the city that corrective actions have been taken,
or are in progress, which action shall be specified in the notification to the
city.
   E.   A property owner failing to notify the city of corrective actions by
time identified by the city shall be subject to termination of service, without
further notice, and water service, if provided by the city, shall be
immediately discontinued and shut off until the violation shall have been
corrected in accordance with federal, state and city regulations and laws.
   F.   In the event any instance of excessive or improper infiltration or
inflow into the treatment works of the city shall continue beyond the time
identified by the city, it is declared that the continuing infiltration or
inflow is a public nuisance, that the city shall have the right to abate such
public nuisance, and to enter upon any private property within the city for
such purpose and shall assess the cost of the abatement as a lien against the
property upon which the continuing infiltration and inflow occurs. The
assessment shall be levied by the filing of statement of the costs together
with the description of the name of the owner(s) thereof with the City
Recorder, whereupon the City Recorder shall in due course enter such assessment
as a lien against the property in the lien docket of the city. An
administration fee of $25 shall be charged and collected by the city in
addition to the other costs of abatement to cover part of the cost of
abatement.
   G.   The City Council may by rule establish standards and criteria for
infiltration and inflow for the purpose of preventing and removing these from
the city’s Sanitary Sewer System.
(Ord. 1175, § 3, 2005; Ord. 1127, Art. XXV (§§ 1-5), 1999)
ARTICLE XXVI. RESERVED
§ 13.08.790  RESERVED.
ARTICLE XXVII. PENALTIES
§ 13.08.800  VIOLATIONS—PENALTIES.
   A.   Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this chapter,
except
Article VII or subsequent articles of this chapter pertaining to such, a
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement and
Article XVIII, may be served by the city with written notice stating the nature
of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in the
notice, permanently cease all violations.
   B.   Violation of this chapter constitutes a violation and may be prosecuted
under the provision of Sweet Home Municipal Code
Chapter 9.36, as now enacted or hereafter amended except
Article VII or subsequent articles pertaining to such, a wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, and
Article XVIII.
   C.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become
liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage that the city sustains by
reason of such violation.
(Ord. 1237, § 1 (part), 2013; Ord. 1127, Art. XXVII (§§ 1-3), 1999)
CHAPTER 13.09:  STORMWATER DRAINAGE
Section
   
13.09.010   Findings—Purpose.
   
13.09.020   Definitions.
   
13.09.030   Stormwater drainage policy.
   
13.09.040   Establishment of a stormwater drainage utility.
   
13.09.050   Establishment of a stormwater drainage utility fee—Responsibility.
   
13.09.060   Stormwater drainage utility fee—Dedicated.
   
13.09.070   Billing for fee, payment delinquencies and penalties.
   
13.09.080   Enforcement.
   
13.09.090   Administrative review—Appeals.
   
13.09.100   Notice of decision.
   
13.09.110   Exemptions.
   
13.09.120   Discounts.
   
13.09.130   Violations—Penalties.
   
13.09.140   Severability.
   
13.09.150   Classification.
§ 13.09.010  FINDINGS—PURPOSE.
   A.   The city provides a valuable public service by providing stormwater
drainage facilities for the collection and disposal of stormwater discharged
from properties and public rights-of-way within the city. The stormwater
drainage facilities constitute a public utility owned and operated by the city.
The utility exists for the benefit of any person within the city who wants to
have the public stormwater drainage facilities available for the diversion,
collection and/or disposal of stormwater drainage and other runoff water from
the person’s private property and represents a municipal service in a developed
urban environment which is essential to the public health, safety and welfare.
   B.   Persons who use the public stormwater drainage facilities need to be
charged fees that reflect the cost of the management, maintenance, extension
and construction of the public stormwater drainage facility as a public utility
in the city. Persons should not be compelled to use this utility, nor to pay
monthly utility fees, if the utility is not to be used by the person
responsible. Persons who undertake the installation of runoff control
facilities on their property that reduce or eliminate the discharge of
stormwater into public stormwater drainage facilities ought to be given an
exemption, in proportion to the degree of reduction, against stormwater
drainage utility fees that would otherwise be due. Certain stormwater drainage
facilities and costs are incurred by the utility to provide the overall
stormwater program and benefit those persons who may otherwise eliminate the
discharge of stormwater into public stormwater drainage facilities.
   C.   Accordingly, the structure of the stormwater drainage utility is
intended to be a fee for service and not a charge against property. Although
this structure is intended to constitute a service fee, even if it is viewed as
a fee against property or against the person responsible, as a direct
consequence of ownership of that property, the utility’s fee structure should
allow the person responsible to have the ability to control the amount of the
fee. Similarly, the utility fee structure should reflect the actual cost of
providing the service and not impose fees on persons not receiving a service.
The actual costs may include all costs the utility might incur were it in
private ownership.
   D.   Persons using water from the city potable water facilities use
substantial amounts of water for irrigating lawns and gardens, washing
structures, sidewalks, driveways and parking lots, and for other activities
which result in the discharge of runoff into the public stormwater drainage
facilities. These uses of water demonstrate a substantial relationship between
persons’ use of these water facilities and their use of the public stormwater
drainage facilities.
(Ord. 1196, 2006)
§ 13.09.020  DEFINITIONS.
   Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions contained in
this section shall govern the construction of this chapter.
   CITY. The City of Sweet Home, Oregon, and the area within its boundaries
including its boundaries as extended in the future and all property owned by
the city, outside the city limits. It means all officers, employees, and
representatives of the City of Sweet Home.
   CITY ENGINEER. The City Engineer of the City of Sweet Home, or such person
as may be designated by the Public Works Director for the administration of
this chapter. Designated person includes Public Works Director and any
qualified engineer.
   CITY MANAGER or MANAGER. The City Manager of the City of Sweet Home, or such
person as may be designated by the Manager for the administration of this
chapter.
   COMMERCIAL UNIT or INDUSTRIAL UNIT. Defined in §
13.08.050 as “Commercial, or commercial use” and “Industrial, or industrial
use”.
   COMMODITY CHARGE. The charge per each EDU of impervious surface that drains
directly or indirectly to public infrastructure. COMMODITY CHARGE shall be set
by rule.
   COUNCIL. Sweet Home City Council.
   CUSTOMER CHARGE. Also referred as MONTHLY BASE CHARGE is a charge per EDU as
defined within this chapter for each property within the legal city boundary
for the cost of draining rights-of-way and providing other common surface water
programs. CUSTOMER CHARGE shall be set by rule.
   DELINQUENT ACCOUNT. Any billing and/or associated fee for service that is
not paid by the fifteenth of the month following the month in which the service
was provided and/or charges incurred.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any constructed change to improved or unimproved property
including, but not limited to, building or other structures, private stormwater
drainage facilities, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or
drilling operations.
   DIRECTOR. The Public Works Director for the City of Sweet Home or his or her
authorized designee.
   EASEMENT. A written and recorded legal document describing legal interest in
land owned by another that entitles easement holder to a specific limited use.
   EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT (EDU). Also referred as SINGLE FAMILY UNIT (SFU)
shall, for purposes of this chapter, mean an area which is estimated to place
approximately equal demand on the public stormwater drainage facilities. The
term EDU shall be inclusive of those units identified as detached single-family
residences, unit ownerships, condominiums, etc. Each EDU shall be based on an
amount of impervious surface in square feet as set by rule.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACES. Those surface areas which either prevent or retard
saturation of water into the land surface and cause water to run off the land
surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow from that present
under natural conditions pre-existent to development. Examples of IMPERVIOUS
SURFACES include, but are not limited to, rooftops, concrete or asphalt
sidewalks, walkways, patio areas, driveways, parking lots or storage areas and
gravel, oil, macadam or other surfaces which similarly impact the natural
saturation or runoff patterns which existed prior to development.
   IMPROVED PROPERTY. Any area which has been altered such that the runoff from
the site is greater than which could historically have been expected under
conditions pre-existent to development. Such a condition shall be determined by
the Director.
   MASTER PLAN. The “1997 City of Sweet Home Storm Drainage Master Plan
Update”, including such amendments to such plan, and adopted January 26, 1999.
   NORMAL WORKING HOURS. For administrative purposes, any normal workday Monday
through Friday (except holidays) between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
   OPEN DRAINAGE WAY. A natural or constructed path, ditch or channel which has
the specific function of conveying natural stream water or stormwater from a
point of higher elevation to a point of lower elevation.
   PERSON RESPONSIBLE. The owner, agent, occupant, lessee, tenant, contract
purchaser or other person having possession or control of property or the
supervision of an improvement on the property.
   PRIVATE. That is on private property.
   PUBLIC. Within the public right-of-way.
   RESIDENCE or RESIDENCES. A building used primarily as a home.
   RULE. Any written standard, directive, interpretation, policy, regulation,
procedure or other provision, adopted by the Council as a resolution to carry
out the provisions of this chapter.
   RUNOFF CONTROL. Any measure approved by the Director that reduces stormwater
runoff from land surfaces on which development exists.
   STORMWATER. Water from precipitation, surface or subterranean water from any
source, drainage and non-septic waste water.
   STORMWATER DRAINAGE FACILITIES. Any structure(s) or configuration of the
ground that is used or by its location becomes a place where stormwater flows
or is accumulated including, but not limited to, pipes, sewers, gutters,
manholes, catch basins, ponds, open drainage-ways and their appurtenances,
neighboring creeks and/or streams not otherwise excluded by action of the
Council as not being stormwater drainage facilities.
(Ord. 1196, 2006)
§ 13.09.030  STORMWATER DRAINAGE POLICY.
   A.   Council declares its intention to acquire, own, manage, construct,
equip, operate and maintain within the city open drainage ways, underground
storm drains, equipment and appurtenances necessary, useful or convenient for
public stormwater drainage facilities. The Council also declares its intention
to manage, maintain and extend existing public stormwater drainage facilities.
   B.   The improvement of both public and private stormwater drainage
facilities through or adjacent to a new development shall be the responsibility
of the person responsible as defined within this chapter. The improvements
shall comply with all applicable city ordinances, policies, standards and
Master Plan.
   C.   No portion of this chapter or statement or subsequent Council
interpretation or policies shall relieve the person responsible of assessments
levied against his or her property for public facility improvement projects.
   D.   It is the policy of the city to participate in improvements to
stormwater drainage facilities when authorized by the Director. To be
considered for approval by the Director, a stormwater drainage facility must:
      1.   Be public;
      2.   Provide a benefit to the community;
      3.   Be located in or on a city property, city right-of-way or city
easement;
      4.   If a piped system, be a design equivalent to equal or larger than a
12-inch diameter pipe; and
      5.   Be identified as a project in the Master Plan; or
      6.   Be a rehabilitation and/or replacement of existing public stormwater
drainage facilities.
   E.   The city shall maintain public stormwater drainage facilities located
on city property, city right-of-way or city easements. Public stormwater
drainage facilities to be managed by the city include, but are not limited to:
      1.   Open drainage ways which service a drainage basin of at least 100
acres, when on city property, city right-of-way or city easement;
      2.   A piped drainage system and related appurtenances which has been
designed and constructed expressly for use by the general public and accepted
by the Director;
      3.   Roadside drainage ditches along unimproved city streets; and/or
      4.   Flood control facilities (levees, dikes, overflow channels,
detention basins, retention basins, dams, pump stations, groundwater recharging
basins, etc.) that have been designed and constructed expressly for use by the
general public and accepted by the city.
   F.   Stormwater drainage facilities not maintained by the city include, but
are not limited to:
      1.   Stormwater drainage facilities not located on city property, city
right-of-way or city easement;
      2.   Private parking lot stormwater drainages;
      3.   Roof, footing and area drainages;
      4.   Drainages not designed and constructed for use by the general
public;
      5.   Drainage swales which collect stormwater from a basin less than 100
acres that is not located on city property, right-of-way or easement;
      6.   Access driveway culverts;
      7.   Those portions of streams or drainage ways located on privately-
owned land; and
      8.   Ditches swales, culverts and similar facilities owned and operated
by the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation or other local, county or state governments.
(Ord. 1196, 2006)
§ 13.09.040  ESTABLISHMENT OF A STORMWATER DRAINAGE UTILITY.
   A stormwater drainage utility is created for the purpose of providing funds
for the management, maintenance, extension and construction of public
stormwater drainage facilities within the city. Council finds, determines and
declares the necessity of providing for the management, maintenance, extension
and construction of city stormwater drainage facilities for its inhabitants.
(Ord. 1196, 2006)
§ 13.09.050  ESTABLISHMENT OF A STORMWATER DRAINAGE UTILITY FEE—
RESPONSIBILITY.
   A.   The person(s) who owns the property served by the public stormwater
drainage facility shall be ultimately responsible for payment of all fees/
charges prescribed in this chapter for that property not withstanding the fact
that the property may be occupied by a tenant or other occupant who may be
required by the owner to pay the charges.
   B.   Water and/or sanitary sewer service may be denied to any person who has
left an unpaid stormwater drainage bill at another address within the city
limits of Sweet Home, until the bill is paid.
   C.   Each property shall be billed a stormwater drainage utility fee for
services in accordance with the rate schedule set by resolution as authorized
by this chapter. Fee shall include a “customer charge”, if applicable, and a
“commodity charge” each of which shall be based per EDU and each subsequent 100
square foot measurement of impervious surface. The fee shall:
      1.   Be established in amounts which will provide sufficient funds to
properly manage and maintain public stormwater drainage facilities; and
      2.   Be used for the construction of new stormwater drainage facilities
or for the extension of existing stormwater drainage facilities.
   D.   The City Manager shall cause a review of stormwater drainage fees to be
made each February of the year to determine what fee changes, if any, are to be
considered by the City Council. Based on this annual review, City Council may,
by resolution, change the fees based upon revised estimates of the cost of
properly managing, maintaining, extending and/or constructing public stormwater
drainage facilities.
   E.   Credit will be allowed for runoff control measures. When approved by
the Director, stormwater drainage utility fees may be reduced for a property
where approved runoff control measures have been taken. A fee reduction shall
be on a straight line basis with conditions existing on the date of the passage
of this chapter, being considered as starting or initial conditions. If the
person responsible establishes, to the satisfaction of the Director, that all
runoff from a property is disposed of without utilizing public stormwater
drainage facilities either directly or indirectly, there will be no fees
charged under the provisions of this chapter except those fees imposed to fund
stormwater programs common to all property owners, including the cost of
draining the public rights-of-way.
   F.   Property not used for single-family dwelling purposes (i.e. multi-
family properties such as duplex and/or tri-plex, commercial properties,
industrial properties, schools, churches, government, etc.) shall be considered
to be furnished service in proportion to the amount of the property’s
impervious surface, and that for each EDU (or increment of 100 square feet) of
impervious surface, the property is furnished service equivalent to that
furnished a single-family unit and that the minimum service charge shall be
that established for a single-family unit.
(Ord. 1196, 2006)
§ 13.09.060  STORMWATER DRAINAGE UTILITY FEE—DEDICATED.
   All fees collected for the purposes specified in this chapter shall be paid
into the stormwater drainage accounts and accounted for by dedicated line items
including, but not limited to, stormwater drainage maintenance and stormwater
drainage construction. The revenues shall be used for the purposes of the
management, maintenance, extension and construction of public stormwater
drainage facilities.
(Ord. 1196, 2006)
§ 13.09.070  BILLING FOR FEE, PAYMENT DELINQUENCIES AND PENALTIES.
   A.   The stormwater drainage fee shall be billed and collected with the
monthly water and/or sewer utility bill. All such bills shall be rendered
monthly by the city and shall become due and payable in accordance with the
rules and regulations of the Utility Billing Department pertaining to the
collection of utility fees. All fees collected will be placed in the stormwater
drainage accounts as required by this chapter.
   B.   All bills are due when mailed and shall be considered delinquent if not
paid by the fifteenth of the month following the month in which the charges
were incurred and shall be payable at City Hall.
   C.   1.   If a bill is not paid by the time it becomes delinquent, a
delinquent notice may, by rule, be mailed to the customer and/or property owner
(s). If the bill is not paid by the date and time specified in the delinquent
notice, or appropriate arrangements made at City Hall - Water Department, the
City Manager shall, by rule, have the authority to deprive the property
concerned of water service by means of shut off, lockout, meter removal and/or
methods appropriate for discontinuance of water service until all delinquent
user charges including interest accrued and the expense of removal, closing and
restoration have been fully paid. The expense of the discontinuance, removal or
closing, as well as the expense of restoring service shall be a debt due to the
city and a lien upon the property and may be recovered by civil action in the
name of the city against the property owner, the person or both. Water service
shall not be restored until all charges, including interest accrued and the
expense of removal, closing and restoration shall have been paid.
      2.   Interest at a rate set by resolution shall accrue on all accounts
from the date of delinquency. In addition, a penalty shall be assessed at the
rate of $2 per month from the date of delinquency, which shall be added to the
account and shall accrue interest in the same manner as all other delinquent
charges beginning the following month. A service charge shall be paid to the
city whenever service is reinstated after having been discontinued due to
nonpayment.
   D.   Service may be denied to any person until restitution has been made for
any damage or loss of revenue resulting from tampering with or bypassing water
meters or locking devices.
   E.   The Director shall have authority to adjust or waive fees as
appropriate. Changes of ownership or occupancy of premises found delinquent
shall not be cause of reducing or eliminating these penalties.
   F.   Stormwater drainage charges levied in accordance with this chapter
shall be a debt due to the city and a lien upon the property. If this debt is
not paid within 30 days after it shall be due and payable, it shall be deemed
delinquent and may be recovered by civil action in the name of the city against
the property owner, the person or both.
(Ord. 1196, 2006)
§ 13.09.080  ENFORCEMENT.
   Any fee due which is not paid when due may be recovered in an action at law
by the city. In addition to any other remedies or penalties provided by this or
any other city ordinance and/or state law, failure of any person responsible to
pay fees promptly when due shall subject the person responsible to
discontinuance of any utility services provided by the city and the City
Manager is empowered and directed to enforce this provision against the
delinquent users. The employees of the city shall, at all reasonable times,
have access to any improved property served by the city for inspection, repair
or the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 1196, 2006)
§ 13.09.090  ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW—APPEALS.
   A.   Any person responsible who disputes the amount of the fee, or disputes
any determination made by or on behalf of the city pursuant to and by the
authority of this chapter may petition the City Council for a hearing on a
revision or modification of the fee or determination. The petitions may be
filed only once in connection with any fee or determination, except upon the
showing of changed circumstances sufficient to justify the filing of an
additional petition.
   B.   Such petitions, including all facts and figures, shall be submitted in
writing and filed with the Director at least 14 days prior to a hearing being
scheduled by the Council. The petitioner shall have the burden of proof.
   C.   Within 45 days of filing of the petition, the Council shall make
finding of fact based on all relevant information, shall make a determination
based upon such findings and, if appropriate, extend timeline up to an
additional 30 days for further fact gathering and/or modify the fee or
determination accordingly. The determination by the Council shall be considered
a final order and petitioner shall be notified according to §
13.09.100.
(Ord. 1196, 2006)
§ 13.09.100  NOTICE OF DECISION.
   Every determination of appeal made by the Council shall be in writing and
notice shall be mailed to or served upon the petitioner within a reasonable
time from the date of the action. Service by certified mail, return receipt
requested, shall be conclusive evidence of service for the purpose of this
chapter.
(Ord. 1196, 2006)
§ 13.09.110  EXEMPTIONS.
   The Council may, by resolution, exempt any class of user when the Council
determines that the public interest deems it necessary or that the contribution
to stormwater drainage facility use by the class to be insignificant.
(Ord. 1196, 2006)
§ 13.09.120  DISCOUNTS.
   The Council may establish, by resolution, stormwater drainage utility fees
at discounted rates when the Council determines it to be in the public best
interest to do so.
(Ord. 1196, 2006)
§ 13.09.130  VIOLATIONS—PENALTIES.
   Violations of this chapter may be prosecuted under the provisions of Sweet
Home Municipal Code
Chapter 9.36 and any amendments thereto in addition to any other legal remedies
available to the city. Each day that a violation exists is a separate offense.
(Ord. 1240, § 28, 2015; Ord. 1196, 2006)
§ 13.09.140  SEVERABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter are severable, and if any clause, section or
provision of this chapter shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any
reason or cause, the remaining portion of this chapter shall be in full force
and effect and be valid as if the invalid portion thereof had not been
incorporated herein. It is hereby declared to be the City Council’s intent that
this chapter would have been adopted had such an unconstitutional provision not
been included herein.
(Ord. 1196, 2006)
§ 13.09.150  CLASSIFICATION.
   The City Council determines that any fees, rates or charges imposed by this
chapter are not a tax subject to the property tax limitations of Article XI, §
11(b) of the Oregon Constitution.
(Ord. 1196, 2006)
CHAPTER 13.12:  WATER AND SEWER HOOKUP FEES AND SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGES
Section
   
13.12.010   Purpose.
   
13.12.020   Definitions.
   
13.12.030   System development charge established.
   
13.12.040   Methodology.
   
13.12.050   Authorized expenditures.
   
13.12.060   Expenditure restrictions.
   
13.12.070   Improvement plan.
   
13.12.080   Collection of charge.
   
13.12.090   Installment payment.
   
13.12.100   Exemptions.
   
13.12.110   Credits.
   
13.12.120   Notice.
   
13.12.130   Segregation and use of revenue.
   
13.12.140   Refunds.
   
13.12.150   Implementing regulations—Amendments.
   
13.12.160   Appeal procedure.
   
13.12.170   Prohibited connection.
   
13.12.180   Penalty.
   
13.12.190   Construction.
   
13.12.200   Severability.
   
13.12.210   Classification.
§ 13.12.010  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the system development charge is to impose a portion of the
cost of capital improvements for water, wastewater and storm water upon those
development(s) that create the need for or increase the demands on the city’s
water, wastewater and/or storm water systems.
(Ord. 1164, 2004)
§ 13.12.020  DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following mean:
   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS. Public facilities or assets used for:
      1.   Water supply, treatment or distribution or any combination;
      2.   Wastewater collection, transmission, treatment or disposal or any
combination; and/or
      3.   Stormwater collection, transmission, treatment or disposal or any
combination.
   DEVELOPMENT. All improvements on a site, including buildings, other
structures, parking and loading areas, landscaping, paved or graveled areas,
and areas devoted to exterior display, storage or activities. DEVELOPMENT
includes redevelopment of property. DEVELOPMENT includes improved open areas
such as plazas and walkways, but does not include natural geologic forms or
unimproved lands.
   IMPROVEMENT FEE. A fee for costs associated with capital improvements to be
constructed after the date the fee is adopted pursuant to §
13.12.030 of this chapter.
   LAND AREA. The area of a parcel of land as measured by projection of the
parcel boundaries upon a horizontal plane with the exception of a portion of
the parcel within a recorded right-of-way or easement subject to a servitude
for a public street or for a public scenic or preservation purpose.
   OWNER. The owner or owners of record title or the purchaser or purchasers
under a recorded land sales agreement, and other persons having an interest of
record in the described real property.
   PARCEL OF LAND. A lot, parcel, block or other tract of land that in
accordance with city regulations is occupied or may be occupied by a structure
or structures or other use, and that includes the yards and other open spaces
required under the zoning, subdivision or other development ordinances.
   PERMITTEE. The person to whom a building permit, development permit, a
permit or plan approval to connect to the sanitary sewer, storm sewer or water
system, or right-of-way access permit is issued.
   QUALIFIED PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS. A capital improvement that is:
      1.   Required as a condition of development approval;
      2.   Identified in the plan adopted pursuant to “improvement plan” of
this chapter; and either:
         a.   Not located on or contiguous to a parcel of land that is the
subject of the development approval; or
         b.   Located in whole or in part on or contiguous to property that is
the subject of development approval and required to be built larger or with
greater capacity than is necessary for the particular development project to
which the improvement fee is related.
      3.   For purposes of this definition, CONTIGUOUS means in a public way
which abuts the parcel.
   REIMBURSEMENT FEE. A fee for costs associated with capital improvements
constructed or under construction on the date the fee is adopted pursuant to §
13.12.030 of this chapter, and for which the Council determines capacity to
exist.
   SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGE. A reimbursement fee, an improvement fee or a
combination thereof assessed or collected at the time of increased usage of
capital improvement of the water, wastewater or storm water systems, at the
time of issuance of a development permit or building permit, or at the time of
connection to the capital improvement to the city’s water, wastewater and/or
storm water systems.
      1.   A SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGE includes that portion of a sanitary
sewer, storm sewer or water system connection charge that is greater than the
amount necessary to reimburse the city for its average cost of inspecting and
installing connections with water, wastewater and/or storm sewer facilities.
      2.   A system development charge does not include fees assessed or
collected as part of a local improvement district or a charge in lieu of a
local improvement district assessment or the cost of complying with
requirements or conditions imposed by a land use decision.
(Ord. 1164, 2004)
§ 13.12.030  SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGE ESTABLISHED.
   A.   System development charges shall be established and may be revised by
resolution of the City Council. The Council shall set by resolution the amount
of the charge, the type of permit to which the charge applies and, if the
charge applies to a geographic area smaller than the entire city, the
geographic area subject to the charge.
   B.   Unless otherwise exempted by the provisions of this chapter or the
other local or state law, a system development charge is hereby imposed upon
all development within the city, upon the act of making a connection to the
city water or sewer system within the city, and upon all development outside
the boundary of the city that connects to or otherwise uses the water or
wastewater facilities of the city.
(Ord. 1164, 2004)
§ 13.12.040  METHODOLOGY.
   A.   The methodology used to establish or modify the reimbursement fee shall
promote the objective that future systems users shall contribute no more than
an equitable share of the cost of then-existing facilities.
   B.   The methodology used to establish or modify the improvement fee shall
be calculated to obtain the cost of capital improvements for the projected need
for available system capacity for future system users.
   C.   The methodology used to establish or modify the improvement fee or the
reimbursement fee, or both, shall be contained in a resolution adopted by the
City Council.
(Ord. 1164, 2004)
§ 13.12.050  AUTHORIZED EXPENDITURES.
   A.   Reimbursement fees shall be applied only to capital improvements
associated with the system for which the fees are assessed, including
expenditures relating to repayment of indebtedness.
   B.   Improvement fees shall be spent only on capacity increasing capital
improvements associated with the system for which the fee is assessed,
including expenditures relating to repayment of future debt for the
improvements. An increase in system capacity occurs if a capital improvement
increases the level of performance or service provided by existing facilities
or providing new facilities. The portion of the capital improvements funded by
improvement fees must be related to demands created by current or projected
development. A capital improvement being funded wholly or in part from revenues
derived from the improvement fee shall be included in the plan adopted by the
city pursuant to §
13.12.070 of this chapter.
   C.   Notwithstanding subsections A. and B. of this section, system
development charge revenues may be expended on the direct costs of complying
with the provisions of this chapter, including the costs of developing system
development charge methodologies and providing an annual accounting of system
development expenditures.
(Ord. 1164, 2004)
§ 13.12.060  EXPENDITURE RESTRICTIONS.
   A.   Systems development charges shall not be expended for costs associated
with the construction of administrative office facilities that are more than an
incidental part of other capital improvements.
   B.   System development charges shall not be expended for costs of the
operation or routine maintenance of capital improvements.
(Ord. 1164, 2004)
§ 13.12.070  IMPROVEMENT PLAN.
   A.   Prior to the establishment of a system development charge, the Council
shall adopt a plan that includes a list of:
      1.   The capital improvements that the City Council intends to fund in
whole or in part with improvement fee revenues;
      2.   The estimated cost and time of construction of each improvement and
the percentage of that cost eligible to be funded with improvement fee
revenues; and
      3.   A description of the process for modifying the plan.
   B.   In adopting this plan, the City Council may incorporate by reference
all or a portion of any public facilities plan, master plan, capital
improvements plan or similar plan that contains the information required by
this section.
   C.   The Council may modify the plan and list at any time. If a system
development charge will be increased by a proposed modification to the list to
include a capacity increasing public improvement the City Council will:
      1.   At least 30 days prior to adoption of the proposed modification,
provide written notice to persons who have requested notice pursuant to §
13.12.120 of this chapter; and
      2.   Hold a public hearing if a written request for a hearing is received
within seven days of the date of the proposed modification.
   D.   A change in the amount of a reimbursement fee or an improvement fee is
not a modification of the system development charge if the change in amount is
based on the periodic application of the construction cost index published by
the Engineering News Record, or a similar index if the construction cost index
is no longer published or representative of the cost for the city, or a
modification to any of the factors related to the rate that are incorporated in
the established methodology.
(Ord. 1164, 2004)
§ 13.12.080  COLLECTION OF CHARGE.
   A.   The system development charge is payable upon the issuance of:
      1.   A building permit;
      2.   A development permit;
      3.   A development permit for development not requiring the issuance of a
building permit;
      4.   A permit or approval to connect to the water system;
      5.   A permit or approval to connect to the sewer system; or
      6.   A right-of-way access (public works) permit.
   B.   If no building, development or connection permit is required, the
system development charge is payable at the time the usage of the capital
improvement is increased based on changes in the use of the property unrelated
to seasonal or ordinary fluctuations in usage.
   C.   If development is commenced or connection is made to the water or sewer
systems without an appropriate permit, the system development charge is
immediately payable upon the earliest date that a permit was required.
   D.   The Public Works Director or his or her designee shall collect the
applicable system development charge from the permittee when a permit that
allows building or development of a parcel is issued or when a connection to
the water or sewer system of the city is made.
   E.   The Public Works Director or his or her designee shall not issue the
permit or allow the connection until the charge has been paid in full, or until
provision for installment payments has been made pursuant to §
13.12.090 of this chapter, or unless an exemption is granted pursuant to §
13.12.100 of this chapter.
(Ord. 1164, 2004)
§ 13.12.090  INSTALLMENT PAYMENT.
   A.   When a system development charge is due and collectible, the owner of
the parcel of land subject to the development charge may apply for payment in
20 semi-annual installments, to include interest on the unpaid balance, in
accordance with O.R.S. 223.208.
   B.   The Public Works Director or his or her designee shall provide
application forms for installment payments, which shall include a waiver of all
rights to contest validity of the lien, except for the correction of
computational errors.
   C.   An applicant for installment payments shall have the burden of
demonstrating the applicant’s authority to assent to the imposition of a lien
on the parcel and that the property interest of the applicant is adequate to
secure payment of the lien.
   D.   The Public Works Director or his or her designee shall report to the
Finance Director or his or her designee the amount of the system development
charge, the dates on which payments are due, the name of the owner and the
description of the parcel.
   E.   The Finance Director or his or her designee shall docket the lien in
the lien docket. From that time the city shall have a lien upon the described
parcel for the amount of the system development charge, together with interest
on the unpaid balance at the rate established by the Council. The lien shall be
enforceable in the manner provided in O.R.S. Chapter 223.
   F.   Upon written request of the Public Works Department, the Finance
Director or his or her designee is authorized to cancel assessments of SDCs,
without further Council action, where the new development approved by the
building permit is not constructed and the building permit is cancelled.
   G.   For property that has been subject to a cancellation of assessment of
SDCs, a new installment payment contract shall be subject to the code
provisions applicable to SDCs and installment payment contracts on file on the
date the new contract is received by the city.
(Ord. 1164, 2004)
§ 13.12.100  EXEMPTIONS.
   A.   Additions to single-family dwellings that do not constitute the
addition of a dwelling unit, as defined by the state’s Uniform Building Code,
are exempt from all portions of the system development charge.
   B.   An alteration, addition, replacement or change in use that does not
increase the parcels or structures use of the public improvement facility are
exempt from all portions of the system development charge.
(Ord. 1164, 2004)
§ 13.12.110  CREDITS.
   A.   When a development occurs that is subject to a system development
charge, the system development charge for the existing use, if applicable,
shall be calculated and if it is less than the system development charge for
the use that will result from the development, the difference between the
system development charge for the existing use and the system development
charge for the proposed use shall be the system development charge. If the
change in the use results in the system development charge for the proposed use
being less than the system development charge for the existing use, no system
development charge shall be required. No refund or credit shall be given unless
provided for by another subsection of this section.
   B.   A credit shall be given to the permittee for the cost of a qualified
public improvement upon acceptance by the city of the public improvement. The
credit shall not exceed the improvement fee even if the cost of the capital
improvement exceeds the applicable improvement fee and shall only be for the
improvement fee charged for the type of improvement being constructed.
   C.   If a qualified public improvement is located in whole or in part on or
contiguous to the property that is the subject of the development approval and
is required to be built larger or with greater capacity than is necessary for
the particular development project, a credit shall be given for the cost of the
portion of the improvement that exceeds the city’s minimum standard facility
size or capacity needed to serve the particular development project or
property. The applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating that a
particular improvement qualifies for credit under this subsection. The request
for credit shall be filed in writing no later than 60 days after acceptance of
the improvement by the city. The city may deny the credit provided for in this
section if the city demonstrates that the application does not meet the
requirements of this section or if the improvement for which credit is sought
was not included in the improvement plan pursuant to §
13.12.070 of this chapter.
   D.   When the construction of a qualified public improvement located in
whole or in part or contiguous to the property that is the subject of
development approval gives rise to a credit amount greater than the improvement
fee that would otherwise be levied against the project, the credit in excess of
the improvement fee for the original development project may be applied against
improvement fees that accrue in subsequent phases of the original development
project.
   E.   Notwithstanding subsections A. through D. above, when establishing a
methodology for a system development charge, the city may provide for a credit
against the improvement fee, the reimbursement fee or both, for capital
improvements constructed as part of the development which reduce the
development’s demand upon existing capital improvements and/or the need for
future capital improvements, or a credit based upon any other rationale the
Council finds reasonable.
   F.   Credits shall not be transferable from one development to another.
   G.   Credits shall not be transferable from type of system development
charge to another.
   H.   Credits shall be used within ten years from the date the credit is
given.
(Ord. 1164, 2004)
§ 13.12.120  NOTICE.
   A.   The city shall maintain a list of persons who have made a written
request for notification prior to adoption or modification of a methodology for
any system development charge. Written notice shall be mailed to persons on the
list at least 90 days prior to the first hearing to establish or modify a
system development charge. The methodology supporting the system development
charge shall be available at least 60 days prior to the first hearing to adopt
or amend a system development charge. The failure of a person on the list to
receive a notice that was mailed does not invalidate the action of the city.
   B.   The city may periodically delete names from the list, but at least 30
days prior to removing a name from the list, the city must notify the person
whose name is to be deleted, that a new written request for notification is
required if the person wishes to remain on the notification list.
(Ord. 1164, 2004)
§ 13.12.130  SEGREGATION AND USE OF REVENUE.
   A.   All funds derived from a particular type of system development charge
are to be segregated by accounting practices from all funds of the city. That
portion of the system development charge calculated and collected on account of
a specific facility system shall be used for no purpose other than set forth in
§
13.12.050 of this chapter.
   B.   The appropriate city official shall provide the City Council with an
annual accounting, by January 1 of each year, for system development charges
showing the total amount of system development charge revenues collected for
each type of facility and the projects funded from each account in the previous
fiscal year. A list of the amount spent on each project funded in whole or in
part, with system development charge revenues, shall be included in the annual
accounting.
(Ord. 1164, 2004)
§ 13.12.140  REFUNDS.
   A.   Refunds may be given by the Public Works Department upon finding that
there was a clerical error in the calculation of the SDC.
   B.   Refunds shall not be allowed for failure to timely claim credit or for
failure to timely seek an alternative SDC rate calculation at the time of
submission of an application for a building permit.
   C.   The city shall refund to the applicant any SDC revenues not expended
within ten years of receipt.
(Ord. 1164, 2004)
§ 13.12.150  IMPLEMENTING REGULATIONS—AMENDMENTS.
   The City Council delegates authority to the City Manager or designee to
adopt necessary procedures to implement provisions of this chapter including
the appointment of an SDC program administrator. All rules pursuant to this
delegated authority shall be filed with the office of City Manager and be
available for public inspection.
(Ord. 1164, 2004)
§ 13.12.160  APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   A.   A person challenging the propriety of an expenditure of system
development charge revenues may appeal the decision or the expenditure to the
City Council by filing a written request with the Public Works Director
describing with particularity the decision of the Public Works Director and the
expenditure from which the person appeals. An appeal of an expenditure must be
filed within two years of the date of the alleged improper expenditure.
   B.   Appeals of any other decision required or permitted to be made by the
Public Works Director under this chapter must be filed in writing with Public
Works Director within ten days of the decision.
   C.   After providing notice to the appellant, the Council shall determine
whether the Public Works Director’s decision or the expenditure is in
accordance with this chapter and the provisions of O.R.S. 223.297 to 223.314
and may affirm, modify or overrule the decisions. If the Council determines
that there has been an improper expenditure of system development charge
revenues, the Council shall direct that a sum equal to the misspent amount
shall be deposited within one year to the credit of the account or fund from
which it was spent. The decision of the Council shall be reviewed only as
provided in O.R.S. 34.010 to 34.100, and not otherwise.
   D.   A legal action challenging the methodology adopted by the Council
pursuant to §
13.12.040 shall not be filed later than 60 days after adoption. A person shall
contest the methodology used for calculating a system development charge only
as provided in O.R.S. 34.010 to ORS 34.100, and not otherwise.
   E.   A person who wishes to challenge the calculation of a system
development charge must make a written challenge to the calculation of the
system development charge and file the challenge with the Public Works Director
within 30 days of receiving the calculation. The written challenge must
describe with particularity the calculation which the person appeals.
      1.   a.   The written challenge shall state:
            (1)   The name and address of the appellant;
            (2)   The nature of the calculation being appealed;
            (3)   The reason the calculation is incorrect; and
            (4)   What the correct determination of the appeal should be or how
the correct calculation should be derived.
         b.   A person who fails to file such a written challenge within the
time permitted waives his or her objections, and his or her objections shall be
dismissed.
      2.   After providing timely notice to the challenger, the Public Works
Director shall determine whether the calculation is in accordance with the
resolution containing the methodology used to establish or modify the system
development charge adopted by the City Council.
      3.   Unless the challenger and the city agree to a longer period, a
written challenge to the calculation of the system development charge shall be
heard by a hearings officer within 40 working days of the receipt of the
written challenge. At least 15 working days prior to the hearing, the city
shall mail notice of the time and location thereof to the person who made the
written challenge.
      4.   The hearings officer shall hear and determine the challenge on the
basis of the person’s written challenge and any additional evidence he or she
deems appropriate. At the hearing, the challenger may present testimony and
oral argument personally or by counsel. The rules of evidence as used by courts
of law do not apply.
      5.   The person challenging the calculation shall carry the burden of
proving that the calculation being appealed is incorrect and what the correct
calculation should be or how a correct calculation should be derived.
      6.   After exhausting the city’s administrative review procedure pursuant
to §
13.12.160 of this chapter, the person challenging the calculation of the system
development charge may then petition for review of the city official’s/hearings
officer or Council’s determination pursuant to O.R.S. 34.010 to 34.100.
(Ord. 1164, 2004)
§ 13.12.170  PROHIBITED CONNECTION.
   No person may connect to the water or sewer systems of the city unless the
appropriate system development charge has been paid or the lien or installment
payment method has been applied for and approved.
(Ord. 1164, 2004)
§ 13.12.180  PENALTY.
   Violation of this chapter constitutes a violation under the provisions of
Chapter 9.36 of the Sweet Home Municipal Code and may be prosecuted under the
provisions thereof as now enacted or hereafter amended. The prosecution shall
not be exclusive, but shall be in addition to any other remedy the city may
have available to it to enforce compliance with this chapter. Each day that a
violation exists is a separate offense. A Violation Enforcement Officer
authorized to issue citations for commission of violation(s) of this chapter
shall include city’s Code Enforcement Officer, Sweet Home police officer and
Public Works Director.
(Ord. 1240, § 28, 2015; Ord. 1164, 2004)
§ 13.12.190  CONSTRUCTION.
   For the purposes of administration and enforcement of this chapter, unless
otherwise stated in this chapter, the following rules of construction shall
apply.
   A.   In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of
this chapter and any caption, illustration, summary table or illustrative
table, the text shall control.
   B.   The word “shall” is always mandatory and not discretionary; the word
“may” is permissive.
   C.   Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words
used in the singular number shall include the plural and the plural the
singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.
   D.   The phrase “used for” includes “arranged for”, “designed for”,
“maintained for” or “occupied for”.
   E.   Where a regulation involves two or more connected items, conditions,
provisions or events:
      1.   “And” indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions
or events shall apply; and
      2.   “Or” indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or
events may apply singly or in any combination.
   F.   The word “includes” shall not limit a term to the specific example, but
is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances of like kind or
character.
(Ord. 1164, 2004)
§ 13.12.200  SEVERABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter are severable and it is the intention to
confer the whole or any part of the powers herein provided for. If any clause,
section or provision of this chapter shall be declared unconstitutional or
invalid for any reason or cause, the remaining portion of this chapter shall be
in full force and effect and be valid as if the invalid portion thereof had not
been incorporated herein. It is hereby declared to be the Council’s intent that
this chapter would have been adopted had such an unconstitutional provision not
been included herein.
(Ord. 1164, 2004)
§ 13.12.210  CLASSIFICATION.
   The City Council determines that any fee, rates or charges imposed by this
chapter are not a tax subject to the property tax limitations of Article XI, §
11(b) of the Oregon Constitution.
(Ord. 1164, 2004)
CHAPTER 13.16:  MANDATORY WATER TESTING PROGRAM
Section
   
13.16.010   Applicability.
   
13.16.020   Testing—Required.
   
13.16.030   Connection to city water system—Required.
   
13.16.040   Connection to city water system—Liens.
   
13.16.050   Partitions.
   
13.16.060   Well water.
   
13.16.070   Violation—Penalty.
§ 13.16.010  APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter will apply to all properties within the risk areas identified
by the Linn County Environmental Health Division as being at high risk for
groundwater contamination. These areas are commonly referred to as the “42nd/
43rd Avenue Risk Area” (see Attachment A attached to the ordinance codified in
this chapter) and the “Clark Mill Road Risk Area” (see Attachment B attached to
the ordinance codified in this chapter). Hereafter, these two areas will be
jointly referred to as the risk areas and the attachments are incorporated
herein by reference.
(Ord. 1009, § 1, 1990)
§ 13.16.020  TESTING—REQUIRED.
   All households within the risk areas which are not currently connected to
the city water system and which have not been previously tested shall have
their wells tested for arsenic and biological contamination. Property owners
shall grant access for taking of samples.
(Ord. 1009, § 2, 1990)
§ 13.16.030  CONNECTION TO CITY WATER SYSTEM—REQUIRED.
   All households which have been tested under the provisions of this chapter
or which have been previously tested and for which results show measurable
biological contamination or levels of arsenic exceeding the EPA National
Drinking Water Standard of five-one-hundredths milligrams per liter shall be
required to connect to the city water system.
(Ord. 1009, § 3, 1990)
§ 13.16.040  CONNECTION TO CITY WATER SYSTEM—LIENS.
   The deadline for connection under the provisions of §
13.16.030 shall be six months after enactment of the ordinance codified in this
chapter. Property owners failing to connect by that date shall be connected to
city water by city staff or other authorized personnel and have a lien placed
against their property to cover the costs of connections. The lien can be
collected and foreclosed against the property by following the procedures set
out in §
8.04.250, as now enacted or hereafter amended. The property owners are jointly
and severally personally liable for the cost of the connection.
(Ord. 1009, § 4, 1990)
§ 13.16.050  PARTITIONS.
   Connection to city water service is required for any tax lot which undergoes
partition or upon which a new dwelling unit is established.
(Ord. 1009, § 5, 1990)
§ 13.16.060  WELL WATER.
   All properties within the risk areas which are connected to city water are
prohibited from reconnection to well water or in any manner using well water
for household purposes. Well water may be used for irrigation, lawn care or
other use outside the dwelling.
(Ord. 1009, § 6, 1990)
§ 13.16.070  VIOLATION—PENALTY.
   Violation of this chapter constitutes a violation and may be prosecuted
under the provisions of
Chapter 9.36 and any amendments thereto. The remedies, which include penalties
herein, provided for in the chapter are cumulative, and not exclusive, and
shall be in addition to any and all other remedies available to the city. If
access is not granted to a property for inspection, the city may obtain an
inspection warrant from the Municipal Court. Any person interfering physically
with individuals carrying out the provisions of this chapter shall be
prosecuted under applicable criminal laws as they apply to the situation.
(Ord. 1237, § 1 (part), 2013; Ord. 1009, § 7, 1990)
CHAPTER 13.20:  CONNECTION TO WATER SYSTEM REQUIRED IN CRITICALLY AFFECTED AREA
Section
   
13.20.010   Definitions.
   
13.20.020   Connection required.
   
13.20.025   Exemption from required connection.
   
13.20.030   Changes of critically affected areas.
   
13.20.040   Disconnection of private supply.
   
13.20.050   Use of city and private water.
   
13.20.060   Connection to city water system—Liens.
   
13.20.070   Violation—Penalty.
   
Appendix   Map of Critically Affected Area
§ 13.20.010  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   CRITICALLY AFFECTED AREA. The geographic area within the Sweet Home city
limits generally enclosed within the area east to west from 42nd Avenue to 46th
Avenue on the south side of Highway 20 and 45th Avenue to 47th Avenue on the
north side of Highway 20; and the area north to south from the northern side of
Highway 20 to the south extent of 45th Avenue, the south extent of 46th Avenue,
and approximately three-quarters of the distance south on 44th Avenue. This
area is demonstrated on a map which is attached hereto and by this reference is
made a part hereof.
   PREMISES. The integral property or area, including improvements thereon, to
which water service is or will be provided.
(Ord. 1120, § 1, 1998)
§ 13.20.020  CONNECTION REQUIRED.
   All existing commercial and residential establishments, homes, buildings,
lots or premises concurrently located within the boundaries of the critically
affected area which utilize water for purposes other than agriculture or
irrigation shall connect to and utilize the city water system as city water
becomes available to the property. All future development shall be required to
connect to the city system, even if water service is not currently near the
property.
(Ord. 1120, § 2, 1998)
§ 13.20.025  EXEMPTION FROM REQUIRED CONNECTION.
   An owner of property located within the critically affected area may
petition the city for an exemption from the connection requirement, to allow
use of well water at that property for domestic purposes. An exemption will be
granted if the owner can demonstrate that the well water does not contain
concentrations of chemicals of concern above DEQ tap water Risk-Based
Concentrations (RBCs) and federal safe drinking water Maximum Contaminant
Levels (MCLs). Chemicals of  concern include  tetrachloroethylene,
trichloroethylene, and 1,1-dichloroethylene. At least two well water samples
(one from the dry season—July through October—and one from the wet
season—January through May) shall be tested and demonstrate that concentrations
of chemicals of concern are below the RBCs and MCLs. Representative water
samples must be collected by laboratory personnel or environmental
professionals, well water professionals, or water pump professionals with
experience in collecting water samples for testing of volatile organic
compounds. Samples shall be analyzed by a laboratory accredited by the State of
Oregon Laboratory Accreditation, using EPA Method 524.2 or EPA Method 8260 to
test for volatile organic compounds, including the chemicals of concern.
Detected concentrations of contaminants of concern must be below the respective
RBCs and MCLs for the dry and wet season samples. Notwithstanding the above
process, an owner may submit DEQ prior lab test results to obtain a DEQ
recommendation for an exemption from the connection requirement.
(Ord. 1289, passed 7-14-2020)
§ 13.20.030  CHANGES OF CRITICALLY AFFECTED AREAS.
   As changes to the critically affected areas occur, as determined by the
Department of Environmental Quality’s monitoring wells and sampling of private
wells, the connection requirements of this chapter will continue to be in
effect for that newly determined critically affected area.
(Ord. 1120, § 3, 1998)
§ 13.20.040  DISCONNECTION OF PRIVATE SUPPLY.
   Property owners in the critically affected area shall disconnect, to the
satisfaction of the city or its agent, all private water supply connections at
their premises except those used exclusively for agriculture and/or irrigation.
Property owners shall demonstrate disconnection of these private supplies prior
to connecting to the city system.
(Ord. 1120, § 4, 1998)
§ 13.20.050  USE OF CITY AND PRIVATE WATER.
   As required by Sweet Home Municipal Code
Chapter 13.04, use of both city water supply and a supply of water other than
that furnished by the city requires installation of approved backflow
prevention devices on the service connection to the premises. Customers
desiring to use both the city water supply and a supply of water other than
that furnished by the city shall under no circumstances allow a physical
connection, direct or indirect, to exist or be made in manner, even
temporarily, between water lines carrying city water and any non-city water
source. Where such connection is found to exist, or where provision is made to
connect the two systems, the city shall shut water off to the premises without
notice. In case of the discontinuance, service shall not be re-established
until satisfactory proof is furnished that the cross connection has been
completely and permanently severed.
(Ord. 1120, § 5, 1998)
§ 13.20.060  CONNECTION TO CITY WATER SYSTEM—LIENS.
   Property owners in the critically affected area failing to connect shall be
connected to the city water by city staff or other authorized personnel and
have a lien placed against their property to cover the cost of connections. The
lien can be collected and foreclosed against the property by following the
procedures set out in §§
8.04.220 through
8.04.250, as now enacted or hereafter amended. The property owners are jointly
and severally personally liable for the cost of the connection.
(Ord. 1120, § 6, 1998)
§ 13.20.070  VIOLATION—PENALTY.
   Violation of this chapter constitutes a violation and may be prosecuted
under the provisions of
Chapter 9.36 and any amendments thereto. The remedies, which include penalties
herein are cumulative, and not exclusive, and shall be in addition to any and
all other remedies available to the city. If access is not granted to a
property for inspection, the city may obtain an inspection warrant from the
municipal court. Any person interfering physically with individuals carrying
out the provisions of this chapter shall be prosecuted under applicable
criminal laws as they apply to the situation.
(Ord. 1240, § 29, 2015; Ord. 1120, § 7, 1998)
Appendix - Map of Critically Affected Area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ece2086d558ecf7c0453b274e996c1b00421ab0e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2393.png]
(Ord. 1289, passed 7-14-2020)
CHAPTER 13.24:  WATER CONSERVATION
Section
   
13.24.010   Title
   
13.24.020   Purpose
   
13.24.030   Provisions
   
13.24.040   Penalty
§ 13.24.010  TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the "Water Conservation Ordinance" of the
City of Sweet Home, Oregon.
(Ord. 1258, § 1, 2017)
§ 13.24.020  PURPOSE.
   The City of Sweet Home provides municipal water to residential, commercial,
and industrial consumers within the city at a charge as allowed by its
Ordinances and amended from time to time to reflect increases in costs of
operation, engineering, and construction to provide said water. The source from
which the municipal water is obtained may become limited by reason of natural
and/or unnatural occurrences. In the event that municipal water supplies become
limited and the City Manager, or designee, determine that a critical water
supply shortage threatens the ability of the city to deliver essential treated
water to its customers, the City Manager or appropriate designee may activate
emergency curtailment measures as follows.
(Ord. 1258, § 2, 2017)
§ 13.24.030  PROVISIONS.
   A.   Stage 1 - Conservation Stage Alert. The trigger for the "Conservation
Stage Alert' occurs when water use/demand reaches 80% of the current water
treatment plant production capabilities for three consecutive days. The City
Manager shall declare a Conservation Stage Alert and request voluntary
conservation by users and the city will distribute Water Conservation Tips and
Information flyer's to all users.
   B.   Stage 2 - Moderate Stage Alert. The trigger for the ''Moderate Stage
Alert' occurs when water use/demand reaches 90% of the current water treatment
plant production capabilities for two consecutive days or a state-declared
drought in the Sweet Home area is acknowledged by appropriate State Officials.
The City Manager shall declare a Moderate Stage Alert and call for the
continued voluntary conservation efforts and declare the requirement of the
following conservation methods:
      1.   Prohibition of lawn watering between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
      2.   Mandatory adherence to odd watering days for users in the South one-
half of the city and even watering days for users in the north one-half of the
city. Long Street and Holley Road from West City Limits to 49th Avenue, shall
be used as the dividing line between north and south.
      3.   Prohibit the hosing down of driveways, sidewalks, and parking lots
with city supplied water.
      4.   Prohibit the watering of all city parks and open areas.
      5.   Prohibit any unnecessary use or flushing of fire hydrants and water
mains.
   C.   Stage 3 - Emergency Stage Alert. The trigger for the "Emergency Stage
Alert' occurs when water use/demand reaches 95% of the current water treatment
plant production capabilities, when total production capability is lost, or
when deemed necessary by the City Manager. In this stage, the City Manager
shall declare an Emergency Stage Alert and call for a continuation of the
prohibited items under the Moderate Stage Alert and prohibit the following
uses:
      1.   Lawn watering without explicit written city approval. The city may
approve watering for new lawns, turf and grasses that were seeded before
issuance of the Emergency Stage Alert and are less than 12 months past first
planting.
      2.   Washing of boats and vehicles except where public health, safety and
welfare depend on frequent vehicle cleaning, such as food transport vehicles or
where required by law.
      3.   The filling of private swimming pools with city supplied water.
(Ord. 1258, § 3, 2017)
§ 13.24.040  PENALTY.
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to use water
in a manner or time prohibited as outlined above in §
13.24.030, and as declared in effect by the City Manager. In the event any
person, firm, or corporation does so violate the terms of this chapter by use
of water as prohibited, shall, upon conviction thereof be punished by a fine of
not less than $2,000.00 per violation per 24-hour period. Violation of this
chapter is a city violation and may be prosecuted under the provisions of SHMC
Chapter 9.36, as amended, except the fine amount and time period approved in
this ordinance are hereby authorized by the city notwithstanding the
limitations on city violations set forth in SHMC
9.36.040 and only the City Manager or Police Officer may issue the citation and
sign the complaint.
   B.   In the event that a citation is issued during the period of activated
stages of alert, and the City Manager determines that a second violation has
occurred after the date of the initial citation and during the same emergency
curtailment period, the City Manager may;
      1.   Initiate the installation of a flow restrictor on the public side of
the water service meter; and/or
      2.   Terminate the water service.
   C.   In the event the City Manager determines that a second violation has
occurred after the date of the initial citation and during the same emergency
curtailment period and takes action as described above, the action taken by the
City Manager may be appealed to the City Council. The City Council may modify,
affirm, or reverse the action of the City Manager. The decision by the City
Council shall be final.
(Ord. 1258, § 4, 2017)
TITLE 14
[Reserved]
TITLE 15: BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
      Chapter
         
15.01.   ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF BUILDING CODES
         
15.03.   VARIOUS CODES
         
15.06.   FEES
         
15.12.   FLOOD HAZARD AREA REGULATIONS
         
15.16.   MOVING BUILDINGS
         
15.20.   HISTORIC RESOURCES
CHAPTER 15.01:  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT—BUILDING CODE
Section
   
15.01.010   Title.
   
15.01.020   Purpose.
   
15.01.030   Scope of regulations.
   
15.01.040   Definition.
   
15.01.050   Authority to disconnect utilities in emergencies.
   
15.01.060   Authority to abate hazardous equipment.
   
15.01.070   Maintenance.
   
15.01.080   Occupancy violations.
   
15.01.090   Appeals.
   
15.01.100   Plan and permits issuance.
   
15.01.110   Validity of permit.   
   
15.01.120   Permit expiration, extension and reinstatement.
   
15.01.130   Work without a permit.
   
15.01.140   Non-transferability.
   
15.01.150   Violation – penalty.
§ 15.01.010  TITLE.
   These regulations shall be known as the “City of Sweet Home Building Code”,
and will be referred to herein as “this code”.
(Ord. 1204, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 15.01.020  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this code is to establish standards and procedures within the
City of Sweet Home, Oregon.  These regulations are necessary in order to:
   A.   Protect the public health, safety and welfare of the residents,
occupants, and users of structures in Sweet Home.
   B.   Provide for the use of best methods practices for the construction of
structures.
   C.   Meet the standards and procedures for implementation of State Codes in
compliance with Oregon Revised Statutes (O.R.S.).
(Ord. 1204, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 15.01.030  SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   A.   The city shall administer the State Building Code as set forth in
O.R.S. Chapter 455 as now enacted or hereafter amended.
   B.   This code shall apply to the construction, alteration, moving,
demolition, repair, maintenance and other work associated with any building or
structure, except when located within a public right-of-way.
   C.   Where there is conflict between a general requirement and a specific
requirement in sections of this code, the specific requirement shall be
applicable.
   D.   Where there is conflict between this code and any O.R.S., the O.R.S.
shall govern.
(Ord. 1204, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 15.01.040  DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this title, the following definition shall apply:
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The City of Sweet Home Building Official, or a designee
authorized by the Building Official.
(Ord. 1204, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 15.01.050  AUTHORITY TO DISCONNECT UTILITIES IN EMERGENCIES.
   A.   The Building Official shall have the authority to disconnect utility
services to a building, structure, premises, or equipment regulated by this
code when necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property.
      1.   The Building Official shall, whenever possible, notify the serving
utility, the owner and the occupant of the decision to disconnect prior to
taking such action.
      2.   The serving utility, owner and the occupant shall be notified in
writing of such disconnection within a reasonable time thereafter.
   B.   No person shall make a connection to or from an energy, fuel or power
supply to any equipment regulated by this Code which has been disconnected
until authorized by the Building Official.
(Ord. 1204, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 15.01.060  AUTHORITY TO ABATE HAZARDOUS EQUIPMENT.
   A.   When the Building Official determines that equipment regulated by this
code has become hazardous to life, health, or property, the Building Official
shall order the equipment either removed from its location or restored to a
safe and/or sanitary condition.
   B.   Notice shall be given in writing and must include a fixed time limit
for compliance and a statement that the defective equipment shall not be used
until compliance has been confirmed by the Building Official.
   C.   When equipment is to be disconnected, written notice of the
disconnection shall be given within 24 hours to the involved utility, the owner
and occupant of the building, structure, or premises, and must include a
statement of the causes for the disconnection.
   D.   When equipment is maintained in violation as noted in the notice, the
Building Official may take such action deemed necessary to prevent, restrain,
correct, or abate the violation.
(Ord. 1204, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 15.01.070  MAINTENANCE.
   All buildings and structures, both existing and new, and all new parts
thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. 
   A.   All devices or safeguards, which are required by this code, shall be
maintained in conformance with the code edition under which it was originally
installed.
   B.   The owner, or the owner's designated agent, shall be responsible for
the maintenance of buildings and structures. 
   C.   To determine compliance with this section, the Building Official may
require a structure to be inspected.
(Ord. 1204, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 15.01.080  OCCUPANCY VIOLATIONS.
   Whenever any building, structure or equipment therein regulated by this code
is used contrary to the provisions of this code, the Building Official may
order such use discontinued and the structure, or portions thereof, vacated.
   A.   The Building Official shall provide notice to the owner and occupants
of the structure stating a fixed time for compliance.
   B.   All persons using the structure, or portion thereof, shall discontinue
use within the time prescribed by the notice and make the structure, or portion
thereof, comply with the requirements of this code, as required by the Building
Official.
(Ord. 1204, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 15.01.090  APPEALS.
   A.   In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or
determinations made by the Building Official relating to the suitability of
alternate materials and methods of construction or interpretation by the
Building Official with regard to the building code, there shall be and is
hereby created a Board of Appeals.
      1.   The Board of Appeals shall consist of members who are qualified by
experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to building construction
and who are not employees of the City of Sweet Home. 
      2.   The Building Official shall be an ex officio member of and shall act
as secretary to the Board but shall have no vote on any matter before the
Board. 
      3.   The Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the City Council and
shall hold office at its pleasure. 
      4.   The Board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its
business, and render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant
with a duplicate copy to the Building Official.
      5.   The Board of Appeals shall have no authority relative to
interpretation of the administrative provisions of this code nor shall the
Board be empowered to waive requirements of this code.
   B.   Appeals may be filed by any of the following, if affected by a
decision:
      1.   The owner or authorized agent.
      2.   Any resident or property owner within 150 feet of a parcel of land
that is the subject of the decision.
      3.   Any agency, officer, or department of the city, which has the
responsibility for providing city facilities and/or services to the parcel of
land.
   C.   The time period for appeals from notices, orders, or action of the
Building Official shall be ten days.
   D.   The Building Official shall schedule a meeting of the Board within 15
days of the filing of the appeal.
      1.   The Board of Appeals shall grant a hearing or dismiss the appeal. 
      2.   The appeal shall be dismissed if not filed in compliance with Sweet
Home Municipal Code §
15.01.080(B).  If the appeal is dismissed, the Building Official's decision is
final.
      3.   The hearing shall be held not later than 30 days after filing the
appeal.
(Ord. 1204, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 15.01.100  PLAN AND PERMITS ISSUANCE. 
   The application, plans, specification, computation and other data filed by
an applicant for a permit shall be reviewed by the Building Official and other
city departments to verify compliance with any applicable laws.
   A.   When the Building Official finds the required submitted materials
conform to the this code and other applicable laws and all fees have been paid,
the Building Official shall issue a permit to the applicant.
   B.   Plans approved shall be endorsed by the Building Official.
   C.   Approved plans and specifications shall not be changed, modified, or
altered without review and approval of the Building Official.
   D.   The Building Official may issue a permit for construction of a part of
a building or structure before the entire plans and specifications for the
whole building or structure have been submitted or approved, provided adequate
information and detailed statements have been filed complying with all
pertinent requirements of this code.  The person holding the permit shall
proceed without assurance that the permit for the entire building or structure
will be granted.
(Ord. 1204, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 15.01.110  VALIDITY OF PERMIT.
   A.   The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans,
specifications and computations shall not be construed to be a permit for, or
an approval of, any violation of the provisions of this code or of any federal,
state, or city law, statute, rule, regulation or ordinance.
   B.   The issuance of a permit based on plans, specifications and other data
shall not prevent the Building Official from requiring the correction of errors
in the plans, specifications, and other application materials.
   C.   The issuance of a permit shall not prevent the Building Official from
stopping building operations being carried out under the permit when there is a
violation of this code or any other ordinances of the city.
(Ord. 1204, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 15.01.120  PERMIT EXPIRATION, EXTENSION AND REINSTATEMENT.
   A.   Permits shall become null and void if:
      1.   The work authorized is not begun within 180 days from the date
permit is issued. 
      2.   After the work is begun, the work is suspended or abandoned for a
period of 180 days, as determined by the Building Official.
   B.   A permit shall become null and void 24 months after the date of permit
issuance.
      1.   If the work authorized by a permit has not received final inspection
approval prior to the permit expiration date, all work shall stop.
         a.   The Building Official may make an exception to this requirement
at the time a permit is issued when the permit holder can demonstrate that the
complexity or size of the project makes completing the project within 24 months
unreasonable.
         b.   The Building Official may approve a one time extension for up to
six months if the permit holder can document sufficient progress that would
indicate project completion can occur within six months.
         c.   A new permit must be obtained for the work remaining unfinished. 
The permit fees will be based on the value of unfinished work.
   C.   A permit holder may submit a written request for an extension of an un-
expired permit.
      1.   The Building Official may approve an extension of a period not
exceeding 180 days.
      2.   No permit shall be extended more than once, except as allowed by
subsection B.1.(b) of this section.
   D.   An expired permit can be reinstated to allow the work authorized by the
original permit when all of the following conditions can be met:
      1.   The applicable laws and codes under which the original permit was
issued have not been amended in a manner that affects the work authorized by
the original permit.
      2.   No changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and
specifications approved by the original permit.
      3.   The original permit expired less than one year from the request to
reinstate.
   E.   A reinstated permit shall expire on the expiration date of the original
permit.
   F.   The fee for a reinstated permit shall cost one-half the amount of a
permit authorizing the same work at the current rate schedule.
   G.   An expired permit that does not comply with the preceding criteria will
not be reinstated and a new permit, at full permit and plan review fees shall
be required.
(Ord. 1204, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 15.01.130  WORK WITHOUT A PERMIT.
   Whenever any work for which a permit is required by this code has been
commenced without first obtaining the permit, an investigation shall be made
before a permit may be issued for such work.
   A.   An investigation fee shall be collected whether or not a permit is
subsequently issued. 
   B.   An investigation fee shall be collected in addition to required permit
fees.
   C.   Payment of a reinstatement fee shall not exempt any person from
compliance with all other provisions of this code, nor from any penalty
prescribed by law.
(Ord. 1204, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 15.01.140  NON-TRANSFERABILITY.
   A permit issued to a person or firm is not transferable and shall not permit
any other person or firm to perform any work authorized under a permit.
(Ord. 1204, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 15.01.150  VIOLATION--PENALTY.
   A.   Except for violations of building code as adopted in Sweet Home
Municipal Code §
15.03.010, failure to comply with any of the provisions and requirements of
Sweet Home Municipal Code Title 15 shall constitute a violation and may be
prosecuted under the provisions of Sweet Home Municipal Code
Chapter 9.36.
   B.   Abatement of a violation of this title can be accomplished by any
remedy open  to the city, including using the procedures set out in Sweet Home
Municipal Code
Chapter 8.04 for the abatement of nuisances.
   C.   Each day that a violation exists is a separate offense.
(Ord. 1214, § 1, 2010; Ord. 1204, § 1(part), 2008)
CHAPTER 15.03:  VARIOUS CODES
Section
   
15.03.010   Adoption of codes.
   
15.03.020   Enforcement of Sweet Home Municipal Code.
   
15.03.030   Unsafe buildings.
   
15.03.040   Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings.
   
15.03.050   Emergency.
§ 15.03.010  ADOPTION OF CODES.
   The following codes, as amended from time to time, are adopted as follows:
   A.   Oregon Structural Specialty Code;
   B.   Oregon Structural Specialty Code Appendix “J” – Excavation, Grading and
Erosion Control;
   C.   Oregon Mechanical Specialty Code;
   D.   Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code;
   E.   Oregon Residential Specialty Code;
   F.   Oregon Manufactured Dwelling and Park Specialty Code; and
   G.   International Code Council Uniform Code for Building Conservation.
   H.   Oregon Energy Efficiency Specialty Code.
   I.   Oregon Solar Installation Specialty Code.
   J.   Failure to comply with any of the provisions and requirements of the
codes adopted in this section shall be subject to administrative civil
penalties, set by City Council resolution, and shall be processed in accordance
with the procedures set forth in this section.
      1.   In addition to the civil penalties, a condition caused or permitted
to exist in violation of the codes adopted in this section is a public nuisance
and may be abated by any of the procedures set forth under law.
      2.   The penalties and remedies provided in this section are not
exclusive and are in addition to other penalties and remedies available to the
city under any ordinance, statute or law. However, the city shall not issue a
citation to a court for a monetary penalty to be assessed for a violation of
this section.
      3.   Each day that a violation of a provision of this section exists
constitutes a separate violation.
   K.   Upon a determination by the Building Official that any person, firm,
corporation or other entity however organized has violated a provision of this
section, or a rule adopted thereunder, the Building Official may cause issuance
of a notice of civil violation and imposition of an administrative civil
penalty to the violator and/or the owner of the property as per this section.
      1.   Prior to issuing an order to correct a violation under this section,
the Building Official must pursue reasonable attempts to secure voluntary
correction.
      2.   a.   Prior to issuing a notice of civil violation and imposing an
administrative civil penalty under this section, the Building Official shall
issue an order to correct a violation to the violator and owner.
         b.   Except where the Building Official determines that the violation
poses an immediate threat to the health, safety, environment, or public
welfare, the time for correction shall be not less than seven calendar days.
      3.   a.   Following the date or time by which the correction must be
completed as required by the order to correct a violation, the Building
Official shall determine whether such correction has been completed.
         b.   If the required correction has not been completed by the date or
time specified in the order, the Building Official may issue a notice of civil
violation and impose an administrative civil penalty to the violator and/or the
owner to whom an order to correct was issued as per this section.
      4.   Any proposed administrative civil penalty must be reviewed by the
City Manager prior to notice of civil penalty being served or sent as set forth
herein.
      5.   In imposing an administrative civil penalty, the Building Official
shall consider the following:
         a.   The person’s past history in taking all feasible steps or
procedures necessary or appropriate to correct the violation;
         b.   Any prior violations of statutes, rules, orders and permits;
         c.   The gravity and magnitude of the violation;
         d.   Whether the violation was repeated or continuous;
         e.   Whether the cause of the violation was an unavoidable accident,
negligence, or an intentional act; and
         f.   The violator’s cooperativeness and efforts to correct the
violation.
      6.   A notice of civil violation under this section must be served either
by personal service or sent by certified mail and sent by first class mail.
Notice will be deemed received for purposes of any time computations under this
section three days after the date mailed for Oregon addresses and seven days
after the date mailed for addresses outside of Oregon. Every notice shall
include the following:
         a.   Specific reference to the code provisions or other identifying
references involved in the violation;
         b.   A statement of the matter asserted or charged;
         c.   A statement of the amount of the penalties imposed;
         d.   The date on which the order to correct was issued and time by
which correction was to be made;
         e.   A statement of the basis for concluding that the violation was
knowing, intentional, or repeated; and
         f.   A statement of the right to appeal the civil penalty to the City
Council, including a description of the process and the deadline by which such
an appeal must be filed.
      7.   Whomever received a notice of civil penalty may appeal the penalty
to the City Council.
      8.   A civil penalty imposed shall become final upon expiration of the
time for filing an appeal, unless a timely appeal of the penalty has been
filed.
      9.   Each day the violator fails to remedy the code violation shall
constitute a separate violation.
      10.   The civil administrative penalty authorized by this section shall
be in addition to the following:
         a.   Assessments or fees for any costs incurred by the city in
remediation, cleanup, or abatement; and
         b.   Any other actions authorized by law provided that the city shall
not issue a citation to Municipal Court for a violation under §
15.03.010 to assess monetary penalties.
      11.   A person, firm, corporation or other entity however organized
aggrieved by an administrative action of the Building Official taken pursuant
to §
15.03.010 may, within 14 days after the date of notice of civil penalty, appeal
in writing to the Building Official.
         a.   The written appeal shall be accompanied by an appeal fee, as set
by City Council resolution and shall include at least the following:
            (1)   The name and address of the appellant;
            (2)   The nature of the determination being appealed;
            (3)   The reason the determination is incorrect; and
            (4)   What the correct determination of the appeal should be.
         b.   The penalty shall become final, if at all, upon issuance of the
City Council’s decision affirming the imposition of the administrative civil
penalty.
         c.   If a notice of revocation of a permit is the subject of the
appeal, the revocation does not take effect until final determination of the
appeal.
      12.   An appeal shall be heard by the City Council within 30 days of the
receipt of the written appeal.
      13.   At least ten days prior to the hearing, the city shall mail notice
of the time and location of the appeal hearing to the appellant.
      14.   The City Council shall hear and determine the appeal on the basis
of the appellant’s written statement and any additional evidence the Council
deems appropriate.
         a.   At the hearing, the appellant may present testimony and oral
argument personally or by counsel.
         b.   The burden of proof shall be on the Building Official.
         c.   The rules of evidence as used by courts of law do not apply.
      15.   a.   The City Council shall issue a written decision within seven
days of the hearing date.
         b.   The written decision of the Council is final.
      16.   a.   Other than as provided in this section, the appeal fee is not
refundable.
         b.   The Council may make a determination of the motion of the
appellant that the appeal fee shall be refunded to the appellant upon a finding
by the Council that the appeal was not frivolous.
      17.   Failure to pay a penalty imposed hereunder within ten days after
the penalty becomes final shall constitute a violation of this section. Each
day the penalty is not paid shall constitute a separate violation. The city
shall collect the penalty by any administrative or judicial action or
proceeding as allowed by the section, or other provisions of city code or state
statutes.
      18.   If the administrative civil penalty is not paid within 30 days, the
City Manager shall cause a written notice to be given to the person in charge
of the property, stating the amount of penalty and administrative costs and the
amount shall be made a lien on the lot or parcel of land. The City Manager
shall direct the City Finance Director to enter the charges in the city lien
docket as a lien upon the lot or parcel of land so affected.
         a.   Each such lien shall be a lien upon the lot or parcel of land
against which it is charged in the city lien docket and shall be subject to
collection and foreclosure and shall bear interest at the rate of 9% per annum.
Interest shall accrue 30 days from the date of the entry of the lien in the
city lien docket.
         b.   As an additional remedy for the collection of the penalty, the
city may proceed against the responsible party personally.
      19.   In addition to enforcement mechanisms authorized elsewhere in this
section, failure to pay an administrative civil penalty imposed pursuant to
this section shall be grounds for withholding issuance of requested permits,
issuance of a stop work order, if applicable, or revocation or suspension of
any permits or certificates of occupancy.
(Ord. 1221, § 1, 2010; Ord. 1217, § 1, 2010; Ord. 1214, §§ 2, 3, 2010; Ord.
1204, § 2(part), 2008)
§ 15.03.020  ENFORCEMENT OF SWEET HOME MUNICIPAL CODE.
   The Building Official shall enforce Sweet Home Municipal Code Titles 15, 16
and 17.
(Ord. 1204, § 2(part), 2008)
§ 15.03.030  UNSAFE BUILDINGS.
   A.   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions apply:
      1.   All buildings or structures regulated by this code which are
structurally unsafe, not provided with adequate egress, which constitute a fire
hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, are deemed unsafe.
      2.   Any use of buildings or structures constituting a hazard to safety,
health or public welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation,
obsolescence, fire hazard, disaster, damage or abandonment is an unsafe use. 
      3.   Parapet walls, cornices, spires, towers, tanks, statuary and other
appendages or structural members which are supported by, attached to, or a part
of a building and which are in deteriorated condition or otherwise unable to
sustain the design loads which are specified in this code are hereby designated
as unsafe building appendages.
   B.   All unsafe buildings, structures, uses or appendages are hereby
declared to be public nuisances.
   C.   Unsafe buildings shall be repaired, rehabilitated, demolished or
removed in accordance with the procedures set forth in the Uniform Code of
Abatement of Dangerous Buildings and any other means available to the city.
(Ord. 1204, § 2(part), 2008)
§ 15.03.040  UNIFORM CODE FOR THE ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS.
   The 1997 ICC Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is
adopted by reference with the following revisions and deletions:
   A.   Section 205 is excepted, deleted and not adopted. The Appeals Board for
this section will be as per Sweet Home Municipal Code §
15.01.090.
   B.   Chapter 5  is excepted, deleted and not adopted. Appeals for this
section will be as per Sweet Home Municipal Code §
15.01.090. 
   C.   Chapter 6  is excepted, deleted and not adopted.
   D.   Section 701.1 shall read as follows:  General.  After any order of the
Building Official or the Board of Appeals made pursuant to this code shall have
become final, no person to whom any such order is directed shall fail, neglect
or refuse to obey any such order. Any such person who fails to comply with any
such order is guilty of a violation that may be prosecuted as a violation
pursuant to Sweet Home Municipal Code
Chapter 9.36 as now enacted or hereafter amended, except that violation of the
Uniform Code for the abatement of dangerous buildings by entering or remaining
in a building posted pursuant to Section 404 or Section 701, defacing or
removing the posted notice or violating Section 703 of the code shall be dealt
with by prosecution under applicable criminal laws as they apply to the
situation being an exception to Sweet Home Municipal Code 15.01.150A.
   E.   Section 801 is excepted, deleted and not adopted. The recovery of the
cost of repair or demolition of any substandard or dangerous building shall be
handled in the same manner as recovery of costs incurred for abatement of
public nuisances as set forth in Sweet Home Municipal Code
Chapter 8.04.
   F.   Section 802 is excepted, deleted and not adopted.
   G.   Chapter 9 is excepted, deleted and not adopted.
(Ord. 1240, § 30, 2015; Ord. 1204, § 2(part), 2008)
§ 15.03.050  EMERGENCY. 
   The procedures of this chapter need not be followed where a building is
unmistakably dangerous and imminently endangers human health, life or
property.  In such instance, the Building Official may proceed summarily to
abate the building.  The cost of abatement shall be handled in the same manner
as recovery of costs incurred for abatement of public nuisances as set forth in
Sweet Home Municipal Code
Chapter 8.04.
(Ord. 1204, § 2(part), 2008)
CHAPTER 15.06:  FEES
Section
   
15.06.010   Fees.
   
15.06.020   Value.
   
15.06.030   Review.
§ 15.06.010  FEES.
   The Building Official may authorize the refunding of fees paid in accordance
with the departmental refund policy in effect.
   A.   Fees shall be established as necessary and reasonable to provide for
the administration and enforcement of any specialty code or codes.
   B.   Fees shall be used solely for the administration and enforcement of the
Building Inspection Program.
(Ord. 1204, § 4(part), 2008)
§ 15.06.020  VALUE.
   The determination of value or valuation under any provisions of this code
shall be made by the Building Official.  The value to be used in computing the
building permit and plan review fees shall be the total value of all
construction work for which the permit is issued as well as all finish work,
painting, roofing, electrical, plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, elevators,
fire-extinguishing systems and any other permanent equipment.
(Ord. 1204, § 4(part), 2008)
§ 15.06.030  REVIEW.
   Fees shall be reviewed annually, in accordance with O.R.S. 455, and in such
a time as to be recognized in the City of Sweet Home's annual budget.
(Ord. 1204, § 4(part), 2008)
CHAPTER 15.12:  FLOOD HAZARD AREA REGULATIONS
Section
   
15.12.010   Statutory authorization.
   
15.12.015   Findings of fact.
   
15.12.020   Statement of purpose.
   
15.12.025   Methods of reducing flood losses.
   
15.12.030   Definitions.
   
15.12.040   Lands to which chapter applies.
   
15.12.050   Basis for establishing the special flood hazard areas.
   
15.12.055   Coordination with State of Oregon Specialty Codes.
   
15.12.060   Compliance and penalties for noncompliance.
   
15.12.065   Abrogation and severability.
   
15.12.070   Interpretation.
   
15.12.080   Warning and disclaimer of liability.
   
15.12.090   Development permit requirement.
   
15.12.100   Designation of of the Floodplain Administrator.
   
15.12.110   Application for development permit.
   
15.12.120   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator.
   
15.12.130   Establishment of development permit.
   
15.12.140   Variance procedure.
   
15.12.150   Provisions for flood hazard reduction—General standards.
   
15.12.160   Critical facilities.
   
15.12.170   Specific standards for riverine (including all non-coastal) flood
zones.
   
15.12.180   Floodways.
Editor’s note:
   Former code § 15.12.030 was deleted by Ord. 1171. Also, several new sections
were added by the same ordinance. The sections in this chapter have been
renumbered to flow consistently.
§ 15.12.010  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The State of Oregon has in O.R.S. 197.175, Cities’ and Counties’ Planning
Responsibilities delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to
adopt floodplain management regulations designed to protect the public heath,
safety and general welfare of its citizenry.
(Ord. 1287, § 1, 2020; Ord. 1171, § 1, 2005; Ord. 984, § 1.1, 1989)
§ 15.12.015  FINDINGS OF FACT.
   A.   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation
which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
   B.   These flood losses may be caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in special flood hazard areas which increase flood heights and
velocities, and when inadequately anchored, cause damage in other areas. Uses
that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated, or otherwise protected from flood
damage also contribute to flood loss.
(Ord. 1287, § 1, 2020)
§ 15.12.020  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flooding in
flood hazard areas by provisions designed to:
   A.   Protect human life and health;
   B.   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
   C.   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   D.   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   E.   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located
in special flood hazard areas;
   F.   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood hazard areas so as to minimize blight areas caused by
flooding;
   G.   Notify potential buyers that the property is in a special flood hazard
area;
   H.   Notify those who occupy special flood hazard areas that they assume
responsibility for their actions;
   I.   Participate in and maintain eligibility for flood insurance and
disaster relief.
(Ord. 1287, § 1, 2020; Ord. 984, § 1.2, 1989)
§ 15.12.025  METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.
   In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
   A.   Restricting or prohibiting development which is dangerous to health,
safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
   B.   Requiring that development vulnerable to floods, including facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   C.   Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters;
   D.   Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may
increase flood damage;
   E.   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters or may increase flood hazards in other areas.
(Ord. 1287, § 1, 2020; Ord. 1219, § 1, 2010)
§ 15.12.030  DEFINITIONS.
   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the interpretation of any provision of
this chapter or a request for a variance.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated Zone AO, AH, AR/AO or AR/AH on a
community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a 1% or greater annual chance
of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined
channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where
velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or
sheet flow.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on
the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) as Zone A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA is synonymous in meaning and definition with the
phrase AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation to which floodwater is anticipated
to rise during the base flood.
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   BUILDING. See STRUCTURE.
   CRITICAL FACILITY. A facility for which even a slight chance of flooding
might be too great. CRITICAL FACILITIES include, but are not limited to
schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire and emergency response
installations, installations which produce, use, or store hazardous materials
or hazardous waste.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
   FLOOD or FLOODING.
      1.   A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from:
         a.   The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
         b.   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
         c.   Mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by
flooding as defined in subsection 1.b. of this definition and are akin to a
river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as
when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the
current.
      2.   The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or
other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or
currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by
an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a
severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an
abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event
which results in flooding as defined in subsection 1.a. of this definition.
   FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an
examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or
flood-related erosion hazards.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). The official map of a community, on which
the Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special hazard
areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. A FIRM that has
been made available digitally is called a DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP
(DFIRM).
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). See FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate risk of flood
damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures, and their contents.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated
height. Also referred to as REGULATORY FLOODWAY.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair
facilities, and does not include long term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      1.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register;
      2.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      3.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of Interior; or
      4.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
         a.   By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior, or
         b.   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
   LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC). An official FEMA determination, by letter, to
amend or revise effective Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Insurance
Studies. The following are categories of LOMCs:
      1.   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (CLOMA). A CLOMA is FEMA’s
comment on a proposed structure or group of structures that would, upon
construction, be located on existing natural ground above the base (1% annual
chance) flood elevation on a portion of a legally defined parcel of land that
is partially inundated by the base flood.
      2.   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR). A CLOMR is FEMA’s
comment on a proposed project that would, upon construction, affect the
hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in
the modification of the existing regulatory floodway, the effective base flood
elevations, or the special flood hazard area.
      3.   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION BASED ON FILL (CLOMR-F). A CLOMR-
F is FEMA’s comment on a proposed project that would, upon construction, result
in a modification of the special flood hazard area through the placement of
fill outside the existing regulatory floodway.
      4.   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). An official amendment, by letter, to
the Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) based on technical data showing that an
existing structure, parcel of land or portion of a parcel of land that is
naturally high ground, (i.e., has not been elevated by fill) above the base
flood, that was inadvertently included in the special flood hazard area.
      5.   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). A LOMR is FEMA’s modification to an
effective Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), or Flood Boundary and Floodway Map
(FBFM), or both. LOMRs are generally based on the implementation of physical
measures that affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding
source and thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodway,
the effective base flood elevations, or the SFHA. The LOMR officially revises
the FIRM or FBFM, and sometimes the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) report, and,
when appropriate, includes a description of the modifications. The LOMR is
generally accompanied by an annotated copy of the affected portions of the
FIRM, FBFM, or FIS report.
      6.   LETTER OF MAP REVISION BASED ON FILL (LOMR-F). A LOMR-F is FEMA’s
modification of the special flood hazard area shown on the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM) based on the placement of fill outside the existing regulatory
floodway.
      7.   PMR. A PMR is FEMA’s physical revision and republication of an
effective Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or Flood Insurance Study (FIS)
report. PMRs are generally based on physical measures that affect the
hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in
the modification of the existing regulatory floodway, the effective base flood
elevations, or the special flood hazard area.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR, provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED DWELLING. A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED DWELLING does not include a “recreational vehicle” and is
synonymous with MANUFACTURED HOME.
   MANUFACTURED DWELLING PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels)
of land divided into two or more manufactured dwelling lots for rent or sale.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which Base
Flood Elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are
referenced.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. For floodplain management purposes, NEW CONSTRUCTION means
structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the
effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by the city and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      1.   Built on a single chassis;
      2.   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      3.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
      4.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. See AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD for this
definition.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement and means the date
the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other
improvement was within 180 days from the date of the permit. The ACTUAL START
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a
site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a manufactured dwelling on a foundation. Permanent construction
does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the ACTUAL START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building,
including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as
well as a manufactured dwelling.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial
damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:
      1.   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
      2.   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic
structure.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief by the city from the terms of a floodplain
management regulation.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
(Ord. 1287, § 1, 2020; Ord. 1219, § 2, 2010; Ord. 1171, § 3, 2005; Ord. 984, §
2, 1989)
§ 15.12.040  LANDS TO WHICH CHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the
jurisdiction of the city.
(Ord. 1287, § 1, 2020; Ord. 984, § 3.1, 1989)
§ 15.12.050  BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.
   The special flood hazard areas identified by the Federal Insurance
Administrator in a scientific and engineering report entitled “The Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) for Linn County, Oregon and Incorporated Areas”, dates of
September 29, 2010 and the revised date December 27, 2012, with accompanying
Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) 41043C0895G, 41043C0911G, 41043C0912G,
41043C0913G, 41043C0914G, 41043C0916G, 41043C0917G, 41043C0918G, and
41043C0919G are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this
chapter. The FIS and FIRM panels are on file at City Hall, 3225 Main Street,
Sweet Home, Oregon.
(Ord. 1287, § 1, 2020; Ord. 1282, § 23, 2020; Ord. 1234, § 1, 2013; Ord. 1219,
§ 3, 2010; Ord. 1171, § 4, 2005; Ord. 984, § 3.2, 1989)
§ 15.12.055  COORDINATION WITH STATE OF OREGON SPECIALTY CODES.
   Pursuant to the requirement established in O.R.S. Chapter 455 that the city
administers and enforces the State of Oregon Specialty Codes, The city does
hereby acknowledge that the Oregon Specialty Codes contain certain provisions
that apply to the design and construction of buildings and structures located
in special flood hazard areas. Therefore, this chapter is intended to be
administered and enforced in conjunction with the Oregon Specialty Codes.
(Ord. 1287, § 1, 2020)
§ 15.12.060  COMPLIANCE AND PENALTIES FOR NONCOMPLIANCE.
   A.   Compliance. All development within special flood hazard areas is
subject to the terms of this chapter and required to comply with its provisions
and all other applicable regulations.
   B.   Penalties for noncompliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be
constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance
with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violations of
the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its
requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in
connection with conditions) shall constitute a violation and may be prosecuted
under the provisions of Chapter
9.36 and any amendments thereto. Abatement of the violations of this Chapter
15.12 can be accomplished by any remedy open to the city, including using the
procedures set out in Chapter
8.04 for abatement of nuisances. Each day that a violation exists is a separate
offense. Nothing contained herein shall prevent the city from taking such other
lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. 1287, § 1, 2020; Ord. 1240, § 28, 2015; Ord. 1171, § 17, 2005)
§ 15.12.065  ABROGATION AND SEVERABILITY.
   A.   Abrogation. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair
any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this
chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict
or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
   B.   Severability. This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby
declared to be severable. If any section clause, sentence, or phrase of this
chapter is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way effect the validity of the
remaining portions of this chapter.
(Ord. 1287, § 1, 2020; Ord. 1219, § 4, 2010; Ord. 1171, § 5, 2005)
§ 15.12.070  INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   A.   Considered as minimum requirements;
   B.   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   C.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state
statutes.
(Ord. 1287, § 1, 2020; Ord. 1219, § 5, 2010; Ord. 1171, § 6, 2005)
§ 15.12.080  WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   A.   Warning. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions.
Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does
not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages.
   B.   Disclaimer of liability. This chapter shall not create liability on the
part of the city, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance
Administrator for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter
or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
(Ord. 1287, § 1, 2020; Ord. 1171, § 7, 2005)
§ 15.12.090  DEVELOPMENT PERMIT REQUIREMENT.
   A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins within any area of special flood hazard established in §
15.12.050. The permit shall be for all structures, including manufactured
homes, as set forth in §
15.12.030, and for all other development.
(Ord. 1171, § 8, 2005; Ord. 984, § 4.1, 1989)
§ 15.12.100  DESIGNATION OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The City Manager, and the City Manager’s designee, is hereby appointed to
administer, implement, and enforce this chapter by granting or denying
development permits in accordance with its provisions. The Floodplain
Administrator may delegate authority to implement these provisions.
(Ord. 1287, § 1, 2020; Ord. 1171, § 9, 2005; Ord. 984, § 4.2, 1989)
§ 15.12.110 APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A.   Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished
by the building inspection program and may include, but not be limited to,
plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and
elevations of the area in question, existing or proposed structures, fill,
storage of materials and drainage facilities.
   B.   Specifically, the following information is required:
      1.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all structures;
      2.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has
been floodproofed;
      3.   Certification by a registered design professional that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the floodproofing
criteria; and
      4.   Description of the extent to which a watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
(Ord. 1171, § 10, 2005)
§ 15.12.120  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   Duties of the Floodplain Administrator, or their designee, shall include,
but not be limited to:
   A.   Permit review. Review all development permits to determine that:
      1.   The permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;
      2.   All other required local, state, and federal permits have been
obtained and approved;
      3.   Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in a floodway. If located in the floodway assure that
the floodway provisions of §
15.12.180 are met; and
      4.   Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in an area where Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data is
available either through the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) or from another
authoritative source. If BFE data is not available then ensure compliance with
the provisions of §
15.12.120G. below; and
Editor’s note:
   The correct cross-reference is §
15.12.150G., not §
15.12.120G.
      5.   Provide to building officials the Base Flood Elevation (BFE) and
freeboard, applicable to any building requiring a development permit.
      6.   Review all development permit applications to determine if the
proposed development qualifies as a substantial improvement as defined in §
15.12.030.
      7.   Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development activity is a watercourse alteration. If a watercourse alteration
is proposed, ensure compliance with the provisions in §
15.12.120A.
Editor’s note:
   The correct cross-reference is §
15.12.150A., not §
15.12.120A.
      8.   Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development activity includes the placement of fill or excavation.
   B.   Information to be obtained and maintained. The following information
shall be obtained and maintained and shall be made available for public
inspection as needed:
      1.   Obtain, record, and maintain the actual elevation (in relation to
mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basements) and all attendant
utilities of all new or substantially improved structures where Base Flood
Elevation (BFE) data is provided through the Flood Insurance Study (FIS), Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), or obtained in accordance with §
15.12.120G.
Editor’s note:
   The correct cross-reference is §
15.12.150G., not §
15.12.120G.
      2.   Obtain and record the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of
the natural grade of the building site for a structure prior to the start of
construction and the placement of any fill and ensure that the requirements of 
§§
15.12.180 and
15.12.120B. are adhered to.
Editor’s note:
   The correct cross-reference is §
15.12.150A.2., not §
15.12.120B.
      3.   Upon placement of the lowest floor of a structure (including
basement) but prior to further vertical construction, obtain documentation,
prepared and sealed by a professional licensed surveyor or engineer, certifying
the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including
basement).
      4.   Where base flood elevation data are utilized, obtain as-built
certification of the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest
floor (including basement) prepared and sealed by a professional licensed
surveyor or engineer, prior to the final inspection.
      5.   Maintain all Elevation Certificates (EC) submitted to the city.
      6.   Obtain, record, and maintain the elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) to which the structure and all attendant utilities were floodproofed for
all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures where allowed under
this chapter and where Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data is provided through the
FIS, FIRM, or obtained in accordance with §
15.12.150G.
      7.   Maintain all floodproofing certificates required under this chapter.
      8.   Record and maintain all variance actions, including justification
for their issuance.
      9.   Obtain and maintain all hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed
as required under §
15.12.180.
      10.   Record and maintain all substantial improvement and substantial
damage calculations and determinations as required under §
15.12.120F.
Editor’s note:
   The correct cross-reference is §
15.12.120F., not §
15.12.120F.
      11.   Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
   C.   Community boundary alterations. The Floodplain Administrator shall
notify the Federal Insurance Administrator in writing whenever the boundaries
of the community have been modified by annexation or the community has
otherwise assumed authority or no longer has authority to adopt and enforce
floodplain management regulations for a particular area, to ensure that all
Flood Hazard Boundary Maps (FHBM) and Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM)
accurately represent the community’s boundaries. Include within such
notification a copy of a map of the community suitable for reproduction,
clearly delineating the new corporate limits or new area for which the
community has assumed or relinquished floodplain management regulatory
authority.
   D.   Watercourse alterations.
      1.   Notify adjacent communities, the Department of Land Conservation and
Development, and other appropriate state and federal agencies, prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Insurance Administration. This notification shall
be provided by the applicant to the Federal Insurance Administration as a
Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) along with either:
         a.   A proposed maintenance plan to assure the flood carrying capacity
within the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse is maintained; or
         b.   Certification by a registered professional engineer that the
project has been designed to retain its flood carrying capacity without
periodic maintenance.
      2.   The applicant shall be required to submit a Conditional Letter of
Map Revision (CLOMR) when required under subsection E. below. Ensure compliance
with all applicable requirements in subsection E. below and §
15.12.150A.
   E.   Requirement to submit new technical data.
      1.   A community’s base flood elevations may increase or decrease
resulting from physical changes affecting flooding conditions, as soon as
practicable, but not later than six months after the date such information
becomes available. A community shall notify the Federal Insurance Administrator
of the changes by submitting technical or scientific data in accordance with
Section 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Sub-Section 65.3. The
community may require the applicant to submit such data and review fees
required for compliance with this section through the applicable FEMA Letter of
Map Change (LOMC) process.
      2.   The Floodplain Administrator shall require a Conditional Letter of
Map Revision prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit for:
         a.   Proposed floodway encroachments that increase the base flood
elevation; and
         b.   Proposed development which increases the base flood elevation by
more than one foot in areas where FEMA has provided base flood elevations but
no floodway.
      3.   An applicant shall notify FEMA within six months of project
completion when an applicant has obtained a Conditional Letter of Map Revision
(CLOMR) from FEMA. This notification to FEMA shall be provided as a Letter of
Map Revision (LOMR).
      4.   The applicant shall be responsible for preparing all technical data
to support CLOMR/LOMR applications and paying any processing or application
fees associated with the CLOMR/LOMR-F.
      5.   The Floodplain Administrator shall be under no obligation to sign
the community acknowledgement form, which is part of the CLOMR/LOMR
application, until the applicant demonstrates that the project will or has met
the requirements of this code and all applicable state and federal laws.
   F.   Substantial improvement and substantial damage assessments and
determinations. Conduct Substantial Improvement (SI) (as defined in §
15.12.030) reviews for all structural development proposal applications and
maintain a record of SI calculations within permit files in accordance with
subsection B. above. Conduct Substantial Damage (SD) (as defined in §
15.12.030) assessments when structures are damaged due to a natural hazard
event or other causes. Make SD determinations whenever structures within the
special flood hazard area (as established in §
15.12.050) are damaged to the extent that the cost of restoring the structure
to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value
of the structure before the damage occurred.
(Ord. 1287, § 1, 2020; Ord. 1219, §§ 6-8, 2010; Ord. 1171, § 11, 2005; Ord.
1036, § 2Z14, 1991; Ord. 984, § 4, 1989)
§ 15.12.130  ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A.   Floodplain development permit required. A development permit shall be
obtained before construction or development begins within any area horizontally
within the special flood hazard area established in §
15.12.050. The development permit shall be required for all structures,
including manufactured dwellings, and for all other development, as defined in
§
15.12.030, including fill and other development activities.
   B.   Application for development permit. Application for a development
permit may be made on forms furnished by the Floodplain Administrator and may
include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the
nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing
or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and
the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is
required:
      1.   In riverine flood zones, the proposed elevation (in relation to mean
sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) and all attendant
utilities of all new and substantially improved structures; in accordance with
the requirements of §
15.12.120B.
      2.   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-
residential structure will be floodproofed.
      3.   Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect
licensed in the State of Oregon that the floodproofing methods proposed for any
non-residential structure meet the floodproofing criteria for non-residential
structures in §
15.12.170C.3.
      4.   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated.
      5.   Base flood elevation data for subdivision proposals or other
development when required per §§
15.12.120A. and
15.12.150F.
         f.   Substantial improvement calculation for any improvement,
addition, reconstruction, renovation, or rehabilitation of an existing
structure.
         g.   The amount and location of any fill or excavation activities
proposed.
(Ord. 1287, § 1, 2020)
§ 15.12.140  VARIANCE PROCEDURE.
   The issuance of a variance is for floodplain management purposes only. Flood
insurance premium rates are determined by federal statute according to
actuarial risk and will not be modified by the granting of a variance.
   A.   Conditions for variances.
      1.   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed
below the base flood level, in conformance with the provisions of subsections
3.,  5., and C. below. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the
technical justification required for issuing a variance increases.
Editor’s note:
   The correct cross-references are A.3. and A.5., not 3. and 5.
      2.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      3.   Variances shall not be issued within any floodway if any increase in
flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
      4.   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         a.   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         b.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant;
         c.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the
public, or conflict with existing laws or ordinances.
      5.   Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of
a functionally dependent use provided that the criteria of subsections 2.
through 4. above are met, and the structure or other development is protected
by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no
additional threats to public safety.
Editor’s note:
   The correct cross-references are A.2. through A.4., not 2. through 4.
   B.   Appeal Board.
      1.   The City Council shall hear and decide appeals and requests for
variances from the requirements of this chapter.
      2.   The City Council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged
there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.
      3.   Those aggrieved by the decision of the City Council may appeal the
decision as provided for by law.
      4.   In passing upon the applications, the City Council shall consider
technical evaluations, relevant factors and standards specified in other
sections of this chapter:
         a.   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
         b.   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
         c.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on individual owners;
         d.   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility
to the community;
         e.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
         f.   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
         g.   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
         h.   The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan;
         i.   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
         j.     The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and
         k.   The costs of providing government services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer and water systems, streets and bridges.
      5.   Upon consideration of the factors of subsection A. above, the City
Council may attach such conditions to the granting of a variance as it deems
necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
      6.   The city shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report
any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
   C.   Variance notification. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted
shall be given written notice that the issuance of a variance to construct a
structure below the base flood elevation will result in increased premium rates
for flood insurance and that such construction below the base flood elevation
increases risks to life and property. Such notification and a record of all
variance actions, including justification for their issuance shall be
maintained in accordance with §
15.12.120B.
(Ord. 1287, § 1, 2020; Ord. 1219, § 14, 2010; Ord. 1171, § 16, 2005)
§ 15.12.150  PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION—GENERAL STANDARDS.
   In all special flood hazard areas, the following standards shall be adhered
to:
   A.   Alteration of watercourses. Require that the flood carrying capacity
within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained.
Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of
said watercourse to ensure that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished.
Require compliance with §§
15.12.120D. and
15.12.120E.
   B.   Anchoring.
      1.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored
to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
      2.   All manufactured dwellings shall be anchored per §
15.12.170C.4.
   C.   Construction materials and methods.
      1.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
      2.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
   D.   Utilities and equipment.
      1.   Water supply, sanitary sewer, and on-site waste disposal systems.
         a.   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
         b.   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into flood waters.
         c.   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding consistent with
the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality.
      2.   Electrical, mechanical, plumbing, and other equipment.
         a.   Electrical, heating, ventilating, air-conditioning, plumbing,
duct systems, and other equipment and service facilities shall be elevated at
or above the base flood level or shall be designed and installed to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components and to resist
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and stresses, including the effects of
buoyancy, during conditions of flooding. In addition, electrical, heating,
ventilating, air-conditioning, plumbing, duct systems, and other equipment and
service facilities shall meet all the requirements of this section if replaces
as part of a substantial improvement.
         b.   If replaced as part of substantial improvement, shall meet all
the requirements of this section.
   E.   Tanks.
      1.   Underground tanks shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse
and lateral movement under conditions of the base flood.
      2.   Above-ground tanks shall be installed at or above the base flood
level or shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement
under conditions of the base flood.
   F.   Subdivision proposals and other proposed developments.
      1.   All new subdivision proposals and other proposed new developments
(including proposals for manufactured dwelling parks and subdivisions) greater
than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, shall include within such
proposals, base flood elevation data.
      2.   All new subdivision proposals and other proposed new developments
(including proposals for manufactured dwelling parks and subdivisions) shall:
         a.   Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
         b.   Have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damage.
         c.   Have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
   G.   Use of other base flood data.
      1.   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance
with §
15.12.050 the Local Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data available from a federal,
state, or other source, in order to administer this section  and §
15.12.170. All new subdivision proposals and other proposed new developments
(including proposals for manufactured dwelling parks and subdivisions) must
meet the requirements of subsection F. above.
      2.   Base flood elevations shall be determined for development proposals
that are five acres or more in size or are 50 lots or more, whichever is lesser
in any A Zone that does not have an established base flood elevation.
Development proposals located within a riverine unnumbered A Zone shall be
reasonably safe from flooding; the test of reasonableness includes use of
historical data, high water marks, FEMA provided base level engineering data,
and photographs of past flooding, and the like where available. In unnumbered A
Zones, when no base flood elevation data is available, the minimum elevation
requirement is two feet above the highest adjacent grade to reasonably safe
from flooding. Failure to elevate at least two feet above grade in these zones
may result in higher insurance rates.
   H.   Structures located in multiple or partial flood zones. In coordination
with the State of Oregon Specialty Codes:
      1.   When a structure is located in multiple flood zones on the
community’s Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) the provisions for the more
restrictive flood zone shall apply.
      2.   When a structure is partially located in a special flood hazard
area, the entire structure shall meet the requirements for new construction and
substantial improvements.
(Ord. 1287, § 1, 2020; Ord. 1219, § 9, 2010; Ord. 1171, § 12, 2005; Ord. 984, §
5.1, 1989)
§ 15.12.160  CRITICAL FACILITIES.
   Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent possible,
located outside the limits of the special flood hazard area. Construction of
new critical facilities shall be permissible within the SFHA only if no
feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within
the SFHA shall have the lowest floor elevated three feet above the Base Flood
Elevation (BFE) or to the height of the 500-year flood, whichever is higher.
Access to and from the critical facility shall also be protected to the height
utilized above. Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that
toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters.
(Ord. 1287, § 1, 2020; Ord. 1171, § 15, 2005)
§ 15.12.170  SPECIFIC STANDARDS FOR RIVERINE (INCLUDING ALL NON-COASTAL) FLOOD
ZONES.
   These specific standards shall apply to all new construction and substantial
improvements in addition to the general standards contained in §
15.12.150.
   A.   Flood openings.
      1.   All new construction and substantial improvements with fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) are subject to the
following requirements.
      2.   Enclosed areas below the base flood elevation, including crawl
spaces shall:
         a.   Be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood waters;
         b.   Be used solely for parking, storage, or building access;
         c.   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
or meet or exceed all of the following minimum criteria:
            i.   A minimum of two openings,
            ii.   The total net area of non-engineered openings shall be not
less than one square inch for each square foot of enclosed area, where the
enclosed area is measured on the exterior of the enclosure walls,
            iii.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade,
            iv.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or
other coverings or devices provided that they shall allow the automatic flow of
flood water into and out of the enclosed areas and shall be accounted for in
the determination of the net open area.
            v.   All additional higher standards for flood openings in the
State of Oregon Residential Specialty Codes Section R322.2.2 shall be complied
with when applicable.
   B.   Garages.
      1.   Attached garages may be constructed with the garage floor slab below
the Base Flood Elevation (BFE) in riverine flood zones, if the following
requirements are met:
         a.   If located within a floodway the proposed garage must comply with
the requirements of §
15.12.180;
         b.   The floors are at or above grade on not less than one side;
         c.   The garage is used solely for parking, building access, and/or
storage;
         d.   The garage is constructed with flood openings in compliance with
subsection A. above to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by
allowing for the automatic entry and exit of flood water;
         e.   The portions of the garage constructed below the BFE are
constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;
         f.   The garage is constructed in compliance with the standards in §
15.12.150; and
         g.   The garage is constructed with electrical, and other service
facilities located and installed so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during conditions of the base flood.
      2.   Detached garages must be constructed in compliance with the
standards for appurtenant structures in subsection C.6. below or non-
residential structures in subsection C.3. below depending on the square footage
of the garage.
   C.   For riverine (non-coastal) special flood hazard areas with base flood
elevations. In addition to the general standards listed in §
15.12.150 the following specific standards shall apply in riverine (non-
coastal) special flood hazard areas with Base Flood Elevations (BFE): Zones A1-
A30, AH, and AE.
      1.   Before regulatory floodway. In areas where a regulatory floodway has
not been designated, no new construction, substantial improvement, or other
development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on
the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), unless it is demonstrated that
the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the
community.
      2.   Residential construction.
         a.   New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated one foot or
more above the Base Flood Elevation (BFE).
         b.   Enclosed areas below the lowest floor shall comply with the flood
opening requirements in subsection A. above.
      3.   Non-residential construction.
         a.   New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial, or other non-residential structure shall:
            i.   Have the lowest floor, including basement elevated at or above
the Base Flood Elevation (BFE); or, together with attendant utility and
sanitary facilities;
            ii.   Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the
structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water;
            iii.   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy;
            iv.   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting provisions of this section based on
their development and/or review of the structural design, specifications and
plans. Such certifications shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator as
set forth §
15.12.120B.
         b.   Non-residential structures that are elevated, not floodproofed,
shall comply with the standards for enclosed areas below the lowest floor in
subsection A. above.
         c.   Applicants floodproofing non-residential buildings shall be
notified that flood insurance premiums will be based on rates that are one foot
below the floodproofed level (e.g., a building floodproofed to the base flood
level will be rated as one foot below).
         d.   Applicants shall supply a maintenance plan for the entire
structure to include but not limited to: exterior envelop of structure; all
penetrations to the exterior of the structure; all shields, gates, barriers, or
components designed to provide floodproofing protection to the structure; all
seals or gaskets for shields, gates, barriers, or components; and, the location
of all shields, gates, barriers, and components, as well as all associated
hardware, and any materials or specialized tools necessary to seal the
structure.
         e.   Applicants shall supply an Emergency Action Plan (EAP) for the
installation and sealing of the structure prior to a flooding event that
clearly identifies what triggers the EAP and who is responsible for enacting
the EAP.
      4.   Manufactured dwellings.
         a.   New or substantially improved manufactured dwellings supported on
solid foundation walls shall be constructed with flood openings that comply
with subsection A. above;
         b.   The bottom of the longitudinal chassis frame beam shall be at or
above base flood elevation;
         c.   New or substantially improved manufactured dwellings shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement during the base
flood. Anchoring methods may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-
top or frame ties to ground anchors (Reference FEMA’s “Manufactured Home
Installation in Flood Hazard Areas” guidebook for additional techniques); and
         d.   Electrical crossover connections shall be a minimum of 12 inches
above Base Flood Elevation (BFE).
      5.   Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles placed on sites are
required to:
         a.   Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and
         b.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or
jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities
and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or
         c.   Meet the requirements of  subsection C.4. above, including the
anchoring and elevation requirements for manufactured dwellings.
      6.   Appurtenant (accessory) structures. Relief from elevation or
floodproofing requirements for residential and non-residential structures in
riverine (non-coastal) flood zones may be granted for appurtenant structures
that meet the following requirements:
         a.   Appurtenant structures located partially or entirely within the
floodway must comply with requirements for development within a floodway found
in §
15.12.180;
         b.   Appurtenant structures must only be used for parking, access,
and/or storage and shall not be used for human habitation;
         c.   In compliance with State of Oregon Specialty Codes, appurtenant
structures on properties that are zoned residential are limited to one-story
structures less than 200 square feet, or 400 square feet if the property is
greater than two acres in area and the proposed appurtenant structure will be
located a minimum of 20 feet from all property lines. Appurtenant structures on
properties that are zoned as non-residential are limited in size to 120 square
feet;
         d.   The portions of the appurtenant structure located below the base
flood elevation must be built using flood resistant materials;
         e.   The appurtenant structure must be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during
conditions of the base flood;
         f.   The appurtenant structure must be designed and constructed to
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls and comply with the
requirements for flood openings in subsection A. above;
         g.   Appurtenant structures shall be located and constructed to have
low damage potential;
         h.   Appurtenant structures shall not be used to store toxic material,
oil, or gasoline, or any priority persistent pollutant identified by the Oregon
Department of Environmental Quality unless confined in a tank installed in
compliance with §
15.12.150E.;
         i.   Appurtenant structures shall be constructed with electrical,
mechanical, and other service facilities located and installed so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
the base flood.
(Ord. 1287, § 1, 2020; Ord. 1219, § 10, 2010; Ord. 1171, § 13, 2005; Ord. 984,
§§ 5.2, 5.3, 1989)
§ 15.12.180  FLOODWAYS.
   Located within the special flood hazard areas established in §
15.12.050 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely
hazardous area due to the velocity of the floodwaters which carry debris,
potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
   A.   Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway
unless:
      1.   Certification by a registered professional civil engineer is
provided demonstrating through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in
accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment
shall not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during
the occurrence of the base flood discharge; or
      2.   A community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory
floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided
that a Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) is applied for and approved
by the Federal Insurance Administrator, and the requirements for such revision
as established under Volume 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Section
65.12 are fulfilled.
         a.   If an encroachment proposal resulting in an increase in base
flood elevation meets the following criteria:
            i.   Is for the purpose of fish enhancement,
            ii.   Does not involve the placement of any structures (as defined
in §
15.12.030) within the floodway,
            iii    Has a feasibility analysis completed documenting that fish
enhancement will be achieved through the proposed project,
            iv.   Has a maintenance plan in place to ensure that the stream
carrying capacity is not impacted by the fish enhancement project,
            v.   Has approval by the National Marine Fisheries Service, the
State of Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife, or the equivalent federal or
state agency, and
            vi.   Has evidence to support that no existing structures will be
negatively impacted by the proposed activity;
then an approved CLOMR may be required prior to approval of a floodplain
permit.
   B.   New installation of manufactured dwellings are prohibited (2002 Oregon
Manufactured Dwelling and Park Specialty Code). Manufactured dwellings may only
be located in floodways according to one of the following conditions:
      1.   If the manufactured dwelling already exists in the floodway, the
placement was permitted at the time of the original installation, and the
continued use is not a threat to life, health, property, or the general welfare
of the public; or
      2.   A new manufactured dwelling is replacing an existing manufactured
dwelling whose original placement was permitted at the time of installation and
the replacement home will not be a threat to life, health, property, or general
welfare of the public and it meets the following criteria:
         a.   As required by 44 CFR Ch. 1, Subpart 60.3(d)(3) and subsection
A.2. above, it must be demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses
performed in accordance with standard engineering practices that the
manufactured dwelling and any accessory buildings, accessory structures, or
property improvements (encroachments) will not result in any increase in flood
levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge;
         b.   The replacement manufactured dwelling shall have the bottom of
the longitudinal chassis frame beam elevated to or above the base flood
elevation and any accessory buildings or structures (encroachments) shall have
the finished floor elevated a minimum of 18 inches above the BFE as identified
on the Flood Insurance Rate Map;
         c.   The replacement manufactured dwelling is placed and secured to a
foundation support system designed by an Oregon professional engineer or
architect and approved by the city and anchored per §
15.12.170C.4.;
         d.   The replacement manufactured dwelling, its foundation supports,
and any accessory buildings, or property improvements (encroachments) do not
displace water to the degree that it causes a rise in the water level or
diverts water in a manner that causes erosion or damage to other properties;
         e.   The location of a replacement manufactured dwelling is allowed by
Sweet Home Municipal Code Title 17;
         f.   Electrical crossover connections shall be a minimum of 12 inches
above the base flood elevation; and
         g.   Any other requirement deemed necessary by the city.
      3.   If the requirements of subsection A. above are satisfied, all new
construction, substantial improvements, and other development shall comply with
all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of §§
15.12.150 and
15.12.170.
(Ord. 1287, § 1, 2020; Ord. 1219, §§ 11-13, 2010; Ord. 1171, § 14, 2005)
CHAPTER 15.16:  MOVING BUILDINGS
Section
   
15.16.010   General.
   
15.16.020   Performance guarantee.
§ 15.16.010  GENERAL.
   Any owner of a building must comply with the following codes:
   A.   Prior to moving a building, a building permit must be obtained for the
property where the building will be re-sited.
   B.   Buildings moved within the city must be moved by a company licensed and
bonded to move buildings within Oregon.
   C.   An Oregon Department of Motor Vehicles permit for moving the building
must be obtained.
(Ord. 1204, § 5(part), 2008)
§ 15.16.020  PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE.
   A performance guarantee, in an amount to be determined by the Public Works
Director or designee, for potential damage to the public infrastructure will be
secured as follows:
   A.   A surety bond shall be obtained in an amount fixed by the Public Works
Director, executed by a surety company authorized to transact business in the
State of Oregon in a form approved by the Finance Director and the City
Attorney.
   B.   At the discretion of the Public Works Director, in lieu of a surety
bond, the applicant may provide a certification by a bank or other reputable
lending institution that money or a promissary note, in an amount fixed by the
Public Works Director, is being held in the applicant and city's name, to cover
potential costs of damage to the public infrastructure.  The money held by the
bank may be released only upon authorization of the Public Works Director.
   C.   The performance guarantee may be dissolved by the Public Works Director
after the building has reached its final destination.
(Ord. 1204, § 5(part), 2008)
CHAPTER 15.20:  HISTORIC RESOURCES
Section
   
15.20.010   Purpose.
   
15.20.020   Planning Commission Authority.
   
15.20.030   Historic Resources Designation.
   
15.20.040   Alteration and demolition review.
§ 15.20.010 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide procedures for the identification,
preservation, alteration, or demolition of significant historic resources
located in the city.
(Ord. 1204, § 6(part), 2008)
§ 15.20.020  PLANNING COMMISSION AUTHORITY.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the Planning Commission has the following
authority:
   A.   Decision making on requests for inclusion or removal from the list.
   B.   Review for proposed alterations or demolitions of historic resources on
the list.
(Ord. 1204, § 6(part), 2008)
§ 15.20.030  HISTORIC RESOURCES DESIGNATION.
   The Historic Resources Inventory List, known as "the List",  adopted by the
2005 Comprehensive Plan shall serve as the city's official list of Significant
Historic Resources.
   A.   Designation procedures.
      1.   An owner, Planning Commission, City Council, or the State Historic
Preservation Office may request inclusion of a structure on the List.
      2.   The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing to review the
request for inclusion on the List following the process set forth in Sweet Home
Municipal Code §
17.12.130. Notice of the public hearing shall follow the procedures set forth
in Sweet Home Municipal Code §
17.12.120, including notice to the Department of Land Conservation and
Development.
   B.   Designation criteria.  In order to be recommended for inclusion or to
be maintained on the List, the Planning Commission must find that the historic
resource is over 50 years of age or of extraordinary historic importance, and
possesses sufficient historic integrity.  In addition, the historic resource
should be at least one of the following:
      1.   Associated with events that have made a significant contribution to
the broad patterns of local, state, or national history.
      2.   Associated with the lives of persons, or groups of people,
significant in local, state, or national history.
      3.   Embodies the distinctive characteristics of an architectural type,
style, period, or method of construction or that represents the work of a
master, or that possesses high artistic values, or that represents a
significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual
distinction.
      4.   Has yielded or is likely to yield information that is important in
local, state, or national history.
   C.   Designation decision.  The Planning Commission shall either:
      1.   Approve the request as submitted, or
      2.   Approve the request with modifications, or
      3.   Deny the request.
   D.   Removal from the List.
      1.   If a historic resource has been demolished or destroyed, the
Planning Commission may remove the resource from the register without first
holding a hearing. 
      2.   Requests for removal from the List for any other reason shall be
reviewed according to the public hearing procedures of this chapter.
      3.   To remove the historic resource from the List, the Planning
Commission must determine that the original findings for the inclusion on the
List no longer apply.
   E.   Appeals.  An appeal of a Planning Commission decision can be made to
the City Council as per Sweet Home Municipal Code §
17.12.090.
(Ord. 1204, § 6(part), 2008)
§ 15.20.040  ALTERATION AND DEMOLITION REVIEW.
   The purpose of this section is to encourage the preservation of the city's
historic resources through procedures to review requests for alteration or
demolition of those resources.  The process for a review under this section
will be the same as in Sweet Home Municipal Code §
15.20.030 (A).
   A.   Alteration, for this section, means an addition, removal, or
reconfiguration that significantly changes the character of a historic
resource.
   B.   Demolition, for this section, means the razing, destruction, or
dismantling of a resource to the degree that its historic character is
substantially obliterated.
   C.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary
maintenance or repair of any architectural feature that does not involve a
change in design, material, or external appearance of a historic resource.
   D.   This section shall not be construed to prevent the alteration,
demolition, or relocation of a historic resource when the Building Official
determines that public safety is affected due to an unsafe or dangerous
condition.
   E.   Review criteria.  In order to approve an application for the alteration
of a historic resource on the List, the Planning Commission must find that the
proposal meets the following standards:
      1.   A property shall be used as it was historically or be given a new
use that requires minimal change to its distinctive materials, features,
spaces, and spatial relationships.
      2.   The historic character of a property shall be retained and
preserved.  The relocation of distinctive materials or alteration of features,
spaces, and spatial relationships that characterize a property shall be
avoided.
      3.   A property shall be recognized as a physical record of its time,
place, and use.  Changes that create a false sense of historical development,
such as adding features or elements from other historic properties, shall not
be undertaken.
      4.   Changes to a property that have acquired historic significance in
their own right shall be retained and preserved.
      5.   Distinctive materials, features, finishes, and construction
techniques or examples of craftsmanship that characterize a property shall be
preserved.
      6.   Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired rather than
replaced.  Where the severity of deterioration requires replacement of a
distinctive feature, the new feature shall match the old in design, color,
texture, and, where possible, materials.  Replacement of missing features shall
be substantiated by documentary and physical evidence.
      7.   Chemical and physical treatments, if appropriate, shall be
undertaken using the gentlest means possible.  Treatments that cause damage to
historic materials shall not be used.
      8.   Archeological resources shall be protected and preserved in place. 
If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures shall be undertaken.
      9.   New additions, exterior alterations, or related new construction
shall not destroy historic materials, features, and spatial relationships that
characterize the property.  The new work shall be differentiated from the old
and shall be compatible with the historic materials, features, size, scale and
proportion, and massing to protect the integrity of the property and its
environment.
      10.   New additions and adjacent or related new construction shall be
undertaken in such a manner that, if removed in the future, the essential form
and integrity of the historic property and its environment would be unimpaired.
   F.   In order to approve an application for the relocation or demolition of
a historic resource on the List, the Planning Commission must find that:
      1.   No prudent and feasible alternative exists, or
      2.   The designated property is deteriorated beyond repair, or
      3.   The value to the community of the proposed use of the property
outweighs the value of retaining the historic resource.
   G.   Demolition conditions.  In approving a request for the demolition of a
historic resource on the List, the Planning Commission may impose the following
conditions:
      1.   Photographic, video, or drawn record of the property to be
demolished.
      2.   Salvage and restoration of significant elements, and/or
      3.   Other reasonable mitigation measures.
(Ord. 1204, § 6(part), 2008)
TITLE 16: LAND DIVISIONS AND LINE ADJUSTMENTS
      Chapter
         
16.04.   PURPOSE, SCOPE AND DEFINITIONS
         
16.08.   ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
         
16.12.   DESIGN STANDARDS
         
16.16.   TENTATIVE PLAN
         
16.20.   FINAL PLAT
         
16.24.   IMPROVEMENTS
         
16.28.   EXCEPTIONS AND VARIANCES
         
16.32.   PROPERTY LINE ADJUSTMENTS
CHAPTER 16.04:  PURPOSE, SCOPE AND DEFINITIONS
Section
   
16.04.010   Purpose.
   
16.04.020   Scope of regulations.
   
16.04.030   Definitions.
§ 16.04.010  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this title is to establish standards and procedures for the
subdivision and partitioning of property, and the adjusting of property lines
of land within the City of Sweet Home, Oregon.  These regulations are necessary
in order to:
   A.   Protect the public health, safety and welfare.
   B.   Provide clear and objective procedures and standards for the
subdivision and partitioning of land and adjusting of property lines.
   C.   Implement the Comprehensive Plan.
   D.   Provide for consistency in construction within classifications of
streets.
   E.   Ensure adequate provision of utilities and other public facilities.
   F.   Provide for the protection, conservation and proper use of land.
   G.   Meet the standards and procedures for the division of land in
compliance with O.R.S. Chapter 92.
(Ord. 1202, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 16.04.020  SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.
   Subdivision and partition plats shall be reviewed and acted upon in
accordance with these regulations. A person desiring to subdivide or partition
land shall submit tentative plans and final documents for approval as provided
for in Sweet Home Municipal Code Title 16 - Land Divisions and Line
Adjustments. All subdivisions,  partitions, and property line adjustments shall
also conform with the provisions of O.R.S. Chapter 92, Sweet Home Municipal
Code Title 17 and the Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. 1202, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 16.04.030  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this title, the following words and phrases shall mean:
   ACCESS EASEMENT.  A private easement providing ingress and egress across a
property to another property.
   ALLEY.  A street which affords only a secondary means of access to property.
   ARTERIAL, MAJOR.  Links communities and activity centers on a regional
basis, and serves a high number of local trips.
   ARTERIAL, MINOR.  Provides both access and circulation within residential
neighborhoods and commercial/industrial areas.
   BICYCLE WAY.  A path created primarily for use by bicycles.
   BUILDING LINE.  A line parallel to the front lot line and passing through
the most forward point of a place of a building.
   CITY.  The City of Sweet Home, Oregon.
   CITY ENGINEER.  The City Engineer of the City of Sweet Home, or a fully
qualified person designated by the Public Works Director to fulfill the
responsibilities of a City Engineer as specified by this title.
   COLLECTOR.  A street that distributes trips from the major arterials through
the area to their ultimate destination minimizing the impact of traffic to
adjacent land uses while recognizing the need to serve less intense residential
areas.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.   The most current adopted version of the Sweet Home
Comprehensive Plan.
   CUL-DE-SAC.  A turnaround at the end of a dead-end street.
   DEAD-END STREET.  A street with a single common ingress and egress.
   DRIVEWAY, JOINT USE. When land uses on two or more lots or parcels share one
driveway.
   EASEMENT.  A grant of the right to use a portion of land for a specified
purpose.
   HALF STREET.  A portion of the width of a street, usually along the edge of
a subdivision, where the remaining portion of the street could be provided in
another land division.
   HALF STREET IMPROVEMENTS.  Will usually consist of pedestrian way, curb,
parking, and two travel lanes.
   HAMMERHEAD.  A vehicle turnaround on a dead-end street configured in the
shape of a hammerhead or in a similar configuration.
   LOCAL ACCESS STREET.  A local street which parallels an arterial, providing
access to through lots that have no access from the arterial street.
   LOCAL STREET.  A street that provides access to adjacent land, and is
designed to minimize the impact of traffic on adjacent development.
   LOT.  A single unit of land that is created by a subdivision of land.
   MAP.  A drawing representing selected features in relationship to other
features present on or near the subject property.
   PARCEL.  A single unit of land that is created by partitioning of land.
   PARTITION LAND.   To divide an area or tract of land into not more than
three parcels within a calendar year, but does not include:
      1.   A division of land resulting from a lien foreclosure, foreclosure of
a recorded contract for the sale of real property or the creation of cemetery
lots;
      2.   An adjustment of a property line by the relocation of a common
boundary where an additional unit of land is not created and where the existing
unit of land reduced in size by the adjustment complies with Sweet Home
Municipal Code Title 17;
      3.   The division of land resulting from the recording of a subdivision
or condominium plat;
      4.   A sale or grant by a person to a public agency or public body for a
state highway, city street or other right-of-way purposes provided that such
road or right-of-way complies with the City's Comprehensive Plan and Oregon
Revised Statutes; or
      5.   A sale or grant by a public agency or public body of excess property
resulting from the acquisition of land by the state, a political subdivision or
special district for highways, city streets or other right-of-way purposes when
the sale or grant is part of a property line adjustment incorporating the
excess right-of-way into adjacent property.
   PEDESTRIAN WAY.  A right-of-way for pedestrian traffic.
   PERSON.   Every natural person, firm, partnership, association, social or
fraternal organization, corporation, trust, estate, receiver, syndicate, branch
of government, or any group or combination acting as a unit.
   PLANNED DEVELOPMENT.  A specific area that is planned to allow
diversification between buildings and open space while meeting the objectives
of the underlying zoning regulations.
   PLANNING COMMISSION.  The Planning Commission of the City of Sweet Home.
   PLAT.  A map representing a tract of land showing the boundaries and
location of individual properties and streets, and includes a final subdivision
plat, replat or partition plat.
   PLAT - FINAL.  A map of all or a portion of a subdivision, replat, or
partition, that is presented to the City for final approval.
   PRIVATE STREET.  A street that has not been accepted by the City of Sweet
Home or other governmental entity.
   PROPERTY LINE ADJUSTMENT.  The relocation or elimination of a common
property line between abutting properties.
   PROPERTY LINE ADJUSTMENT REPLAT.  The relocation or elimination of a common
property line between abutting properties within a subdivision or partition
plat.
   QUEUING.  A line of vehicles waiting their turn.
   RADIUS.  The single point intersection of a curve and straight line that
touches the curve but does not intersect it.
   REPLAT.  The act of platting the lots, parcels and easements in a recorded
subdivision or partition plat to achieve a reconfiguration of the existing
subdivision or partition plat or to increase or decrease the number of lots in
the subdivision.
   RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOOD STREET.  A street, within a Planned Development,
that may have queuing, drainage swales, and off-set pedestrian ways.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY.  The area between boundary lines of a street.
   ROADWAY.  The portion or portions of a street right-of-way developed for
vehicular traffic.
   SIDEWALK.  A pedestrian walkway with a hard surface.
   STREET.  A public or private way that is created to provide ingress or
egress for vehicles to one or more lots, parcels, areas or tracts of land,
excluding private driveways, including the terms "road," "highway," "lane,"
"avenue," or similar designations.
   SUBDIVIDE LAND.  To divide an area or tract of land into four or more lots
within a calendar year
   SUBDIVIDER.  Any person who causes land to be subdivided or partitioned or
who undertakes to develop a subdivision.
   SUBDIVISION.  Either an act of subdividing land or an area or tract of land
subdivided.
   TANGENT. A straight line starting, ending or touching a curve at a single
point.
   THROUGH LOT.  A lot that fronts upon two streets that do not intersect at
the boundaries of the lot.
   TRACT.  An area, parcel, lot, site, piece of land, or property that is the
subject of a development application.
   TRAFFIC GENERATOR.  A use in a particular geographic area that is likely to
attract into the area substantial vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
(Ord. 1277, § 1, 2019; Ord. 1202, § 1(part), 2008)
CHAPTER 16.08:  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section
   
16.08.010   Appeal.
   
16.08.020   Amendment.
   
16.08.030   Interpretation.
   
16.08.040   Filing fees.
   
16.08.050   Segregation of assessments.
   
16.08.060   Violation–penalty.
§ 16.08.010  APPEAL.
   A.   An appeal of an administrative decision concerning this title will be
made to the Planning Commission. Appeals of a Planning Commission decision will
be made to the City Council.
   B.   An appeal must be filed within 12 days of the date of the mailing of
the decision notice.
   C.   The established fee will be paid upon filing of an appeal.
   D.   At an appeals hearing, the ordinances and criteria must be stated, and
the applicant or appellant must address these criteria with sufficient
specificity to allow decision makers an opportunity to respond to the issue.
   E.   Upon appeal, the appellate authority must consider the record of the
action or ruling which resulted in appeal.
   F.   An aggrieved party in a proceeding may appeal the City Council decision
to the Land Use Board of Appeals (LUBA).
(Ord. 1277, § 1, 2019; Ord. 1202, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 16.08.020  AMENDMENT.
   The provisions of this title may be amended after consideration by the
Planning Commission and the City Council.  The Planning Commission shall first
transmit its findings and recommendations to the City Council.  The Planning
Commission will hold a public hearing on the proposed amendments prior to
making findings and recommendations.  The City Council shall hold a public
hearing on the proposed amendments and shall consider the recommendations of
the Planning Commission in making its decision.
(Ord. 1202, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 16.08.030  INTERPRETATION.
   Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this title are less
restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provisions, the
more restrictive provisions shall govern.
(Ord. 1202, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 16.08.040  FILING FEES.
   The City Council shall establish fees by separate resolution for the
performance of the actions and reviews required by this title.
(Ord. 1202, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 16.08.050  SEGREGATION OF ASSESSMENTS.
   A.   Whenever property has been assessed in its entirety and there is an
intent to divide the property into lots or parcels, the owner of the subject
property may file a written request with the Finance Director for a segregation
of the assessment.
   B.   Requests for the segregation of liens shall include the following:
      1.   A description of the property to be divided.
      2.   A current copy of a recorded deed with Linn County Deed Records,
Volume and Page numbers or Instrument number, showing ownership of the subject
property.
   C.   Upon receipt of the application request, the Finance Director shall
calculate the total amount of assessment eligible for segregation according to
the method of apportionment used in the original improvement assessment, unless
inappropriate because of special circumstances.  The eligible portion of the
assessment shall be determined by the Public Works Director, or designee,
according to the value of the original construction costs. The assessment will
then be prorated by each lot or parcel.
   D.   No requested segregation shall be granted unless the segregation
complies with O.R.S. Chapter 92, City Codes and the Comprehensive Plan.
   E.   The Finance Director shall record the liens in the city lien docket. 
From that time, the city shall have a lien upon the described lots or parcels
for the amount of the assessment, as determined above, together with interest
on the unpaid balance at the rate of 10% per annum.
(Ord. 1202, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 16.08.060  VIOLATION--PENALTY.
   Failure to comply with any of the provisions and requirements of Sweet Home
Municipal Code Title 16 shall constitute a violation and may be prosecuted
under the provisions of Sweet Home Municipal Code
Chapter 9.36.  Abatement of a violation of this title can be accomplished by
any remedy open to the city, including using the procedures set out in Sweet
Home Municipal Code
Chapter 8.04 for the abatement of nuisances.  Each day that a violation exists
is a separate offense.
(Ord. 1202, § 1(part), 2008)
CHAPTER 16.12:  DESIGN STANDARDS
Section
   
16.12.010   Principles of acceptability.
   
16.12.015   General development standards and design criteria.
   
16.12.020   Streets.
   
16.12.025   Blocks.
   
16.12.030   Lots and parcels.
   
16.12.035   Easements.
   
16.12.040   Water system.
   
16.12.045   Sanitary sewer system.
   
16.12.050   Storm water and surface drainage.
   
16.12.055   Lot grading.
   
16.12.060   Erosion control.
   
16.12.070   Underground utilities.
   
16.12.075   Large tract land division.
§ 16.12.010  PRINCIPLES OF ACCEPTABILITY.
    Subdivisions and partitions shall conform with the Comprehensive Plan,
Sweet Home Municipal Code Title 17, applicable provisions of other city
ordinances, state law and the standards established by this title.  Locations
and standards related to transportation and community facilities shall be based
on the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. 1202, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 16.12.015  GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS AND DESIGN CRITERIA.
   The developer shall design and improve all streets, storm drains, sanitary
sewers, water lines, access ways and other public easements which are part of
the development, and those off-site public improvements necessary to serve the
development consistent with the Comprehensive Plan or any specific plan
thereof, and such other public improvements as required by this title.
   A.   All designs and improvements shall be in accord with the standards and
criteria set forth in any conditions of approval and this title.
   B.   All improvements shall be covered by a warranty guarantee for the
materials and workmanship for a period of at least one year from the date of
their completion.
   C.   All improvements as set forth herein shall be considered necessary for
the general use of the following:
      1.   The property owner(s) of the development;
      2.   The local neighborhood; and
      3.   The city's traffic and drainage needs, including without limitation
the following:
         a.   Grading and surfacing of streets and access ways;
         b.   Installation of facilities to supply domestic water;
         c.   Construction of sanitary collection treatment facilities;
         d.   Construction of storm water drainage conveyances, including flow
controls, infiltration and water quality facilities;
         e.   Any other improvement work required.
   D.   All improvement work shall be at the sole cost and expense of the
developer, unless otherwise specifically provided.
(Ord. 1202, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 16.12.020  STREETS.
   The location, width and grade of streets shall be considered in their
relation to existing and planned streets, topographical and drainage
conditions, public convenience and safety, the proposed use of land to be
served by the streets, and full land utilization which will not result in
tracts of vacant inaccessible land.  Street design standards are intended to
provide city staff with standards and guidelines for protecting the function
and integrity of the city's transportation system.  The following table
implements the standards of the Transportation System Plan.
 
                                                               Residential
Standards Major Arterial Minor Arterial Collector Local Street Neighborhood
                                                               Street ***
ROW Width                     80' (max) 70' (max) 60' (max) 50' (max) 20' (min)
Curb to curb width            60' (max) 40' (max) 40' (max) 36' (max) 20' (min)
Travel Lane width             11' (min) 10.5'     10' (min) 7' (min)  7' (min)
                                        (min)
Number of lanes               4 (max)   3 (max)   2 (min)   2 (max)   2 (min)
Median/center turn width      12'       11.5'     Not       Not       Not
(max)                                             required  required  required
Bike Lane width (min)         2 @ 6'    2 @ 6'    1 @ 6'    7'        Not
                                                                      required
Parking width (max)           8'        8'        8'        7'        Not
                                                                      required
Curb *                        6"        6"        6"        6"        Not
                                                                      required
Planting Strip width (min)**  7'        7'        7'        3'        3'
Sidewalk width (min)          8'        7'        6'        5'        Not
                                                                      required
System spacing                1 mile    ½ mile   ½ mile   250'      100'
Design speed - (max)          40 mph    35 mph    25 mph    25 mph    20 mph
Access management:
intersection spacing          300'      100'      100'      75'       50'
(min)****
Access Management:  driveway No direct Shared    Shared    Direct    Direct
spacing                       driveway  driveway  driveway  access    access
                              access    access    access    allowed   allowed
 
* Other City approved alternatives may be proposed, such as "Green Streets"
standards, as defined by Portland Metro Green Streets handbook, and subsequent
updates. A green street can be defined as a street designed to integrate a
system of storm water management within its right of way, and to
   •   Reduce the amount of water that is piped directly to streams and rivers.
   •   Be a visible component of a system of "green infrastructure" that is
incorporated into the aesthetics of the community.
   •   Make the best use of the street tree canopy for storm water interception
as well as temperature mitigation and air quality improvement.
   •   Ensure the street has the least impact on its surroundings, particularly
at locations where it crosses a stream or other sensitive area.
**  Planting strips may include filtration strips and swales.
*** Allowed only within a Planned Unit Development.
**** Measured as adjacent edge to edge of right-of-way, with the higher street
category controlling.
      1.   A transportation impact analysis (TIA) may be required, if the
proposed development appear to have traffic generators with a significantly
high level of traffic. 
         a.   Applicants may be required to have a pre-application meeting with
city staff to determine if the proposed development will have a significantly
high level of traffic.  If determined by city staff that a TIA is required, the
TIA must be submitted as a part of the application or the application will not
be considered complete and will be on hold as per Oregon Revised Statutes.
         b.   "Significantly high level of traffic" means that the average
number of daily trips on any existing street would increase by 20% or more as a
result of the proposed development, based on the Institute of Traffic Engineers
- Trip Generation.  Base numbers must be established as a part of the TIA
analysis using standard traffic count methodology.
         c.   Any TIA shall be prepared by a qualified professional.
   B.   Alignment.  If possible, streets shall be in alignment with existing
streets by continuation of the center lines of each street.
      1.   Staggered street alignment resulting in "T" intersections at local
streets should have a minimum distance of 75' between the adjacent right-of-way
of streets having approximately the same bearing.
      2.   Staggered street alignment making "T" intersections at collectors
and arterials should leave a minimum distance of 100' between adjacent right-
of-way on streets having approximately the same bearing.
   C.   Future extensions of streets.  Where necessary to give access or to
permit a satisfactory future division of adjoining land, streets shall be
extended to the boundary of the subdivision or partition.
      1.   A street ending at a property line may be approved with or without a
turnaround but shall have a reserve area.
      2.   Reserve areas.  Reserve areas, easements, or street plugs
controlling access to streets shall be required when necessary to ensure street
extensions and the widening of half streets.  The reserve strip will normally
be one foot in width and under the ownership of the city.
      3.   Property abutting the city limits will not require street extensions
to the boundary unless the abutting property is within the Urban Growth
Boundary or the City's Transportation System Plan identifies a future
connection. If there is a bridge identified in the Transportation System Plan
for future connectivity, street extensions to the boundary will be required.
   D.   Intersection angles.  Streets shall be designed to intersect at angles
as near to right angles as practical except where constrained topography or
abutting properties requires a lesser angle.
      1.   The intersection of arterial or collector streets with other
arterial or collector streets shall have at least 100' of tangent adjacent to
the intersection unless constraints require a lesser distance, but in no case
shall the tangent be less than 30'. 
      2.   Intersections which are not at right angles shall have a minimum
corner radius at the curb of between 20' and 30' along the right-of-way lines
of the acute angle.
      3.   The acute angle of the intersecting street shall be no more than
10º  off perpendicular to the cross street.
      4.   When street rights-of-way are not able to intersect at right angles,
then the curbs, parking area, and planter strips shall be modified to align the
travel lanes at right angle to the cross street.
      5.   Right-of-way lines at intersections with arterial streets shall have
a corner radius of not less than 20'.
   E.   Existing streets.  Whenever existing streets adjacent to or within a
tract are of inadequate width, additional right-of-way shall be provided at the
time of subdivision.
   F.   Half-streets.  Half streets shall be required for existing right-of-way
on the perimeter of the subdivision with the following conditions:
      1.   Located adjacent to unimproved streets.
      2.   Located adjacent to one-half street condition on the same side of
the street.
      3.   Located opposite of a constructed one-half street.
   G.   Dead end streets:  A dead end street shall terminate with a turnaround
designed to the minimum size standards of the International Fire Code.
      1.   Dead end streets can be allowed only when the extension of street is
not possible due to one or more of the following reasons:
         a.   A natural feature, such as a wetland, stream or steep slope makes
it impractical for the street to be extended.
         b.   An existing structure or use is located on an adjacent parcel
within the alignment of the proposed street.
         c.   An existing deed restriction or covenant or political boundary
does not allow the extension of the street.
         d.   The alignment is approved as part of a Planned Development.
   H.   Street names.  Except for extensions to existing streets, no street
name shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with the names of
existing streets.  Street names shall conform to Sweet Home Municipal Code
Title 12.
   I.   Grades.  Grades shall conform to any conditions of approval of the
city, Oregon Building Codes, and the International Fire Code.
   J.   Curves.  Center line radii of curves shall not be less than 500 feet on
arterials,  350 feet on collectors, and 100 feet on local streets and alleys. 
Where existing conditions, particularly topography, make it impractical to meet
these standards, the Planning Commission may approve sharper curves.
   K.   Local access streets.  Where a subdivision or partition abuts or
contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the Planning Commission may
require a local access street.
   L.   Railroad right-of-way.  New railroad crossings and modifications to
existing crossings are subject to review and approval by ODOT - Rail Division
and must have written support prior to submittal of a tentative subdivision or
partition plan for a land use application to be deemed complete. 
   M.   Alleys.  Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial
districts unless other permanent provisions for access to off-street parking
and loading facilities are approved by the Planning Commission.  The corners of
alley intersections shall have a radius of not less than 12 feet.
   N.   Private streets.  Private streets shall be allowed in Planned
Developments, as approved by the Planning Commission.
   O.   Access to new subdivisions.  All existing streets providing access to a
subdivision should be improved to city standards only when warranted by a
traffic impact study.
      1.   Improvements shall be made to ensure that the street has the
capacity to meet the projected impacts from the development.
      2.   Improvements shall extend for a minimum of one block, or as
determined by the TIA or Planning Commission.
      3.   Improvements shall provide the minimum of accessibility for vehicles
and pedestrians.
      4.   The city may partner with the developer for extended improvements
beyond the minium access area. A local improvement district (LID) may be
initiated by the city to meet the extended needs to local improvements.
   P.   Bicycle and pedestrian ways. All new subdivisions shall provide for
pedestrian and bicycle connectivity and accessibility, as required in the
Transportation System Plan, Chapter 6,  including the following:
      1.   Sidewalks along arterials and collectors.
      2.   Bikeways along arterials and collectors.
      3.   Use of access ways, multi-use paths or easements to overcome
barriers to bicycle and pedestrian circulation.
      4.   All pedestrian and bicycle ways will be constructed to city
standards.
(Ord. 1202, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 16.12.025  BLOCKS.
   Block and perimeter length shall take into account at minimum the following:
   A.   Property shape;
   B.   Traffic flow;
   C.   Fire safety;
   D.   Access control onto adjacent streets;
   E.   Natural features;
   F.   Access to schools;
   G.   Access to parks;
   H.   Mid-block pedestrian ways, which shall have an all weather surface with
a minimum width of 10 feet; and
   I.   Existing development.
(Ord. 1202, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 16.12.030  LOTS AND PARCELS.
   A.   Size and shape.  Lot and parcel size, width, shape and orientation
shall be appropriate for the zone and location of the subdivision, as well as
for the type of use contemplated. 
   B.   No lot or parcel shall be dimensioned to contain a part of an existing
or proposed street. 
   C.   Residential lots and parcels shall be consistent with the residential
lot size and width standards of Sweet Home Municipal Code Title 17. 
   D.   Lot depth shall not exceed two and one-half times the average width.
   E.   Frontage.  Each lot or parcel, except those abutting private streets,
shall abut upon a publicly owned street, other than an alley, for a width of at
least 25 feet.
   F.   Access easements.  Where no other practical access to lots or parcels
exists, the city may allow an access easement for actual access to lots or
parcels. Approval of an easement that is a joint use driveway may be approved
pursuant to the standards listed in §
17.08.100(C)(6).
   G.   Through lots should be avoided except where they are essential to
provide separation of residential development from non-residential activities,
arterial streets, or to overcome a specific disadvantages of topography and
orientation.
      1.   A planting screen easement of at least ten feet  in width and across
which there shall be no right of access may be required along the lines of lots
or parcels abutting a collector or arterial street or other incompatible uses.
      2.    Lots shall be served from only one side via a local street. 
      3.   A through lot shall have the yard abutting a street that has no
access to the back yard, and shall utilize setbacks for a back yard as per the
underlying zone standards.
   H.   Lot side lines.  The side lines of lots, as far as practicable, shall
run at right angles to the street upon which the lots face.
      1.   Topographical conditions or street configurations may warrant an
angle.
      2.   Generally, any angle should not exceed 30º  from a right angle to
the street.
   I.   Flag Lots.  Flag lots should be avoided if local street connection can
reasonably be included in lieu of the flag lot configuration. The thin strip of
land, known as the flag pole, which provides access to the lot(s) furthest from
the street shall not be used in determining lot size, lot width or yard setback
requirements.
   J.   If special setbacks are to be established in a subdivision or partition
through the variance process, they shall be shown on the tentative plan and
final plat and included in the deed restrictions.
(Ord. 1277, § 1, 2019; Ord. 1202, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 16.12.035  EASEMENTS.
   A.   City utility lines.
      1.   Easements for city sanitary sewer, storm water collection systems,
and water mains, or other utilities, not located within the public right-of-
way, shall be dedicated wherever necessary. 
      2.   City easements shall be at least 20 feet wide and offset on rear or
side lot lines with five feet on one side and 15 feet on the other.
   B.   Franchise utility easements will be seven feet in width and generally
abutting the right-of-way.
   C.   Drainage channels.  If a subdivision or partition is traversed by a
drainage channel, there shall be provided a public drainage easement.  The
drainage easement shall conform substantially with the lines of the drainage
channel, with additional width as needed for channel maintenance.
(Ord. 1202, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 16.12.040  WATER SYSTEM.
    The design shall be to city standards and shall be approved by the City
Engineer.  The design shall take into account provisions for extension beyond
the subject property.  The design shall adequately loop the city system.
(Ord. 1202, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 16.12.045  SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM.
   The design shall be to city standards and shall be approved by the City
Engineer.  The design shall take into account capacity and grade to allow for
desirable extension beyond the subject property.
(Ord. 1202, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 16.12.050  STORM WATER AND SURFACE DRAINAGE.
   Design of drainage within a subdivision or partition shall be to city
standards, and shall be approved by the City Engineer.
   A.   The design shall take into account the capacity and grade necessary to
maintain unrestricted flow from areas draining through the subdivision or
partition and to allow extension of the system to serve such areas. 
   B.   Provision shall be made for water quality and retention storage areas
designed and constructed to meet the standards set by the city.
(Ord. 1202, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 16.12.055  LOT GRADING.
   Lot grading shall conform to all applicable Oregon Building Codes and Sweet
Home Municipal Code Titles 12, 13, and 15 requirements.
(Ord. 1202, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 16.12.060  EROSION CONTROL.
   Erosion control must be approved as per the City's Erosion Control
requirements of Sweet Home Municipal Code
Chapter 13.06.
(Ord. 1202, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 16.12.070  UNDERGROUND UTILITIES.
   All permanent franchise utility service to subdivision lots shall be
provided from underground facilities.  No overhead utility facilities in
connection with permanent utility service to a subdivision or partition shall
be permitted.  In the case of a partition in an area where underground utility
service is not presently provided, permanent service may be supplied by means
of overhead wires or cables.
(Ord. 1202, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 16.12.075  LARGE TRACT LAND DIVISION.
   In subdividing or partitioning tracts into large lots or parcels which may
be divided in the future, the city may impose requirements which will allow for
subsequent division of any lot, parcel, or tract.
(Ord. 1202, § 1(part), 2008)
CHAPTER 16.16:  TENTATIVE PLAN
Section
   
16.16.010   General information.
   
16.16.020   Pre-application review.
   
16.16.025   Tentative subdivision, subdivision replat or partition, partition
replat plan submittal.
   
16.16.030   Procedures.
   
16.16.040   Tentative subdivision, subdivision replat or partition, partition
replat plan review criteria.
   
16.16.050   Tentative plan conditions of approval.
   
16.16.060   Development phasing.
   
16.16.070   Duration of tentative plan approval.
   
16.16.080   Extension to tentative plan approval.
§ 16.16.010  GENERAL INFORMATION.
   The city shall make available all information on file with the city relating
to the area of a proposed subdivision or partition. The subdivider shall also
be advised of the design and improvement standards and other requirements
established by the city in connection with the review and approval of plats.
(Ord. 1202, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 16.16.020  PRE-APPLICATION REVIEW.
   A pre-application conference may be required by the city. The subdivider
shall submit a sketch to the City Planner and the Public Works Engineering
Division of the proposed tentative plan for the property to be divided. 
Following preliminary review, the subdivider may proceed to prepare a tentative
plan for submission to the city.
(Ord. 1202, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 16.16.025  TENTATIVE SUBDIVISION, SUBDIVISION REPLAT OR PARTITION, PARTITION
REPLAT PLAN SUBMITTAL.
   All applications for a tentative partition or subdivision approval must
include a complete application form.  For a subdivision or subdivision replat,
ten full size copies and one 8½" by 11" copy of a plan shall be submitted with
the following details.  For a partition or partition replat, three full size
copies and one 8½" by 11" copy of a plan shall be submitted showing the
following details.  The tentative plan need not be a finished drawing but it
shall show all pertinent information to scale.
   A.   Where the land to be subdivided contains only part of the tract owned
or controlled by the subdivider, a sketch is required of a tentative layout for
streets and utilities in the unsubdivided portion indicating connections to
existing or future improvements.
   B.   The following information shall be submitted:
      1.   All existing subdivisions, streets and property lines of the land
immediately adjoining the proposed subdivision.
      2.   All existing streets between the subject property and the nearest
existing arterial or collector streets.
      3.   The name of the owners of all land immediately adjoining the
proposed subdivision.
      4.   How streets and alleys in the proposed subdivision may connect with
existing or proposed streets and alleys in neighborhood.
   C.   The name, if any, of the land division. The subdivision name must not
duplicate or resemble the name of another subdivision in Linn County and shall
be subject to approval by the Linn County Surveyor. Pre-approval of the
subdivision name by Linn County Surveyor's Office is recommended.
   D.   Date of the original submittal and of any subsequent revisions.
   E.   North arrow.
   F.   Scale of drawing.
   G.   Names and addresses of owner or owners, subdivider, surveyor, and
design engineer if applicable.
   H.   The location, widths and names of all existing or platted streets or
other public ways within or directly adjacent to the tract of railroad right-
of-way, city boundaries, and other important features.
   I.   The location on the site and in the adjoining streets or property for
the following existing and proposed items:
      1.   Sewers and water mains and private services.
      2.   Invert elevations of sewers at points of proposed connections or
adjacent manholes must also be shown.
      3.   Culverts.
      4.   Ditches and drain pipes.
      5.   Electric, gas and telephone conduits.
   J.   Contour lines having the following minimum intervals: 
      1.   One foot contour intervals for ground slopes less than 5%.
      2.   Two foot contour intervals for ground slopes between 5% and 10%.
      3.   Five foot contour levels for ground slopes exceeding 10%.
      4.   The elevations of all control points which are used to determine the
contours.
   K.   Geo-tech reports as needed.
   L.   Location and elevation of properties within the 100-year flood plain
and other areas subject to flooding or ponding and areas subject to inundation
from storm water overflow with approximate high water elevation.
   M.   Location, width, direction and rate of flow at peak discharge of all
water ways.
   N.   Location of any wetlands identified on the City of Sweet Home Local
Wetlands Inventory, locally known, or identified by some other means.
   O.   Location of any required riparian zone identified by Sweet Home
Municipal Code
Chapter 17.72.
   P.   Properties in the natural resource zone, must show natural features,
such as rock outcroppings, wooded areas and preservable trees over 12 inches in
diameter measured at 4½ feet from the ground.
   Q.   Existing uses of the property and adjacent property within 100 feet
including location of all existing structures to remain on the property.
   R.   Known structures, landmarks, sites and areas of cultural, historic or
archaeological significance. 
      1.   The City of Sweet Home historic sites listing and the State Historic
Preservation Office shall be consulted if a historic site is identified.
      2.   Sweet Home Municipal Code Title 15 rules for historic structures
must be addressed.
   S.   Zoning on and adjacent to the subject property.
   T.   For all proposed streets, the following information must be shown:
      1.   Location;
      2.   Total right-of-way width;
      3.   Curb to curb width;
      4.   Sidewalk;
      5.   Beauty strip;
      6.   Proposed name;
      7.   Grade;
      8.   Approximate radii or curves;
      9.   Fire hydrants;
      10.   Street lights;
      11.   Stop signs;
      12.   Location of post office boxes.
   U.   The tentative plan shall be drawn to a standard engineer's scale where
1 inch equals 20 feet to 100 feet.
   V.   Proposed signage.
   W.   Proposed perimeter fencing.
   X.   The relationship of all proposed streets to any existing or approved
streets and proposed future streets in the transportation system plan.
   Y.   Existing and proposed easements on the site, including the width and
the purpose of the easements.
   Z.   Existing easements on adjoining properties, including the width and
purpose of the easements.
   AA.    Information on the proposed lots must include the following:
      1.   The location of each lot,
      2.   The dimensions and square footage of each lot, and
      3.   Lot, block, tract, or parcel numbers.
   BB.    Proposed uses for each lot.
   CC.    Land to be deeded or dedicated for public purposes.
   DD.    Statement indicating whether the property has an existing water right
or permit.  If so, the Certificate or permit number must be listed.
   EE.    ODOT Rail approval for any proposed crossing or development within
300' of the railroad right-of-way.
   FF.   The following additional information must be submitted with the
tentative plan:
      1.   Total acreage of the parcel to be subdivided.
      2.   The percent of land dedicated to the public, not including
easements.
      3.   All public improvements proposed to be installed, including:
         a.   The approximate timing of installation, and
         b.   The method of financing.
      4.   Special improvements to be made by the developer and the approximate
timing of such improvements are to be complete. Sufficient detail regarding
proposed improvements shall be submitted so that they may be checked for
compliance with the objectives of these regulations, State laws and other
applicable city ordinances.
   GG.   Proposed services or other listed items may be on a separate map for
clarity.
(Ord. 1202, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 16.16.030  PROCEDURES.
   A.   Tentative subdivision and replat plans.
      1.   Notice.
         a.   Each notice of hearing authorized by this title shall be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least ten days
prior to the date of the hearing.
         b.   A notice of hearing on a subdivision or replat shall be mailed to
the applicant and to all owners of record of property on the most recent
property tax assessment role available to the city within 100 feet of the
subject property.
         c.   A notice of hearing on a subdivision or replat shall be mailed to
non-owner residents within 100 feet of the subject property.
         d.   Notice shall be provided to the following city staff:
            i.   City Manager
            ii.   Police
            iii.   Finance
            iv.   Public Works.
         e.   Notice shall also be provided to the following service agencies:
            i.   Natural gas providers
            ii.   Communications providers
            iii.   Broadband providers
            iv.   Power providers
            v.   City of Sweet Home franchise holders
            vi.   United States Postal Service
            vii.   Linn County Planning
            viii.   Linn County Road Department
            ix.   Linn County Surveyor
            x.   Sweet Home School District 55
            xi.   Sweet Home Fire and Ambulance District
            xii.   ODOT Region 2 Access Development
            xiii.   ODOT District 4 Office
         f.   Notice shall also be provided to any neighborhood or community
organization which has requested notice from the city and whose boundaries
include the site.
         g.   Notice distances will be measured from the exterior boundaries of
the subject property for which the application request has been made.
         h.   The notice shall be mailed at least 20 days prior to the date of
hearing.
         i.   Failure of a person to receive the notice prescribed in this
section shall not impair the validity of the hearing.
         j.   All notices of public hearings shall contain the following
information:
            i.   Explain the nature of the application which could be approved;
            ii.   List of applicable criteria from this title and the
comprehensive plan that apply to the application at issue;
            iii.   Set forth the street address or other easily understood
geographic identifier;
            iv.   State the date, time and location of the hearing;
            v.   State that the failure of an issue to be raised in a hearing,
in person or by letter, or failure to provide sufficient specificity to afford
the decision maker an opportunity to respond to the issue precludes appeal to
the Land Use Board of Appeals based on that issue;
            vi.   Include the name and telephone number of a local government
representative to contact for more information;
            vii.   State that a copy of the application, all documents and
evidence relied upon by the applicant and applicable criteria are available for
inspection at no cost and a copy will be provided at reasonable cost;
            viii.   State that a copy of the staff report will be available for
inspection at no cost at least seven days prior to the hearing and a copy will
be provided at reasonable cost; and
            ix.   Include a general explanation of the requirements for
submission of testimony and the procedure for conduct of hearings. 
      2.   Approval authority.  The Planning Commission shall have the
authority to take action on a tentative subdivision or replat plan after
holding a public hearing in accordance with the procedures set forth in §
16.16.030 of this chapter. 
      3.   Approval of the tentative plan shall indicate approval of the final
plat if there is no substantial change from the tentative plan as approved by
the Planning Commission and if the subdivider complies with the requirements of
this title and of the provisions of O.R.S. Chapter 92.
      4.   The notice of decision shall be mailed no more than seven days after
the decision has been finalized. Notice of the decision shall be mailed to the
applicant, property owner. Those who provided written comments on the proposal,
and those who requested a copy of the decision.
   B.   Tentative partition plans.
      1.   Notice:
         a.   A notice of a pending partition or replat shall be mailed to the
applicant and to all owners of record of property on the most recent property
tax assessment role available to the city within 100 feet of the subject
property.
         b.   A notice of a pending partition or replat shall be mailed to non-
owner residents within 100 feet of the subject property.
         c.   Notice shall be provided to the following city staff:
            i.   City Manager
            ii.   Police
            iii.   Finance
            iv.   Public works.
         d.   Notice shall also be provided to the following service agencies:
            i.    Natural gas providers
            ii.   Communications providers
            iii.   Broadband providers
            iv.   Power providers
            v.   City of Sweet Home franchise holders
            vi.   United States Postal Service
            vii.   Linn County Planning
            viii.   Linn County Road Department
            ix.   Linn County Surveyor
            x.   Sweet Home School District 55
            xi.   Sweet Home Fire and Ambulance District
            xii.   ODOT Region 2 Access Development
            xiii.   ODOT District 4 Office.
         e.   Notice shall also be provided to any neighborhood or community
organization which has requested notice from the city and whose boundaries
include the site.
         f.   Notice distances will be measured from the exterior boundaries of
the subject property for which the application request has been made.
         g.   The notice shall be mailed at least 20 days prior to the date of
the decision.
         h.   Failure of a person to receive the notice prescribed in this
section shall not impair the validity of the decision.
         i.   Notices shall contain the following information:
            i.   Explain the nature of the application and which could be
approved;
            ii.   List of applicable criteria from this title and the
Comprehensive Plan that apply to the application at issue;
            iii.   Set forth the street address or other easily understood
geographic identifier;
            iv.   State the date for submittal of testimony on the request;
            v.   State that the failure of an issue to be raised in writing
within the specified time frame, or failure to provide sufficient specificity
to afford the decision maker an opportunity to respond to the issue, precludes
appeal to the Land Use Board of Appeals based on that issue;
            vi.   Include the name and telephone number of a local government
representative to contact for more information;
            vii.   State that a copy of the application, all documents and
evidence relied upon by the applicant and applicable criteria are available for
inspection at no cost and a copy will be provided at reasonable cost;
            viii.   State that a copy of the staff report will be available for
inspection at no cost at least seven days prior to the hearing and a copy will
be provided at reasonable cost; and
            ix.   Include a general explanation of the requirements for
submission of testimony. 
      2.   Decision. The City Manager, or designee, shall take action on the
tentative partition plan as submitted, or as it may be modified, if all
decision criteria can be met. The notice of decision shall be mailed no more
than seven days after the decision has been finalized. Notice of the decision
shall be mailed to the applicant, property owner, those who provided written
comments on the proposal, and those who requested a copy of the decision.
      3.   The City Manager, or designee, may refer the request to the Planning
Commission. Re-notification of all surrounding property owners is required.
(Ord. 1277, § 1, 2019; Ord. 1202, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 16.16.040  TENTATIVE SUBDIVISION, SUBDIVISION REPLAT OR PARTITION, PARTITION
REPLAT PLAN REVIEW CRITERIA.
   Approval of tentative plans will be granted if the city finds that the
proposal substantially conforms to the applicable provisions of Sweet Home
Municipal Code Titles 16 and 17 and the comprehensive plan.  The following
criteria apply:
   A.   The information required by this chapter has been provided.
   B.   The design and development standards of Sweet Home Municipal Code,
Titles 16 and 17 and the comprehensive plan, have been met where applicable.
   C.   Development of any remainder of the property under the same ownership
can be accomplished in accordance with this code.
   D.   Adjoining land can be developed or is provided access that will allow
its development in accordance with all applicable city codes.
   E.   The proposed street plan provides for the circulation of traffic and
meets the street design standards of this title.
   F.   The location and design allows development to be conveniently served by
public utilities.
   G.   Any special features of the site, including topography, floodplains,
wetlands, vegetation, or historic sites, have been adequately considered, and
protected if required by city, state or federal law.
   H.   If the tentative plan provides for development in more than one phase,
the Planning Commission must make findings and conclusions that such phasing is
necessary due to the nature of the development.
   I.    An application for residential development can be denied based on a
lack of school capacity if:
      1.   The city has been informed by the Sweet Home School District that
their adopted school facility plan has identified the lack of school capacity;
and
      2.   The city has considered option to address school capacity; and
      3.   The capacity of a school facility is not the basis for a development
moratorium under O.R.S. 197.505 to 197.540.
      4.   This section does not confer any power to the school district to
declare a building moratorium.
(Ord. 1202, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 16.16.050  TENTATIVE SUBDIVISION, SUBDIVISION REPLAT OR PARTITION, PARTITION
REPLAT PLAN CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL.
   A.   The approving authority may attach conditions of approval of a
tentative subdivision or partition plan to ensure that the proposal will
conform to the applicable review criteria.
   B.   Conditions of approval may include, but are not limited to, the
following:
      1.   Street improvements as required to assure that transportation
facilities are adequate for the proposed development, both on and off of the
subject property.
      2.   Storm water drainage plans.
      3.   Fencing.
      4.   Landscaping.
      5.   Public land dedication.
(Ord. 1202, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 16.16.060  DEVELOPMENT PHASING.
   A tentative subdivision plan may provide for platting in as many as four
phases.  The tentative plan must show each phase and be accompanied by proposed
time limitations for approval of the final plat for each phase.  Each phase is
independent from the other phases and must be completed within the following
time frame, or earlier.  Time limitations for the various phases must meet the
following requirements:
   A.   Phase 1 Final Plat shall be approved within 12 months of preliminary
approval.
   B.   Phase 2 Final Plat shall be approved within 30 months of preliminary
approval.
   C.   Phase 3 Final Plat shall be approved within 42 months of preliminary
approval.
   D.   Phase 4 Final Plant shall be approved within 60 months of the
preliminary approval.
(Ord. 1202, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 16.16.070  DURATION OF TENTATIVE PLAN APPROVAL.
   A.   Approval of a tentative plan shall be valid for 12 months from the date
of approval of the tentative plan, provided that if the approved tentative plan
provides for phased development, the approval shall be valid for the time
specified for each phase, subject to the limitations of §
16.16.060 of this chapter.
   B.   If any time limitation is exceeded, approval of the tentative
subdivision plan, or of any un-platted phase of the tentative subdivision plan
shall be void. Any subsequent proposal by the applicant for division of the
property shall require a new application.
(Ord. 1202, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 16.16.080  EXTENSIONS TO TENTATIVE PLAN APPROVAL.
   An applicant may request an extension of a tentative plan approval, or
extension of the preliminary approval with respect to the un-platted phases. 
Such requests shall be considered an administrative action, and shall be
submitted to the city in writing, stating the reason why an extension should be
granted.
   A.   The Planning Commission may grant an extension of up to 12 months of a
tentative subdivision plan approval, or if the tentative plan provides for
phased development, an extension of up to 12 months of a tentative plan
approval with respect to the phase then being developed, if it is determined
that a change of conditions, for which the applicant was not responsible, would
prevent the applicant from obtaining final plat approval within the original
time limitation. 
   B.   Further extensions of up to one year each, but not to exceed ten years
from date of original approval, as per O.R.S. 92.040(3), may be granted by the
Planning Commission if special circumstances are shown by the applicant.
(Ord. 1202, § 1(part), 2008)
CHAPTER 16.20:  FINAL PLAT
Section
   
16.20.010   Procedures.
   
16.20.020   Final plat review criteria.
   
16.20.030   Final plat submittal.
   
16.20.040   Filing of final plat.
§ 16.20.010  PROCEDURES.
   A.   Final subdivision plat.
      1.   Within one year after approval of the tentative plan, the subdivider
shall prepare a final plat in conformance with the approved tentative plan, the
provisions of this title and the provisions of O.R.S. Chapter 92.
      2.   A draft copy of the final plat is required for review by the City
Planner and City Engineering Division.
         a.   City staff may make checks in the field to verify that the plat
is sufficiently correct on the ground and they may enter the property for this
purpose.
         b.   If it is determined that there has not been full conformity, the
City Engineer and City Planner shall advise the subdivider of the changes or
additions that must be made and afford the subdivider an opportunity to make
such changes or additions.
         c.   The City Engineer and City Planner shall review the plat in
accordance with Title 16 and the Planning Commission approval.
      3.   The person submitting the final plat must concurrently submit a copy
of the plat to the Linn County Surveyor.  The County Surveyor shall examine the
plat for compliance with requirements for accuracy and completeness and shall
collect such fees for this purpose as are provided for by state law.
      4.   If it is determined that full conformity has been made, the City
Engineer and City Planner shall advise the Chairperson of the Planning
Commission. 
         a.   The Chairperson of the Planning Commission may then sign the plat
without further action by the Planning Commission.
            i.   The plat will be reviewed by the Planning Commission
Chairperson for compliance with the Planning Commission approval of the
tentative plan.
            ii.   If the plat is signed without further review by the Planning
Commission, the action shall be reported to the Planning Commission at the next
regular meeting.
         b.   The Planning Commission Chairperson may elect to require the
applicant to submit the plat to the Planning Commission for further review,
based on non-conformance with the original approval. 
            i.   If the Chairperson chooses to require the final plat be
brought back to the Planning Commission, the subdivider must submit a
subdivision application with information supporting the changes made since the
original approval and pay the fee for a subdivision.
            ii.   A new hearing will be scheduled and held in compliance with
Sweet Home Municipal Code
Chapter 17.12.
      5.   Approval of a final plat shall not occur until one of the following
conditions has been met:
         a.   All required infrastructure has been built and approved by the
city; or
         b.   Performance guarantees are in place for all required
infrastructure; or
         c.   A combination of the above has been approved by the city.
      6.   When the city has approved all streets, water and sewer main lines,
parks, drainage ways, or other dedication for which the city will have
responsibility for maintenance, the following must be provided:
         a.   The city must be supplied all required "as-built" construction
documents and verifications for all constructed infrastructure. As-built
submittal shall be on good quality, 5 mil mylar.
         b.   For all infrastructure built, a warranty guarantee, as determined
by the city, must be in place.
      7.   When not fully constructed, performance guarantees have been
approved by the city, and are in place, as per Sweet Home Municipal Code
Chapter 16.24:
         i.   All work covered by a performance guarantee must be completed
within one year of approval of the final plat.
         ii.   Upon completion of work covered by a performance guarantee, as-
built construction documents and verifications must be supplied to the city.
      8.   Approval of a final plat shall not constitute or effect an
acceptance by the city of any street, recreation area, drainage way, area
reserved for water and sewer line, or other dedication shown on the plat.
      9.   Prior to recording of the final plat, the subdivider must apply for
approval of all public officials, as specified in O.R.S. 92.  Signatures on the
final plat by a majority of the Board of County Commissioners shall constitute
approval of the plat by that Board.
      10.   The subdivider shall submit, in a timely manner, the approved final
plat to the Office of the County Clerk and have it recorded.
      11.   An exact copy of the final plat as approved by the city and
submitted to Linn County shall be submitted to the city.
         a.   The exact copy shall be on good quality, 5 mil mylar.
         b.   The copies shall be identified as an exact copy of the plat by
the engineer or surveyor who caused the plat to be made as follows: "I hereby
certify this to be an exact copy of the original plat."
   B.   Final partition plat.
      1.   Within one year from date of the approval of the tentative plan, the
applicant shall prepare a final plat in conformance with the approved tentative
plan, the provisions of this title and the provisions of O. R. S. Chapter 92.
      2.   A draft copy of the final plat is required for review by the City
Planner and City Engineering Division.
         a.   City staff may make checks in the field to verify that the plat
is sufficiently correct on the ground and they may enter the property for this
purpose.
         b.   If it is determined that there has not been full conformity, the
City Engineer and City Planner shall advise the subdivider of the changes or
additions that must be made and afford the subdivider an opportunity to make
such changes or additions.
         c.   The City Engineer and City Planner shall review the plat in
accordance with Title 16 and the city's approval.
      3.   The person submitting the final plat must concurrently submit a copy
of the plat to the Linn County Surveyor.  The County Surveyor shall examine the
plat for compliance with requirements for accuracy and completeness and shall
collect such fees for this purpose as are provided for by state law.
      4.   If it is determined that full conformity has been made, the City
Engineer and City Planner shall advise the Public Works Director and the City
Manager, or designees. 
      5.   The City Manager and the Public Works Director, or their designees,
may then sign the plat without further action.
      6.    All dedications must be built and warranty guarantees in place.
(Ord. 1202, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 16.20.020  FINAL PLAT REVIEW CRITERIA.
   Approval of a final subdivision plat or partition plat will be granted if
the final plat has met the following criteria:
   A.   The final plat is in substantial conformance with the tentative plan.
   B.   Conditions of approval attached to the tentative plan have been
satisfied.
   C.   All required improvements have been constructed and approved, or
performance guarantees are in place, as required by this title.
(Ord. 1202, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 16.20.030  FINAL PLAT SUBMITTAL.
   A partition or subdivision final plat must include the following
information:
   A.   The date, scale, north arrow, legend, significant natural features and
other features, such as highways and railroad right-of-way.
   B.   Legal description of the tract boundaries.
   C.   Name and address of the owners and surveyor.
   D.   Reference points of existing surveys identified, related to the Plat by
distances and bearings and referenced to a field book or map as follows:
stakes, monuments, or other evidence found on the ground and used to determine
the boundaries of the land division.
   E.   Adjoining corners of adjoining subdivisions or existing surveys.
   F.   City boundary lines when crossing or adjacent to the land division.
   G.   All permanent monuments within the subdivision.
   H.   National Geodetic Survey Control points as recorded in the County
Surveyor's office.
   I.   Description and "ties" to such control points, to which all dimensions,
angles, bearings, and similar data on the plat shall be referred.
   J.   The location and width of streets and easements intercepting the
boundaries of the tract.
   K.   The 100-year flood plain.
   L.   Lines with dimensions, bearings or deflection angles, radii, arcs,
points of curvature and tangent bearings for tract, lot, and boundaries and
street bearings shall be shown to the nearest second with basis of bearings.
All distances shall be shown to the nearest one hundredth of a foot.
   M.   The widths of the following:
      1.   Any portion of streets being dedicated.
      2.   All existing rights-of-way. The width of each side of the center
line. 
      3.   All easements.
   N.   All covenants or restricted areas are identified and noted as required.
   O.   For streets on curvature, curve data shall be based on the street
center line and, in addition to the center line dimensions, the radius, chord
distance, bearing, and central angle shall be indicated.
   P.   Streets held for private use shall be clearly indicated on the final
plat and all reservations, easements, or restrictions relating to such private
streets shall be indicated.
   Q.   Public utility and private easements shall be clearly identified.
      1.    If already on record, their recorded reference information must be
identified. 
      2.   Where possible, the bearing, and sufficient ties to locate the
easement with respect to the land division, shall be shown. 
      3.   If the easement is being dedicated by the plat, it shall be properly
referenced in the owner's certificates of dedication.  The purposes of
easements shall also be identified.
   R.   Lot numbers shall begin with the number "1" and continue consecutively
through the subdivision. 
   S.   No block numbers or letters will be used unless the subdivision is a
continued phase of a previously recorded subdivision of the same name that has
previously used block numbers or letters.
   T.   Identification of land to be dedicated for any purpose, public or
private, as a "Tract" to distinguish it from lots or parcels intended for sale.
The following phrasing shall be used when identifying open space dedications:
      1.   "Common Open Space"  shall be used to identify those parcels of land
created for the purpose of common ownership, enjoyment and maintenance by an
approved homeowners association group or is listed as being held in common
ownership, with appropriate deed restrictions and responsibilities, by owners
of property within the subdivision.
      2.   "Public Open Space" shall be used when identifying those parcels of
land dedicated to the city for open space purposes.
      3.   "Open Space Easement" shall be used to identify that portion of a
lot, or lots that have established an open space easement agreement with the
city.
   U.   Explanations of all common improvements or special standards required
as conditions of approval of the tentative plan of a subdivision or partition
shall be recorded and referenced on the subdivision or partition final plat.
These shall be properly referenced in the owner's certificates of dedication. 
   V.   The following certificates, which may be combined where appropriate,
must be present:
      1.   A certificate signed by the City Manager and Public Works Director,
or their designees, certifying city approval.
      2.   For subdivisions only, an additional certificate signed by the
Planning Commission Chairperson certifying city approval.
      3.   A certificate signed and acknowledged by all parties having record
title interest in the land, consenting to the preparation and recording of the
plat.
      4.   A certificate signed and acknowledged as above, dedicating to the
public all land shown on the final plat intended for public access, use, or
benefit.
      5.   A certificate signed by the surveyor responsible for the survey and
final plat, which shall include the surveyor's Oregon Registered Professional
Land Surveyor seal, and attesting that applicable requirements of city, state
and county have been met, and the certificate must be signed by the Linn County
Surveyor.
      6.   Other certifications as appropriate.
   W.   All signatures on the original subdivision or partition plat must be in
permanent black ink.
   X.   Filing of separate legal documents to achieve any of the above
requirements may be permitted by the City Planner when it can be shown that
placing such information on the final plat is not required to achieve the
purposes of this code. A description or reference to any other restrictions
attached to the subdivision approval shall also be noted on the city copy.
   Y.   Supplementary information.
      1.   A copy of any deed restrictions.
      2.   A copy of any dedication requiring separate documents.
      3.   Legal documents conveying property to the city.
      4.   Financial assurances for all required improvements as required by
Sweet Home Municipal Code
Chapter 16.24.
      5.   Boundary and lot closure computations and total area of each lot,
parcel, and open space dedication, in square feet or acres.
      6.   Current copy of a title report.
   Z.   For subdivisions, all monumentation shall comply with the standards
established in O.R.S. Chapter 92.
      1.   Witness corners may be set when it is impractical or impossible to
set a monument in its true position providing course and distance is given to
the true position. 
      2.   All monuments shall be clearly identified with the surveyor's name
or registration number. 
      3.   The intersection of all street centerline's shall be monumented
according to state specifications.
(Ord. 1202, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 16.20.040  FILING OF FINAL PLAT.
   A.   The subdivider shall submit the final plat for signatures of  all
public officials required by this title and O.R.S. Chapter 92.
   B.   Approval of the final plat shall be null and void if the plat is not
recorded within 60 days after the date of the last required signature has been
obtained.
   C.   Approval of the final plat shall be null and void if the plat is not
recorded within 90 days after the date of signature by the City Manager.
   D.   The final plat must also be submitted to the State of Oregon Water
Resources Department if a water right or permit exists on the subject property.
(Ord. 1202, § 1(part), 2008)
CHAPTER 16.24:  IMPROVEMENTS
Section
   
16.24.010   Agreement for improvements.
   
16.24.020   Developer’s guarantee.
   
16.24.030   Procedures.
   
16.24.040   Specifications.
   
16.24.050   Improvements in land divisions.
§ 16.24.010  AGREEMENT FOR IMPROVEMENTS.
   Before Planning Commission approval is certified on the final plat of a
subdivision, one of the following conditions or a combination thereof must be
met:
   A.   The subdivider shall either install required improvements and/or make
needed repairs.
      1.   Repair of any existing city owned and operated streets, storm
system, or underground utilities damaged in the development of the subdivision
shall be a part of any improvement agreement. 
      2.   The agreement shall provide for a reasonable amount of time for the
repair of streets. 
   B.   The subdivider may enter into an agreement with the city, allowing one
year for the required improvements and repairs to be completed.
      1.   The agreement shall provide that if the work is not completed within
the period specified, the city may complete the work and recover the full cost
and expense thereof from the subdivider. 
      2.   A performance guarantee as provided for in Sweet Home Municipal Code
Chapter 16.24 shall be required.
      3.   The agreement may provide for the construction of the improvements
and/or for an extension of time under specific conditions. For all extension,
cost estimates must be updated, and if necessary, the agreement updated based
on the new cost estimates.
   C.   The subdivider must have all or part of the improvements constructed
under a Local Improvement  District procedure as set forth in Sweet Home
Municipal Code
Chapter 3.16.
(Ord. 1202, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 16.24.020  DEVELOPER'S GUARANTEE.
   A.   When a subdivider chooses to file an agreement and a performance
guarantee in lieu of constructing the required improvements prior to platting
to assure full and faithful performance of the required work, one of the
following shall apply:
      1.   A surety bond shall be obtained in an amount fixed by the Public
Works Director, executed by a surety company authorized to transact business in
the State of Oregon in a form approved by the Finance Director and the City
Attorney.
      2.   At the discretion of the Public Works Director, in lieu of a surety
bond, the subdivider may provide a certification by a bank or other reputable
lending institution that money or a note, in an amount fixed by the Public
Works Director, is being held in the subdivider and city's name, to cover the
cost of the improvements and incidental expenses. The money held by the bank
may to be released only upon authorization of the Public Works Director.
   B.   No surety will be accepted until construction plans are completed and
approved by the city.
   C.   Such assurance of full and faithful performance shall be for a sum
determined by the Public Works Director as sufficient to cover the cost of the
improvements and repairs, including related engineering and incidental
expenses.  This sum shall be 115% of the city's estimate of costs or an actual
construction contract amount, whichever is greater.
   D.   If the subdivider fails to carry out provisions of the agreement and
the city has un-reimbursed costs or expenses resulting from such failure, the
city shall call on the performance guarantee for reimbursement.
      1.   If the amount of the performance guarantee exceeds the cost and
expense incurred, the remainder shall be released. 
      2.   If the amount of the performance guarantee or cash deposit is less
than the cost and expense incurred, the subdivider shall be liable to the city
for the difference.
   E.   After completion of work covered in the performance guarantee, a
warranty guarantee, as determined by the city, must be in place.
   F.   For sidewalk construction deferrals, a performance guarantee in the
amount of 115% of the cost of construction is required.  After completion of
work covered in the performance guarantee, a warranty guarantee, as determined
by the city, must be in place.
(Ord. 1202, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 16.24.030  PROCEDURES.
   In addition to other requirements, improvements installed by a subdivider,
either as a requirement of a condition of approval, this title, or at the
developers option, shall conform to the requirements of this title and all
other improvement standards and specifications adopted by the city.  All
improvements shall be installed in accordance with the following procedure:
   A.   Improvement work shall not be commenced until plans have been reviewed
for adequacy and approved by the city.
   B.   Improvement work shall not commence until all city and state permits
have been issued.
      1.   All work on public infrastructure will require a public works
permit.
      2.   All work on what will remain private property will require a permit
from the building inspection program.
   C.   If work is discontinued for any reason for over 180 days or as
otherwise allowed by city permits, it shall not be resumed until after the city
is notified and any required reinstatement actions are completed.
   D.   Improvements shall be constructed under the inspection and to the
satisfaction of the City Engineer and/or Building Official, depending on the
permit requirements. 
   E.   A map showing public improvements as built shall be filed with the city
upon completion of the improvements.
(Ord. 1202, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 16.24.040  SPECIFICATIONS.
   The City of Sweet Home specifications for improvements include all of the
following:
   A.   Sweet Home Policy and Standards Manual.
   B.   Oregon Specifications for Construction standards.
   C.   International Fire Code standards.
   D.   American Water Works Association standards.
   E.   American Public Works Association standards.
   F.   ODOT standards.
   G.   DEQ standards.
   H.   EPA standards.
   I.   Army Corp of Engineer standards.
(Ord. 1202, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 16.24.050  IMPROVEMENTS IN LAND DIVISIONS.
   The following improvements shall be installed at the expense of the
subdivider:
   A.   Underground utilities, sanitary sewers and storm drains installed in
streets shall be constructed and tested prior to the surfacing of the streets. 
      1.   Stubs for service connections for underground utilities and sanitary
sewers shall be placed to avoid the need to disturb street improvements when
service connections are made.
      2.   Franchise utility services and distribution conduits shall be
constructed underground providing service to each lot.
   B.   Water system.  Fire hydrants and water lines serving each lot in the
land division and connecting the land division to city mains shall be
installed. 
   C.   Sanitary sewer system.  Sanitary sewers serving each lot in the land
division and connecting the land division to city mains shall be installed.
   D.   Storm water and surface drainage facilities.  Grading shall be
performed and drainage facilities shall be provided connecting the area
drainage to drainage ways or storm sewers outside of the subject property.
   E.   Streets.  Public streets, including alleys, within the subject
property, and public streets adjacent but only partially within the subject
property, shall be improved. 
      1.   Improvements shall be made to the paving line of existing streets
which intersect with streets in the land division if adequate travel lanes
exist.  If the travel area does not meet city standards, the improvement will
include adequate travel width to provide two way traffic.
      2.   Catch basins shall be installed and connected to the storm water
system.
      3.   Street center lines, crosswalks, bikeways, and other traffic-control
symbols shall be marked.
      4.   Street lights shall be installed per city standards.
      5.   If parking is on only one side of the street, or if there is a
collector or arterial street involved, signage and striping shall be shown on
the plans.
   F.   Sidewalks, pedestrian and bicycle routes.  Sidewalks, pedestrian, and
bicycle routes shall be constructed to meet city standards.  Sidewalk
construction may be deferred up to one year. If so, a performance guarantee is
required.
   G.   Street name signs.  Traffic-control devices and street name signs,
designed to city specifications, shall be installed at all street intersections
and other locations as required by the city.
(Ord. 1202, § 1(part), 2008)
CHAPTER 16.28:  EXCEPTIONS AND VARIANCES
Section
   
16.28.010   Exceptions in a planned unit development.
   
16.28.020   Variances.
   
16.28.030   Criteria used in granting a variance.
§ 16.28.010  EXCEPTIONS IN A PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.
   The standards of this title may be modified by the decision making authority
in the case of a planned development in compliance with Sweet Home Municipal
Code
Chapter 17.48.  Subdivisions or partitions shall be required to meet the
standards of O.R.S. Chapter 92 and the provisions for final plats and for
improvement as specified by this title.
(Ord. 1202, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 16.28.020  VARIANCES.
   When necessary, the Planning Commission may authorize variances to the
requirements of this title.  The variance for this title will utilize the
process for a variance in Sweet Home Municipal Code
Chapter 17.88.
(Ord. 1202, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 16.28.030  CRITERIA USED IN GRANTING A VARIANCE.
   Before a variance may be granted, the Planning Commission shall determine
that all of the following criteria can be satisfied:
   A.   Special circumstances apply to the property which do not apply
generally to other properties in the same vicinity, including, but not limited
to the following:
      1.   Lot size or shape,
      2.   Topography, or
      3.   Other circumstances over which the owners of property have had no
control.
   B.   The variance is necessary for the preservation of a property right of
the applicant substantially the same as owners for other property in the same
vicinity possess.
   C.   The variance would not be detrimental to the purposes of this title, or
to property in the same vicinity in which the property is located, or otherwise
conflict with the objectives of any city plan or policy.
   D.   The variance requested is the minimum variance which would alleviate
the identified special circumstances.
(Ord. 1202, § 1(part), 2008)
CHAPTER 16.32:  PROPERTY LINE ADJUSTMENTS
Section
   
16.32.010   Procedure.
   
16.32.020   Review criteria.
   
16.32.030   Submittal requirements.
   
16.32.040   Recording requirements.
   
16.32.050   Recording requirements for a property line adjustment replat.
§ 16.32.010  PROCEDURE. 
   A.   Referral.  Upon receipt of a completed application for a property line
adjustment, the City Planner shall furnish one copy of the application for
review by the City Manager and City Engineer.  The City Manager and City
Engineer shall have ten days to review the application materials and provide
comments to the City Planner.
   B.   Property line adjustment - replat.  Within an existing subdivision, a
property line adjustment will be considered as a replat.  Notice will be as per
Sweet Home Municipal Code
Chapter 16.16.
   C.   Approval authority.  The City Planner shall have the authority to take
action on a request for a property line adjustment.
(Ord. 1202, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 16.32.020  REVIEW CRITERIA.
   The City Planner will approve, approve with conditions, or deny the request
for a property line adjustment based on the following criteria:
   A.   The property line adjustment does not create a new lot or a land-locked
parcel.
   B.   The adjusted properties are not reduced below the minimum standards of
the zoning district and do not otherwise violate standards of this title or
Title 17 or any applicable building code.
   C.   The adjusted properties do not encroach into required yard setbacks,
existing buildings or easements.
   D.   The adjusted properties comply with any previous requirements or
conditions imposed on the property in previous land use decisions or permitting
processes.
   E.   A property line adjustment within a subdivision or partition plat will
conform with O.R.S. 92.190.
   F.   Lot line adjustments shall be surveyed and monumented as required by
O.R.S. Chapter 92.
(Ord. 1202, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 16.32.030  SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS.
   An application for a property line adjustment shall be signed by all
property owners involved in the proposed adjustment, and a map showing the
following details shall be submitted:
   A.   The scale, north arrow and date of the map.
   B.   The Linn County Tax Map and Tax Lot number identifying each parcel
involved in the adjustment.
   C.   The location, width and purpose of any existing or proposed easements.
   D.   Existing and proposed driveway accesses to a public right-of-way.
   E.   The current and proposed property lines for each subject property.
   F.   The existing and proposed dimensions of each property and the lot area
of each property.
   G.   All existing structures on the properties.
   H.    Existing and proposed utility services and stub locations, including
the following:
      1.   Water;
      2.   Sanitary sewer;
      3.   Storm and surface water drainage;
      4.   Power;
      5.   Gas;
      6.   Telephone;
      7.   Cable; and
      8.   Other utilities.
   I.   Adjacent public right-of-ways, including the width of each.
   J.   The legal description for each subject property involved in the
adjustment describing their new boundaries.
(Ord. 1202, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 16.32.040  RECORDING REQUIREMENTS.
   Documents must conform with the survey for the subject properties in
accordance with O.R.S. Chapter 92 and shall be recorded with Linn County.  A
property line adjustment deed shall contain the following:
   A.   The names of the parties;
   B.   The description of the adjusted line;
   C.   References to original recorded documents; and
   D.   Signatures of all parties with proper acknowledgment.
(Ord. 1202, § 1(part), 2008)
§ 16.32.050  RECORDING REQUIREMENTS FOR A PROPERTY LINE ADJUSTMENT REPLAT.
   A property line adjustment replat will meet all requirements for a replat as
per O.R.S. 92.190.
(Ord. 1202, § 1(part), 2008)
TITLE 17: ZONING
      Chapter
         
17.04.   TITLE, PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS
         
17.08.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
         
17.12.   ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
         
17.16.   OFFICIAL CITY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
         
17.20.   ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES
         
17.24.   R-1 RESIDENTIAL LOW-DENSITY ZONE
         
17.28.   R-2 RESIDENTIAL HIGH-DENSITY ZONE
         
17.30.   R-3 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL ZONE
         
17.31.   R-4 RESIDENTIAL MIXED USE ZONE
         
17.32.   C-1 COMMERCIAL CENTRAL ZONE
         
17.36.   C-2 COMMERCIAL HIGHWAY ZONE
         
17.40.   C-3 COMMERCIAL NEIGHBORHOOD ZONE
         
17.44.   M INDUSTRIAL ZONE
         
17.48.   PD PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ZONE
         
17.52.   MI MOBILE HOME INFILL OVERLAY ZONE
         
17.60.   RC RECREATION COMMERCIAL ZONE
         
17.68.   R/M(T) RESIDENTIAL INDUSTRIAL TRANSITIONAL
         
17.72.   NR NATURAL RESOURCES
         
17.80.   CONDITIONAL USES
         
17.84.   NONCONFORMING USES
         
17.88.   VARIANCES
         
17.92.   OPEN STORAGE OF PROPERTY IN C-1 AND C-2 ZONES
         
17.96.   SIGNS
         
17.98.   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
         
17.100.   VACATION OF PUBLIC WAYS
         
17.104.   ANNEXATIONS
CHAPTER 17.04:  TITLE, PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS
Section
   
17.04.010   Title.
   
17.04.020   Purpose.
   
17.04.030   Definitions.
§ 17.04.010  TITLE.
   Title 17 of the Municipal Code shall be known as the “Zoning Ordinance” of
the City of Sweet Home.
(Ord. 1153, § 1, 2003)
§ 17.04.020  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Zoning Ordinance is to promote local health, safety,
welfare and economy and to assist in carrying out the general policies of the
Sweet Home Comprehensive Plan. The Zoning Ordinance assists in implementing the
statewide planning goals and guidelines.
(Ord. 1153, § 1, 2003)
§ 17.04.030  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this title, the following words and phrases shall mean:
   ABUT. Adjoining with a common boundary line or contiguous to each other.
   ACCESS. The place, way or means by which pedestrians, bicycles and motor
vehicles enter and leave property.
   ACCESSORY DWELLING. An interior, attached, or detached residential structure
that is used in connection with, or that is accessory to, a single-family
dwelling.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE. A structure or use incidental, appropriate and
subordinate to the main use of a property and located on the same lot as the
main use.
   ADJACENT. Near or close.
   ALLEY. A public way which affords only a secondary means of access to
property.
   ALTER. Any change, addition or modification in the construction of a
building or structure.
   AMUSEMENT OR RECREATION SERVICES. Establishments engaged in providing
entertainment for a fee and including such activities as dance halls; studios;
theatrical productions; bands, orchestras and other musical entertainment;
commercial facilities such as arenas, rings, rinks and racetracks; public golf
courses; coin operated devices; amusement parks; membership sports and health
clubs; swimming pools; and expositions.
   APARTMENT. A dwelling unit in a multiple-family building.
   APPROACH or DRIVEWAY APPROACH.  That portion of land which accesses onto a
public or private street.
   AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD. An area used for the dismantling or disassembling
of motor vehicles, machinery or trailers, or the storage or sale of dismantled,
obsolete or wrecked motor vehicles, machinery or trailers or their parts, or
the storage of motor vehicles unable to be moved under the power of the
vehicle.
   BANKFULL STAGE. The elevation at which water overflows the natural banks of
the stream.
   BASE FLOOD. Inundation during periods of higher than normal stream flow,
high winds or combinations thereof, that has a 1% chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. Also referred to as the 100 YEAR FLOOD.
   BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT. A single-family dwelling or part thereof,
where lodging with meals are provided, for compensation, to transient guests
for less than 15 days at a time. Such an establishment shall be occupied by the
proprietor and contain not more than five guest rooms.
   BIOENGINEERING. A method of erosion control and landscape restoration using
live plants, such as willows.
   BOARDING OR ROOMING HOUSE. A dwelling or part thereof, other than a hotel or
motel, where lodging with or without meals are provided, for compensation, for
three or more persons on a daily basis.
   BUILDING. A structure built or assembled for the support, shelter or
enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind.
   BUILDING COVERAGE. The maximum percent of a lot that may be covered with all
buildings on the lot and based on the ground floor area.
   BUILDING ENVELOPE. The land area, outside of all required setbacks, which is
available for construction of a primary structure on a particular property.
   BUILDING LINE. A line parallel to the front lot line and passing through the
most forward point or plane of a building.
   BUILDING, PRIMARY. A building within which is conducted the principal use
permitted on the lot, as provided in this title.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The Building Official of the City of Sweet Home, Oregon.
   CITY. The City of Sweet Home, Oregon.
   CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Sweet Home, Oregon.
   CITY MANAGER. The City Manager of the City of Sweet Home or designee.
   CLUB. A facility owned or operated for a social, educational or recreational
purpose, to which membership is required for participation and which is neither
operated primarily for profit nor to render a service which is customarily
carried on by a business.
   COMMUNITY CENTER OR BUILDING. A facility owned and operated by a government
agency or a non-profit community organization which is open to any resident of
the city or surrounding area; provided that, the primary purpose of the
facility is for recreation, social welfare, community improvement or public
assembly.
   COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR. The Community Development Director for the
City of Sweet Home, Oregon.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The duly adopted Sweet Home Comprehensive Plan.
   CONDOMINIUM. A type of residential development utilizing zero lot lines,
individual ownerships of units and common ownership of open space and other
facilities, and which are regulated, in part by O.R.S. Chapter 100.
   DAY NURSERY. Any institution, establishment or place, including nursery
schools or private kindergartens, in which are commonly received at one time
three or more children not of common parentage, under the age of six years for
a period or periods not exceeding 12 hours for the purpose of being given
board, care or training apart from their parents or guardians for compensation
or reward.
   DELINEATION. An analysis of a resource by a qualified professional that
determines its boundary according to an approved methodology.
   DENSITY. The number of residential dwelling units per acre of land or the
amount of land area expressed in square feet of land assignable to each
dwelling unit in a residential development, not including areas dedicated for
streets, or public facilities.
   DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY. A building or portion thereof designed for occupancy
by three or more families living independently of each other, with the number
of families in residence not exceeding the number of dwelling units provided.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A detached building or manufactured home designed
for and occupied by not more than one family and containing one dwelling unit,
excluding tents, teepees, travel trailers and other similar uses.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED. Two or more dwelling units with common end
walls.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY (DUPLEX). A detached building designed for and occupied
by not more than two families and containing two dwelling units.
   DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms in a building designed for eating,
sleeping, cooking and sanitation, as required by Building Code, for not more
than one family.
   EXCAVATION. The removal of organic or inorganic material (e.g. soil, sand,
sediment, muck) by human action.
   FAMILY. An individual or two or more persons related by blood, marriage,
legal adoption or legal guardianship living together as one housekeeping unit,
using one kitchen and providing meals or lodging to not more than two
additional persons, excluding servants; or a group of not more than five
unrelated persons living together as one housekeeping unit using one kitchen.
   FENCE.  Any permanent partition, structure, or gate erected as a dividing
marker, barrier, or enclosure, including hedges or living bushes or shrubs,
encircling either wholly or any portion of any area.
   FENCE, SIGHT OBSCURING. A continuous fence, wall, evergreen planting or
combination thereof, constructed and/or planted so as to effectively screen the
particular use from view.
   FILL. The deposition of organic or inorganic material (e.g. soil, sand,
sediment, muck, debris) by human action.
   FLOODPLAIN. The area adjoining a stream, tidal estuary or shoreline that is
subject to inundation by a base flood.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the waters of a base flood.
   FLOODWAY FRINGE. The area of the floodplain lying outside of the floodway.
   FLOOR AREA. The area included within the surrounding exterior walls of a
building or portion thereof, exclusive of vent shafts and courts.
   FRONTAGE.  The linear edge of a property along the property line abutting a
street, or private accessway.
   GRADE - GROUND LEVEL. The average elevation of the finished ground level at
the centers of all walls of a building, except that if a wall is parallel to
and within five feet of a sidewalk, the sidewalk elevation nearest the center
of the wall shall constitute the GROUND LEVEL.
   HARD SURFACE. An area surfaced with asphalt, concrete, paving blocks or an
equivalent substance approved by the City Engineer but shall not include
gravel.
   HEDGE.  A row of bushes or small trees planted close together which may form
a barrier, enclosure or boundary in the front yard or street side yard.
   HEIGHT OF BUILDING. The vertical distance from the grade to the highest
point of coping of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the
average height of the highest gable of a pitch or hip roof.
   HIGH GROUNDWATER. The near surface groundwater which can present a problem
to land development and engineering construction.
   HOME OCCUPATION. A lawful occupation carried on by a resident of a dwelling,
where the occupation is secondary to the main use of the property as a
residence.
   HOTEL. A building in which lodging is provided to guests for compensation
and in which no provisions are made for cooking in the lodging rooms.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. Any material (e.g. rooftops, asphalt, concrete) which
reduces or prevents absorption of water into soil.
   IMPROVED STREET or STREETS IMPROVED. A hard surfaced roadway with curb and
gutter.
   INTERMITTENT RUNOFF. The officially designated natural or manmade, open
drainage channel or course necessary to convey stormwater runoff
   JUNK YARD. An area where any person is engaged in breaking up, dismantling,
sorting, storing, distributing, buying, selling, packing or bailing any scrap,
waste material, junk or used equipment or machinery of any nature.
   LAWN. Any grass or similar materials usually maintained as a ground cover of
less than six inches in height. For purposes of this chapter, LAWN is not
considered native vegetation regardless of the species used.
   LIVESTOCK.  Animals of the bovine species, horses, mules, asses, sheep,
goats and swine.
   LOT.  Unit of land created by a subdivision of land and intended as a unit
for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership and/or
for development.
   LOT AREA.  Total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot abutting on two or more streets, other than an alley, at
their intersection.
   LOT COVERAGE. That percentage of the total lot area covered by structures,
as herein defined.
   LOT DEPTH. The horizontal distance between the front and the rear lot lines.
   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot or parcel of land other than a corner lot.
   LOT LINE.  A recorded boundary of a lot.
   LOT LINE, FRONT.  A lot line, or segment of a lot line, that abuts a street.
On a corner lot, the front lot line is the shortest of the lot lines that abut
a street. If two or more street lot lines are of equal length, then the City
Manager or designee shall choose which lot line is to be the front. However, a
through lot has two front lot lines regardless of whether the street lot lines
are of equal or unequal length.
   LOT LINE, INTERIOR.  The lot line separating two lots.
   LOT LINE, REAR. The lot line that is opposite and most distant from the
front lot line. In the case of irregular, triangular or other shaped lots, a
line ten feet in length within the lot parallel to and at a maximum distance
from the front lot line.
   LOT LINE, SIDE. A lot line that is neither a front or rear lot line.
   LOT LINE, STREET SIDE.  A lot line that is both a side lot line and a street
lot line. On a corner lot, the longer lot line which abuts a street is a side
street lot line.
   LOT, THROUGH. A lot that has frontage on two streets, and where the lot
frontages do not intersect.
   LOT WIDTH. The average horizontal distance between the side lot lines,
ordinarily measured parallel to the front lot line.
   MANUFACTURED DWELLING.
      1.   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure constructed for movement on the
public highways that has sleeping, cooking and plumbing facilities, that is
intended for human occupancy, that is being used for residential purposes and
that was constructed in accordance with federal manufactured housing
construction and safety standards and regulations in effect at the time of
construction.
      2.   MOBILE HOME. A structure constructed for movement on the public
highways that has sleeping, cooking and plumbing facilities that is intended
for human occupancy, that is being used for residential purposes and that was
constructed between January 1, 1962 and June 15, 1976, and met the construction
requirements of Oregon mobile home law in effect at the time of construction.
      3.   RESIDENTIAL TRAILER. A structure constructed for movement on the
public highways that has sleeping, cooking and plumbing facilities, that is
intended for human occupancy, that is being used for residential purposes and
that was constructed before January 1, 1962.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. Any place where four or more manufactured dwellings
are located within 500 feet of one another on a lot under the same ownership,
the primary purpose of which is to rent or lease space or keep space for rent
or lease to any person.
   MARIJUANA FACILITY. Any marijuana related facility operated by a person
registered or licensed by the State of Oregon including a marijuana producer, a
marijuana processor, a marijuana retailer, a marijuana wholesaler, a marijuana
laboratory, a marijuana test facility, a marijuana grow site, a marijuana
processor site and a medical marijuana dispensary.
   MASS MOVEMENT. The slow or rapid, natural or artificially induced movement
of rock, soil or fill downslope in response to gravity. The major geologic
types of mass movement include earthflow, slump, rockslide, rockfall and
mudflow.
   MITIGATION. Compensating for impacts to a significant natural resource or
its buffer including: restoration, creation or enhancement. Some examples of
mitigation actions are construction of new wetlands to replace an existing
wetland that has been filled, replanting trees, removal of nuisance plants and
restoring streamside vegetation where it is disturbed.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. See MANUFACTURED HOME PARK.
   MOTEL. A building or group of building lots in which lodging is provided to
guests for compensation, with lodging units having separate entrances directly
exterior and which may or may not have cooking facilities in the lodging units.
   NATIVE VEGETATION. Plants identified as naturally occurring and historically
found within the City of Sweet Home.
   NATURAL RESOURCE. An area of any locally inventoried wetland, pond, stream,
channel, river, lake or habitat area.
   NATURAL RESOURCE ENHANCEMENT. A modification of a natural resource to
improve its quality.
   NATURAL RESOURCE OVERLAY. A designation given to all significant wetlands
and riparian corridors delineated on the Significant Natural Resources Map.
   NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURE OR LOT. A lawful existing structure or lot at the
time this chapter or any amendment thereto becomes effective which does not
conform to the dimensional or similar standards of the zone in which it is
located.
   NON-CONFORMING USE. A lawful existing use at the time this chapter or any
amendment thereto becomes effective which does not conform to the use
requirements of the zone in which it is located.
   NURSING HOME. Any home, place or institution which operates and maintains
facilities providing convalescent or chronic care, or both, for a period
exceeding 24 hours for two or more ill or infirm patients not related to the
nursing home administrator or owner by blood or marriage.
   OPEN STORAGE. To put aside or accumulate property for use when needed or at
a later date, or for  disposal, in an area that is exposed to the public view
from a public street.
   OWNER. An owner of record of real property as shown on the tax rolls of Linn
County, or a person purchasing a piece of property under contract.
   PARCEL. For the purposes of this title, an area of land defined by specific
boundaries that was created legally at the time it was created.
   PARKING LOT. An area of a lot, except for one and two family dwellings, used
for parking vehicles.
   PARKING SPACE. An off-street enclosed or unenclosed surfaced area of not
less than 20 feet by eight feet in size, exclusive of maneuvering and access
area, permanently reserved for the temporary storage of one automobile, and
connected with a street by a surfaced driveway which affords ingress and egress
for automobiles.
   PERSON. Every natural person, firm, partnership, association, social or
fraternal organization, corporation, trust, estate, receiver, syndicate, branch
of government or any group or combination acting as a unit.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD).  A type of development and the regulatory
process that permits a developer to meet overall community density and land use
goals without being bound by existing zoning requirements.
   PLANNING COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of the City of Sweet Home,
Oregon.
   PONDING. The local accumulation of rainwater on the surface of the ground or
to rising groundwater which actually has surfaced.
   PRIVATE STREET.  A street which is privately owned and maintained.
   PROFESSIONAL OFFICE. An office occupied by medical professionals,
accountants, attorneys, architects, professional engineers or surveyors or
persons engaged in similar occupations.
   QUALIFIED NATURAL RESOURCE PROFESSIONAL. An individual who has proven
expertise and vocational experience in a given natural resource field. A
qualified professional conducting a wetland delineation must have the
delineation approved by the Oregon Division of State Lands.
   RECREATION PARK. Any area for picnicking or overnight camping by the general
public or any segment of the public.
   RECREATIONAL FACILITY. A recreation facility under private ownership and
operated by a profit or nonprofit organization, open to bona fide members, and
providing one or more type of recreation activity.
   RECREATIONAL RETAIL. An establishment engaged in selling goods or
merchandise when associated with a recreational development, marina and docks,
and other similar uses.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicular-type unit primarily designed as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use, which either has its
own motive power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle and includes
travel trailer, camping trailer, truck camper or motor home.
   RESIDENTIAL FACILITY. A facility licensed by or under the authority of the
Department of Human Resources under O.R.S. 443.400 to 443.460 which provides
residential care alone or in conjunction with treatment or training or a
combination thereof for six to 15 individuals who need not be related. Staff
persons required to meet Department of Human Resources licensing requirements
shall not be counted in the number of facility residents and need not be
related to each other or to any resident of the residential facility.
   RESORT. A facility for transient guests where the primary attraction is
generally recreational features or activities.
   REVIEW AUTHORITY. The City of Sweet Home.
   RIPARIAN BOUNDARY. An imaginary line that is a certain distance upland from
the top of the bank and encompasses everything within the area between the
wetland and the upper edge of the riparian area. The City of Sweet Home has
adopted the safe harbor setback methodology for this identification.
   RIPARIAN CORRIDOR. A Goal 5 resource that includes the water areas, fish
habitat, riparian areas and wetlands within the riparian corridor boundary. For
purposes of this chapter, riparian areas are identified on the Significant
Natural Resource Overlay Zone Maps, as adopted in the Comprehensive Plan.
   SERVICE STATION, AUTOMOBILE. A place or station designed and used primarily
for the supplying of motor fuel, oil, lubrication and accessories to motor
vehicles, but excluding major repair and overhauling.
   SETBACK. The minimum allowable horizontal distance from the point or line of
reference, such as a property line, to the nearest vertical wall or other
element of a building or structure.
   SHOPPING CENTER. A retail store or combination of stores, usually including
a grocery store, which provide goods for sale to the general public.
   SHRUBS. For the purpose of the Natural Resource Zone, a woody vegetation
usually greater than three feet, but less than 20 feet tall, including multi-
stemmed shrubs and small trees and saplings.
   SIGN. An identification, description, illustration or device which is
affixed to or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure or
land and which directs attention to a product, place, activity, person,
institution or business. Each display surface of a sign other than two surfaces
parallel and back-to-back on the same structure shall be considered a SIGN.
   SIGN, ADVERTISING. A sign which directs attention to or identifies a
business, product, activity or service which is not necessarily conducted, sold
or offered upon the premises where such sign is located.
   SIGN, BUSINESS. A sign which directs attention to or identifies a business,
product, activity or service which is conducted, sold or offered upon the
premises where such sign is located.
   SIGNIFICANT NATURAL RESOURCE. Significant wetlands and riparian corridors
within the City of Sweet Home’s Urban Growth Boundary and designated on the
Significant Natural Resources Map.
   SIGNIFICANT WETLANDS. A wetlands mapped on the City of Sweet Home Local
Wetlands Inventory which meets the primary criteria of the Oregon Division of
State Lands Administrative Rules for Identifying Significant Wetlands (July,
1996).
   SITE PLAN. A plan prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete
dimensions, all of the uses proposed for a specific parcel of land.
   STATE AND FEDERAL NATURAL RESOURCE AGENCIES. The Oregon Division of State
Lands, Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers,
U.S. Department of Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation Service, U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
   STREAM. A channel such as a river or creek that carries flowing surface
water, including perennial streams and intermittent streams with defined
channels, and excluding human-made irrigation and drainage channels.
   STREAMBANK EROSION. The loss of land by stream action.
   STREET. A public right-of-way for pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change to the supporting members of a structure
including foundations, bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams, girders or
structural change in the roof or in the exterior walls.
   STRUCTURE.  Anything that is built or constructed, an edifice or building of
any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts
joined together in some definite manner.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENTS.
      1.   Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost
of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure either:
         a.   Before the improvement or repair is started; or
         b.   If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before
the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition “substantial
improvement” is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or
not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.
      2.   The term does not, however, include either:
         a.   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with
existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
         b.   Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
   TREES. For the purpose of the Natural Resource Zone, a woody plant five
inches or greater in diameter at breast height and 20 feet or taller.
   TOP OF BANK. A distinct break in slope between the stream bottom and the
surrounding terrain, which corresponds with the bankfull stage, which is the
two-year high water mark, of the stream.
   TRAILER HOUSE. A vehicle or similar portable device originally designed or
presently constructed to permit temporary or permanent human occupancy for
living and sleeping purposes, and including mobile homes and recreation
vehicles having permanent kitchen and bath facilities.
   TRAVEL TRAILER. A portable vehicular unit mounted on wheels designed to be
drawn by a motorized vehicle and designed and constructed primarily for
temporary human occupancy for travel, recreational and vacation uses.
   USE. The purpose for which land or a structure is designed, arranged or
intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this title, which
permits activity in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this title.
   WALL.  A structure of brick, stone, etc., that surrounds an area or
separates one area from another.
   WETLAND BOUNDARY. The edges of a wetland as delineated by a qualified
professional.
   WETLANDS. Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground
water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life
in saturated soil conditions. For purposes of this title, RIPARIAN AREAS are
identified on the Significant Natural Resource Overlay Zone Maps, as adopted in
the Comprehensive Plan.
   YARD.  Open space on a lot or parcel of land, unoccupied and unobstructed
from the ground upward, except for encroachments provided for in this title.
   YARD, CORNER LOT. The front yard is adjacent to the shortest lot line along
a street. The rear yard is opposite the front yard. The street side yard is
adjacent to the longest lot line along a street. The side yard is opposite the
street side yard.
   YARD, FRONT. A yard between side lot lines and measured horizontally at
right angles to the front lot line from the front lot line to the nearest point
of a building. Any yard meeting this definition and abutting on a street other
than an alley shall be considered a FRONT YARD.
   YARD, FRONT - INSET. A yard on a flag lot, or similarly configured lot,
paralleling the street and at the rear of another lot.
   YARD, REAR. A yard between side lot lines and measured horizontally at right
angles to the rear lot line from the rear lot line to the nearest point of a
main building.
   YARD, SIDE. A yard between the front and rear yard measured horizontally at
right angles from the side lot line to the nearest point of a main building.
   YARD, STREET SIDE. A yard adjacent to a street between the front yard and
rear lot line measured horizontally at right angles from the side lot line to
the nearest point of a building.
   ZERO LOT LINE SUBDIVISION OR PARTITION. A type of residential subdivision or
partition utilizing zero lot lines between dwelling units and providing for
individual ownership of each lot.
(Ord. 1270, 2018; Ord. 1255, § 1, 2017; Ord. 1246, § 2, 2015; Ord. 1235, § 1
(part), 2013; Ord. 1153, § 1, 2003)
CHAPTER 17.08:  GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
17.08.010   Compliance with title provisions.
   
17.08.020   Interpretation.
   
17.08.030   General provisions regarding accessory uses.
   
17.08.033   Fences, hedges, and walls.
   
17.08.035   Burial of human remains on private property.
   
17.08.040   Clear-vision areas.
   
17.08.050   Exceptions to lot size requirements.
   
17.08.060   Exceptions to yard requirements.
   
17.08.070    Exception to building height limitations.
   
17.08.080   Projections from buildings.
   
17.08.090   Off-street parking requirements.
   
17.08.100   Accesses and driveways.
Prior ordinance history:
   Ord. 644, §§ 2.010, 2.020, 6.010—6.110, 6.200; Ord. 687, §§ 8, 9; Ord. 1026,
§ 4; Ord. 1032, § 1; Ord. 1061, §§ 22—27; and Ord. 1069, §§ 6—9.
§ 17.08.010  COMPLIANCE WITH TITLE PROVISIONS.
   A.   A lot may be used and a structure or part of a structure may be
constructed, altered, occupied or used only as this title permits.
   B.   No lot area, yard, off-street parking area or other open space existing
on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title shall be
reduced below the minimum required for it by this title.
   C.   Every lot shall abut a street, other than an alley, for a width of at
least 25 feet.
(Ord. 1101, § 1(part), 1997)
§ 17.08.020  INTERPRETATION.
   Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this title are less
restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provisions of this
title or any other ordinance, the provisions which are more restrictive shall
govern.
(Ord. 1101, § 1(part), 1997)
§ 17.08.030  GENERAL PROVISIONS REGARDING ACCESSORY USES.
   An accessory use shall comply with all requirements for a principal use,
except where specifically modified by this section. Accessory uses shall not be
used for human habitation except as specified elsewhere in this title.
Accessory uses shall comply with the following limitations:
   A.   [Reserved]
   B.   No sales shall be made from a greenhouse or hothouse maintained
accessory to a dwelling in a residential zone unless it has been approved as a
home occupation under the home occupation provisions of this title.
   C.   A guest house may be maintained accessory to a dwelling; provided,
there are no cooking facilities in the guest house.
   D.   An accessory structure shall be detached from all other buildings by at
least six feet. Accessory structures shall have a maximum floor area of 864
square feet.
   E.   An accessory structure shall meet minimum setbacks, except that a
garage shall be located a minimum of 20 feet from the front and street side
property lines in a residential zone and must be included in the lot coverage
allowed.
   F.   Accessory structures shall be maintained in a condition of reasonable
repair and shall not be allowed to become or remain in condition of disrepair
or neglect, including noticeable leaning and missing sections.
   G.   Boats, trailers, pickup campers, motorized dwellings and similar
recreation equipment may be stored, but not used for human habitation, on a lot
as an accessory use to a dwelling; provided that:
      1.   Parking or storage in a front or street side yard shall be permitted
only on a driveway located at least three feet from any property line; and
      2.   If the equipment is not kept on a front or street side driveway,
parking or storage shall be at least three feet from an interior side or rear
lot line or in an enclosed garage or accessory structure.
   H.   Accessory structures used for agricultural purposes shall be built no
closer than 25 feet from the side or rear lot line.
   I.   Mobile/manufactured homes, recreational vehicles, box cars or other
equipment commonly used for transporting goods may not be used as an accessory
structure.
   J.   Recycling provisions for multi-family dwellings with five or more
units.  New multi-family dwelling units with five or more units must provide
the following:
      1.   A separate location for recycling containers, which is convenient
for collections;
      2.   Adequate containers for at least four principal recyclable
materials; and
      3.   At least every other week (EOW) collection service of the recyclable
materials.
(Ord. 1246, § 3, 2015; Ord. 1212, § 1, 2009; Ord. 1211, § 1, 2009; Ord. 1121, §
2, 1998; Ord. 1101, § 1(part), 1997)
§ 17.08.033  FENCES, HEDGES, AND WALLS.
   A.   Purpose. Fences can create a sense of privacy, protect children and
pets, provide separation from busy streets, and enhance the appearance of
property. The negative effects of fences can include the creation of street
walls that inhibit police and community surveillance, decrease the sense of
community, hinder emergency access, lessen solar access, hinder the safe
movement of pedestrians and vehicles, and create an unattractive appearance.
These standards are intended to promote the positive aspects of fences and to
limit the negative ones.
   B.   Front Yard Definition. For purposes of this section, "front yard" means
a yard extending across the full width of a lot or parcel of land and extending
from the front lot line to the entire actual front building line or shall be
the same as the respective front setbacks required by underlying zone,
whichever is less. The following standards shall apply to all fences, hedges,
and walls.
   C.   General Standards. Construction of fences and walls shall conform to
all of the following requirements:
      1.   Clear vision areas. All fences, hedges, and walls adjacent to a
roadway intersection shall comply with the requirements of §
17.08.040 (Clear-Vision Areas).
      2.   Land use approval. The Planning Commission may require installation
of walls and/or fences as a condition of development in a land use approval.
When so conditioned by a land use action, no further land use review is
required for the fence or wall.
      3.   Measuring Fence Height. Fence height shall be measured from the
average height of the grade adjacent to where the fence is to be located. If a
fence is to be constructed on top of a berm, the height shall be measured from
the bottom of the berm. Where the natural grade changes (i.e., hillside or
swale) the fence, hedge, and wall height shall change with the grade.
      4.   Temporary Fences. A temporary fence may be constructed with wire,
rolled plastic, wood or other suitable material as determined by the City
Manager or designee. The City Manager or designee shall establish the time
duration for a temporary fence not to exceed 12 months. All temporary fences,
prior to installation, must first have the approval of the City Manager or
designee.
      5.   Hedges. Hedges located within five feet of a property line abutting
a street shall not exceed a maximum height of three and one-half feet.
      6.   Gates. Gates shall not open or swing into public right-of-way.
   D.   Materials. Fences and walls shall comply with the materials standards
set forth in this subsection.
      1.   Fences. Fences shall be constructed of materials specifically
designed and manufactured for fencing purposes, including, but not limited to,
wood, wrought iron, vinyl, aluminum, and chain link (with a top rail support).
Materials not specifically designed as fencing material, include, but not
limited to, corrugated cardboard, corrugated metal, plywood, wooden pallets,
concrete rubble, and junked material, are prohibited.
      2.   Walls. Walls shall be constructed of materials specifically designed
and manufactured for use as walls, including, but not limited to, masonry,
rock, concrete, concrete block, or other similar materials.
      3.   Hazardous Materials. Fences and walls shall not be constructed of or
contain any material that will do bodily harm, such as electric or barbed wire,
broken glass, spikes, or any other hazardous or dangerous materials, except as
follows:
         a.   Barbed wire is permitted on top of a six-foot tall fence in the
industrial (M) zone. The total height of the fence and barbed wire is limited
to seven feet. Barbed-wire-only fences are prohibited except as allowed in
subsection 1) below.
            1)  Livestock Containment. Where cattle, sheep, horses or other
livestock are permitted or existed when the property was annexed to the city,
barbed wire is permitted when used to contain or restrict livestock provided
that the fences are posted at 15-foot intervals with clearly visible warnings
of the hazard.
         b.   Above ground electrically charged fences are only permitted when
used to pasture or control livestock, for farming or other similar agricultural
uses in zones where such uses are permitted and when the following standards
can be met:
            1)   On boundary fences, the electrically charged wires shall be
located on the inside face of the fence posts;
            2)   The electrically charged fence shall not exceed four feet in
height;
            3)   The electrically charged fence shall be a pulsed charge
system, and not a continuous charge system; and
            4)   Warning signs stating, “Warning, Electric Fence” shall be
posted at intervals not less than 15 feet.
   E.   Location and Height. Fences and walls shall comply with the location
and height standards set forth in this subsection.
      1.   Residential Zoning Districts (R-l, R-2, R-3, R-4, & RMT). The
maximum height of a fence and wall within residential zoning districts shall be
as follows and as illustrated by Figure 17.08.033 A (Fence Height Limits in the
Residential Zoning Districts).
         a.   Fences and Walls
            1)   Front Yard Abutting Street. Fences and walls within a front
yard abutting a street shall not exceed a maximum height of three and one-half
feet when constructed with solid materials (i.e. wood fence) or four feet when
constructed with open material (i.e. chain-link fence).
            2)   Side and Rear Yards Abutting Street.
               a)   Fences and walls located less than three feet from a street
property line shall not exceed a maximum height of three and one-half feet when
constructed with solid materials (i.e. cedar fence) or four feet when
constructed with open material (i.e. chain-link fence).
               b)   Fence and walls located more than three feet from the
street property line shall not exceed a maximum height of seven feet.
            3)   Interior Side and Rear Yards. Fences and walls located at a
property line not abutting a street shall not exceed a maximum height of seven
feet.
            4)   Through lots. Fences and walls shall be constructed in
accordance with the front setbacks required by underlying zone on both streets.
            5)   Flag lots. On flag lots, the maximum height of a front yard
fence or wall shall not exceed seven feet, provided the front yard of the flag
lot is abutting interior side or rear yards on all sides.
               a)   Fences and walls located in the portion of the pole that
abut a front or corner side yard (i.e. from the street property line to the
front building line of the adjacent property, or respective front setbacks
required by underlying zone, whichever is less) shall not exceed a maximum
height of three and one half feet when constructed with solid materials (i.e.
cedar fence) or four feet when constructed with open material (i.e. chain-link
fence).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ece2086d558ecf7c0453b274e996c1b00421ab0e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2211.jpg]
 
      2.   Nonresidential zoning districts. The maximum height of a fence and
wall within the commercial (C-l, C-2, C-3, & RC) and industrial zoning
districts (M), shall be as follows.
         a.   Fences and Walls
            1)   Yards Abutting Street
               a)   Fences and walls located less than five feet from a street
property line shall not exceed a maximum height of three and one-half feet when
constructed with solid materials (i.e. cedar fence) or four feet in when
constructed with open material (i.e. chain-link fence).
               b)   Fences and walls located more than five feet from the
street property line shall not exceed a maximum height of seven feet.
            2)   Interior Side and Rear Yards. Fences and walls located at a
property line not abutting a street shall not exceed a maximum height of seven
feet.
(Ord. 1246, § 4, 2015)
§ 17.08.035  BURIAL OF HUMAN REMAINS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   The use of private property for the burial of human remains and family
burial grounds is prohibited within the City of Sweet Home.
(Ord. 1229, § 2, 2012)
§ 17.08.040  CLEAR-VISION AREAS.
   A.   Purpose. Clear vision areas are established to ensure that obstructions
do not infringe on the sight lines needed by motorists, pedestrians,
bicyclists, and other approaching potential conflict points at intersections.
   B.   Applicability. In all zones, clear vision areas as described below and
illustrated in Figure 17.08.033 A and Figure 17.08.040 B (Clear Vision Areas at
Intersections) shall be established at the intersection of two streets, an
alley and a street, a driveway and a street or a street and a railroad right-
of-way in order to provide adequate vision of conflicting traffic movements as
well as street signs. These standards are applicable to public and private
streets, alleys, mid-block lanes, and driveways.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ece2086d558ecf7c0453b274e996c1b00421ab0e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2213.jpg]
 
   C.   Standards. The clear vision areas extend across the corner of the
private property from one street to another. The two legs of the clear vision
triangle defining the private property portion of the triangle are each
measured 20 feet back from the point of intersection of the two corner lot
lines, special setback line or access easement line (where lot lines have
rounded corners, the lot lines are extended in a straight line to a point of
intersection). Additional clear vision area may be required at intersections,
particularly those intersections with acute angles, as directed by the City
Manager or designee, upon finding that additional sight distance is required
(i.e. due to roadway alignment, etc.).
There shall be no solid fence, wall, vehicular parking, landscaping, building,
structure, or any other obstruction to vision other than a street sign pole
(e.g. power, signal, or luminaire pole) or tree trunk (clear of branches or
foliage) within the clear vision area between the height of two feet and eight
feet above the grade, measured from the top of the curb or, where no curb
exists, from the established street centerline grade, except as follows.
   D.   Exceptions.
      1.   In all zones, at the intersection of an alley and a street or a
driveway and a street, the minimum length of the two legs of the clear vision
triangle defining the private property portion shall be ten feet.
      2.   In all commercial zones, except the C-l zone, at the intersection of
an alley and a street or a driveway and a street the minimum length of each of
the two legs shall be 15 feet.
      3.   In the C-l zone, the clear vision area does not apply.
      4.   Open chain link fences which permit visibility shall be allowed in a
clear vision area, but shall not exceed four feet in height.
(Ord. 1246, § 4, 2015; Ord. 1101, § 1(part), 1997)
§ 17.08.050  EXCEPTIONS TO LOT SIZE REQUIREMENTS.
   This section shall apply in the event that a lot or the aggregate of
contiguous lots held in a single ownership as recorded in the office of the
Recorder of the county and located in the city as of January 1, 1971, or the
date of annexation of the property to the city, whichever is later, has an area
or dimension which does not meet the lot size requirements of the zone in which
the property is located. In this case, the holdings may be by a use permitted
in the zone subject to the other requirements of the zone. If there is an area
deficiency, residential use shall be limited to a single-family dwelling, or to
the number of dwelling units consistent with the lot area per dwelling unit
requirement of the zone.
(Ord. 1101, § 1(part), 1997)
§ 17.08.060  EXCEPTIONS TO YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   The following exceptions to the yard requirements are authorized for a lot
in any zone.
   A.   If there are buildings on both abutting lots which are within 100 feet
of the intervening lot, and the buildings have front yards of less than the
required depth for the zone, the depth of the front yard for the intervening
lot need not exceed the average depth of the front yard of the abutting lots.
   B.   If there is a building on one abutting lot which is within 100 feet of
the lot, and this building has a front yard of less than the required depth for
the zone, the front yard for the lot need not exceed a depth one-half way
between the depth of the front yard of the abutting lot and the required front
yard depth.
   C.   Garage and carport setbacks shall not be reduced below 20 feet.
(Ord. 1101, § 1(part), 1997)
§ 17.08.070  EXCEPTION TO BUILDING HEIGHT LIMITATIONS.
   Vertical projections such as chimneys, spires and flag poles, are not
subject to the building height limitations of this title. Amateur radio, AM
radio, police and fire antennas are not subject to the building height
limitation of this title when approved by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 1160, § 2, 2003; Ord. 1101 §1(part), 1997)
§ 17.08.080  PROJECTIONS FROM BUILDINGS.
   Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, canopies, sun shades,
gutters, chimneys and flues shall not project more than 30 inches into a
required yard.
(Ord. 1101, § 1(part), 1997)
§ 17.08.090  OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   For each new structure or use, each structure or use increased in area and
each change in the use of an existing structure there shall be provided and
maintained off-street parking areas in conformance with the provisions of this
section.
   A.   Parking lots:
      1.   Design and improvement requirements.
         a.   All parking lots and driveway approaches shall be hard surfaced
and permanently marked.
         b.   All parking lots shall be designed or graded so as not to drain
storm water over the sidewalk or onto any abutting public or private property.
         c.   Parking lots shall be designed so that no backing movements or
other maneuvering within a street other than an alley shall be required.
         d.   Parking spaces along the outer boundaries of a parking lot shall
be contained by a curb or bumper placed to prevent a motor vehicle from
extending over adjacent property or a street right-of-way.
         e.   All parking lots must be designed in accordance with city
standards for stalls and aisles as set forth in the following table:
 
Parking Angle (Degree) Stall Width Stall to Curb Aisle Width Curb Length
0                      8'0"        8.0           12.0        22.0
45                     9'6"        20.1          13.0        13.4
60                     9'6"        21.2          18.0        11.0
90                     9'6"        19.0          24.0        9.5
 
         f.   For two-way circulation, the minimum aisle width shall be 20
feet. Adequate ingress, egress and turnaround space shall be provided.
         g.   No portion of a parking lot shall be located in a required
landscaped yard.
         h.   Service drives to parking lots shall be designed and constructed
to facilitate the flow of traffic, provide maximum safety of traffic ingress
and egress and maximum safety of pedestrian and vehicular traffic in the site.
The number of service drives shall be limited to the minimum that will allow
the property to accommodate and service the anticipated traffic.
         i.   Where a parking lot or loading area abuts a public right-of-way,
there shall be provided a minimum five-foot wide landscaped buffer located on
the lot.
      2.   Location standards.
         a.   Parking lots for dwellings shall be located on the same lot as
the dwellings.
         b.   Parking lots for all other uses shall be located not further than
500 feet from the building or use they are required to serve.
         c.   In residential zones, parking lots shall not be located in a
required front or street side yard.
         d.   Parking lots with access to arterial or collector streets shall
be designed as to connect with existing or future parking lots on adjacent
sites thereby eliminating the necessity of utilizing the arterial or collector
street for cross movements.
   B.   Required off-street parking spaces shall be available for the parking
of operable motor vehicles of residents, customers, patrons and employees only,
and shall not be used for storage of vehicles or materials or for the parking
of trucks used in conducting the business or use.
   C.   The provision and maintenance of off-street parking spaces are
continuing obligations of the property owner. No building, zoning or other
permit shall be issued until plans are presented that show parking space. The
subsequent use of property for which the permit is issued shall be conditional
upon the unqualified continuance and availability of the amount of parking
space required by this title.
   D.   Should the owner or occupant of a lot or building change the use to
which the lot or building is put, thereby increasing off-street parking
requirements, it is unlawful and a violation of this title to begin or maintain
such altered use until the required increase in off-street parking is provided.
   E.   In the event several uses occupy a single structure or parcel of land,
the total requirements for off-street parking shall be the sum of the
requirements of the several uses computed separately.
   F.   Owners of two or more uses, structures or parcels of land may agree to
use the same parking spaces jointly when the shared parking meets the required
number of spaces for the combined uses. A joint use agreement pertaining to the
cooperative use of the parking spaces must be submitted to the City Manager for
approval.
   G.   A plan, drawn to scale, indicating how the off-street parking
requirements are to be fulfilled, shall accompany a request for a building
permit.
   H.   Space requirements for off-street parking shall be as listed in this
section. Fractional space requirements shall be counted as a whole space. When
square feet are specified, the area measured shall be the gross floor area of
the building, but shall exclude any space within a building used for off-street
parking or loading.
 
Use Space Requirement
1.    Single-, two- and multi-family dwelling                                  Two spaces per
                                                                                  dwelling unit
                                                                                  One space per
2.   Accessory dwelling                                                        accessory
                                                                                  dwelling unit
3.    Mobile home park                                                         Two spaces per
                                                                                  dwelling unit
                                                                                  Three spaces
4.    Hotel or motel                                                           per two guest
                                                                                  accommodations
                                                                                  One space per
5.    Welfare or correctional institution, convalescent hospital, nursing home,two beds for
retirement home, home for the aged                                                residents,
                                                                                  patients or
                                                                                  inmates
6.    Hospital                                                                 Three spaces
                                                                                  per two beds
                                                                                  One space per
                                                                                  four seats or
                                                                                  eight feet of
                                                                                  bench length
                                                                                  in the main
7.    Place of public assembly including church, auditorium, gymnasium, communiauditorium, or
center, theater, club, lodge hall or fraternal organization                       if seating is
                                                                                  not fixed to
                                                                                  the floor, one
                                                                                  space per 60
                                                                                  square feet of
                                                                                  floor area
                                                                                  One space per
8.    Library, museum, art gallery                                             300 square
                                                                                  feet of floor
                                                                                  area
9.    Preschool nursery, day nursery, kindergarten                             Two spaces per
                                                                                  teacher
                                                                                  Two spaces per
                                                                                  classroom and
                                                                                  special
                                                                                  instruction
                                                                                  area, or the
10.    Elementary, junior high school                                          requirement
                                                                                  for a place of
                                                                                  public
                                                                                  assembly,
                                                                                  whichever is
                                                                                  the greater
                                                                                  Eight spaces
                                                                                  per classroom
                                                                                  and special
                                                                                  instruction
                                                                                  area or the
11.    Senior high school                                                      requirement
                                                                                  for a place of
                                                                                  public
                                                                                  assembly,
                                                                                  whichever is
                                                                                  greater
12.    Bowling alley                                                           Six spaces per
                                                                                  alley
                                                                                  One space per
13.    Dance hall, skating rink, pool hall or similar indoor commercial amuseme100 square
enterprise                                                                        feet of floor
                                                                                  area
                                                                                  One space per
14.    Retail store, except as provided in subsection 14. of this section      200 square
                                                                                  feet of floor
                                                                                  area
                                                                                  One space per
15.    Retail store exclusively handling bulky merchandise such as automobiles 600 square
and furniture                                                                     feet of floor
                                                                                  area
                                                                                  One space per
16.    Service or repair establishment                                         600 square
                                                                                  feet of floor
                                                                                  area
                                                                                  One space per
17.    Bank or office (except medical or dental)                               300 square
                                                                                  feet of floor
                                                                                  area
                                                                                  One space per
18.    Medical or dental office, clinic                                        250 square
                                                                                  feet of floor
                                                                                  area
                                                                                  One space per
19.    Eating or drinking establishment                                        100 square
                                                                                  feet of floor
                                                                                  area
                                                                                  One space per
                                                                                  four seats or
20.    Mortuary                                                                eight feet of
                                                                                  bench length
                                                                                  in chapels
                                                                                  One space per
                                                                                  two employees
21.    Manufacturing, fabricating, processing, assembling, packing, storage or working on the
wholesaling establishment; freight depot; truck terminal                          premises
                                                                                  during the
                                                                                  largest shift
                                                                                  at peak season
                                                                                  Any use not
                                                                                  specifically
                                                                                  listed in this
                                                                                  section shall
                                                                                  have a parking
                                                                                  requirement
                                                                                  determined by
                                                                                  the City
                                                                                  Manager, based
                                                                                  on the parking
                                                                                  space
                                                                                  requirement
22.    Unspecified uses                                                        for comparable
                                                                                  uses listed in
                                                                                  this section.
                                                                                  The decision
                                                                                  of the City
                                                                                  Manager may be
                                                                                  appealed to
                                                                                  the Planning
                                                                                  Commission,
                                                                                  using
                                                                                  procedures as
                                                                                  spelled out in
                                                                                  this title
 
   I.   All areas located within the C-1 zone are exempt from the off-street
parking requirements of this section, but where parking is provided, it shall
meet all other requirements of this section.
(Ord. 1270, 2018; Ord. 1101, § 1(part), 1997)
§ 17.08.100  ACCESSES AND DRIVEWAYS.
   Accessways onto a public right-of-way shall be subject to issuance of a
public works permit and review by the city planner. In addition, the following
specific requirements shall apply to all accessways, approaches, curbcuts and
driveways.
   A.   Approaches. Additions to, or new construction of, a garage or accessory
structure, or an addition to the main structure in excess of 120 square feet,
shall provide the basis for requiring the following.
      1.   An access approach to a city street, state highway, alley or other
public right-of-way shall be hard surfaced and constructed in accordance with
city design standards.
      2.   An access approach shall extend 20 feet onto the property, measured
from the right-of-way or property line, whichever is closest to a structure on
the property.
      3.   In addition to the above, if the street is hard surfaced the
approach will extend to the existing hard surface roadway edge or curb
whichever applies.
      4.   An access approach to streets which are not yet improved or hard
surfaced, requires that the property owner enter into an agreement with the
city, prior to issuance of a public works permit, to hard surface the approach
when the street is hard surfaced or improved.
   B.   Construction specifications. A driveway and sidewalk used as a part of
an accessway shall be designed and constructed in accordance with plans and
specifications on file in the office of the City Engineer. The designs, plans
and specifications are by reference incorporated into and made a part of this
code.
   C.   Driveway width and placement.
      1.   If only one driveway is desired, the maximum width of the driveway
at the edge of the roadway or curbline is as follows:
         a.   Twenty feet for property with less than 50 feet of frontage;
         b.   Twenty-five feet for property with between 50 and 75 feet of
frontage; and
         c.   Thirty feet for property with more than 75 feet of frontage.
      2.   If more than one driveway is desired for property with 50 to 100
feet of frontage, the maximum width for each driveway is 20 feet and no more
than two driveways may be permitted.
      3.   There shall be a minimum separation of 22 feet between all driveways
except for single-family and two-family dwellings.
      4.   For frontage in excess of 100 feet, each additional 100 feet or
fraction thereof shall be considered as separate frontage.
      5.   One-way driveway approaches, except for those used in conjunction
with a single-family dwelling, shall be clearly marked or signed as approved by
the City Engineer and shall not be less than ten feet in width. Two-way
driveways shall not be less than 20 feet in width.
      6.   Joint use driveways.
         a.   Joint use driveways are permitted.
         b.   A joint use driveway shall comply with International Fire Code.
         c.   A joint use driveway that serves four or more lots or parcels
shall be developed to the standards of a local street.
         d.   Where the city approves a joint use driveway, the property owners
shall record an easement with the deed allowing joint use of and cross access
between adjacent properties. The owners of the properties agreeing to joint use
of the driveway shall record a joint maintenance agreement with the deed,
defining maintenance responsibilities of property owners. The applicant shall
provide a fully executed copy of the agreement to the city for its records, but
the city is not responsible for maintaining the driveway or resolving any
dispute between property owners.
   D.   Distance from intersection.
      1.   All driveways shall be located the maximum distance which is
practical from a street intersection and in no instance shall the distance from
an intersection be closer than the following measured from the nearest curb
return radius, which is the nearest beginning point of the arc of a curb:
 
Local street     20 feet
Collector street 30 feet
Arterial street  40 feet
 
      2.   Where streets of different functional classification intersect, the
distance required shall be that of the higher classification.
   E.   Number of accesses permitted. Access points to a public street shall be
the minimum necessary to provide reasonable access while not inhibiting the
safe circulation and carrying capacity of the street.
   F.   Double frontage properties. Properties which have frontage on more than
one street may be restricted to access on the streets of a lower classification
through site plan review or other review procedures.
   G.   Joint access encouraged. Common accessways at a property line shall be
encouraged and, in some instances, may be required, in order to reduce the
number of access points to street. Construction of common accessways shall be
preceded by recording of joint access and maintenance easements.
   H.   Maximum slope. Access and approach grades shall not exceed 10% slope
except as otherwise approved by the City Engineer.
   I.   Access to state highways. Access to designated state highways shall be
subject to the provisions of this chapter in addition to requirements of the
Highway Division, Oregon Department of Transportation. Where regulations of the
city and state may conflict, the more restrictive requirement shall apply.
(Ord. 1277, § 1, 2019; Ord. 1101, § 1(part), 1997; Ord. 1067, § 3, 1994)
CHAPTER 17.12:  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section
   
17.12.010   Authorization to initiate amendments.
   
17.12.020   Public hearings on amendments.
   
17.12.025   Review criteria for map amendments.
   
17.12.030   Record of amendments.
   
17.12.040   Limitation.
   
17.12.050   Administration.
   
17.12.060   Fence permits.
   
17.12.070   [Reserved].
   
17.12.080   Authorization of similar uses.
   
17.12.085   Notice of land use decisions.
   
17.12.087   Call by the City Manager
   
17.12.090   Appeals.
   
17.12.100   Form of petitions, applications and appeals.
   
17.12.110   Filing fees.
   
17.12.120   Notice of public hearing.
   
17.12.130   Public hearing procedure.
   
17.12.140   General administrative provisions.
   
17.12.150   Enforcement.
§ 17.12.010  AUTHORIZATION TO INITIATE AMENDMENTS.
   An amendment to the text of the ordinance codified in this title or a
legislative zoning map amendment may be initiated by the City Manager, the City
Planning Commission, the City Council or a property owner. A quasijudicial
zoning map amendment may be initiated by a property owner, a representative of
the property owner, the City Manager, the Planning Commission or the City
Council. A request for a quasijudicial zone map amendment by a property owner
shall be accomplished by filing an application with the City Planner at least
45 days prior to the Planning Commission meeting and using forms prescribed
pursuant to §
17.12.100.
(Ord. 1111, § 1(part), 1997: Ord. 1061, § 29, 1993: Ord. 644, § 9.010, 1974)
§ 17.12.020  PUBLIC HEARINGS ON AMENDMENTS.
   A.   The Planning Commission may elect to conduct a public hearing on a
proposed amendment.
   B.   The Planning Commission shall recommend to the City Council approval,
disapproval or modification of the proposed amendment.
   C.   After receiving the recommendation of the Planning Commission, the City
Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment.
   D.   All public hearing procedures shall be in accordance with §§
17.12.120 and
17.12.130.
   E.   Within seven days after a decision has been rendered with reference to
an amendment, the City Manager shall provide the applicant with written notice
of the decision. Notice of the decision shall be mailed to the applicant,
property owner, those who provided written comments on the proposal, and those
who requested a copy of the decision. Written notice of a decision shall apply
to recommendations made by the Planning Commission and to final action made by
the City Council.
(Ord. 1277, § 1, 2019; Ord. 1111, § 1(part), 1997: Ord. 905, § 27, 1983; Ord.
644, § 9.020, 1974)
§ 17.12.025  REVIEW CRITERIA FOR MAP AMENDMENTS.
   An amendment to the official zoning or comprehensive plan map may be
authorized provided that the proposal satisfied all relevant requirements of
this title and also provided that the applicant demonstrates the following:
   A.   The proposed amendment is consistent with the goals and policies of the
comprehensive plan;
   B.   The proposed amendment is orderly and timely, considering the pattern
of development in the area, surrounding land uses, and any changes which may
have occurred in the neighborhood or community to warrant the proposed
amendment;
   C.   Utilities and services can be efficiently provided to serve the
proposed uses or other potential uses in the proposed zoning district; and
   D.   The proposed amendment to the comprehensive plan map is consistent with
Oregon’s statewide planning goals.
(Ord. 1111, § 1(part), 1997: Ord. 1061, § 30, 1993)
§ 17.12.030  RECORD OF AMENDMENTS.
   The City Recorder shall maintain records of amendments to the text and
zoning map of the ordinance codified in this title.
(Ord. 1111, § 1(part), 1997: Ord. 644, § 9.030, 1974)
§ 17.12.040  LIMITATION.
   No application of a property owner for an amendment to the text of this
title or to the zoning map shall be considered by the Planning Commission
within the one-year period immediately following a previous denial of the
request; except the Planning Commission may permit a new application if, in the
opinion of the Planning Commission, new evidence or a change of circumstances
warrant it.
(Ord. 1111, § 1(part), 1997: Ord. 644, § 9.040, 1974)
§ 17.12.050  ADMINISTRATION.
   The City Manager shall have the power and duty to enforce the provisions of
this title.
(Ord. 1111, § 1(part), 1997: Ord. 644, § 10.010, 1974)
§ 17.12.060  FENCE PERMITS.
   No person shall construct or reconstruct any fence or wall without first
obtaining a permit.
(Ord. 1246, § 5, 2015; Ord. 1235, § 1(part), 2013; Ord. 1111, § 1(part), 1997:
Ord. 644, § 10.020, 1974)
§ 17.12.070  [RESERVED].
§ 17.12.080  AUTHORIZATION OF SIMILAR USES.
   The city may permit uses in a zone similar to uses permitted outright in
that zone.
(Ord. 1235, § 1(part), 2013; Ord. 1111, § 1(part), 1997: Ord. 644, § 10.030,
1974)
§ 17.12.085  NOTICE OF LAND USE DECISIONS.
   Within seven days after a land use decision has been rendered, the City
Manager shall provide written notice of the decision. Notice of the decision
shall be mailed to the applicant, property owner. Those who provided written
comments on the proposal, and those who requested a copy of the decision.
(Ord. 1277, § 1, 2019)
§ 17.12.087  CALL BY THE CITY MANAGER.
   A.   After consultation with the City Attorney, the City Manager may call up
a decision by the Planning Commission on a quasi-judicial land use application
for review by the City Council.
   B.   On receiving a call by the City Manager, the Community and Economic
Development Department shall provide to the City Council the application and
all other documents constituting the entire record for the quasi-judicial land
use request.
   C.   The City Manager shall set a date and time for a public hearing before
the City Council to consider the call under the notice of public hearing
process listed in §
17.12.120. The decision resulting from this public hearing by the City Council
shall constitute the final City decision.
   D.   A call by the City Manager stays all proceedings by all parties in
connection with the matter until the City Council has made a decision on the
application.
(Ord. 1277, § 1, 2019)
§ 17.12.090  APPEALS.
   A.   An appeal of an administrative decision concerning this title will be
made to the Planning Commission. Appeals of a Planning Commission decision will
be made to the City Council.
   B.   An appeal must be filed within 12 days of the date of the mailing of
the decision notice.
   C.   A fee set by resolution of Council will be paid upon filing of an
appeal.
   D.   At an appeals hearing, the ordinances and criteria must be stated and
the applicant or appellant must address these criteria with sufficient
specificity to allow decision makers an opportunity to respond to the issue.
   E.   Upon appeal, the appellate authority must consider the record of the
action of which resulted in appeal.
   F.   An aggrieved party in a proceeding for a zone change or discretionary
permit may appeal the decision to LUBA.
(Ord. 1277, § 1, 2019; Ord. 1235, § 1(part), 2013; Ord. 1111, § 1(part), 1997:
Ord. 1012, § 8, 1990: Ord. 644, § 10.040, 1974)
§ 17.12.100  FORM OF PETITIONS, APPLICATIONS AND APPEALS.
   A.   Petitions, applications and appeals provided for in this title shall be
made on forms prescribed by the city.
   B.   Applications shall be accompanied by plans and specifications, drawn to
scale, showing the actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon; the
sizes and locations on the lot of all existing and proposed structures; the
intended use of each structure; the number of families, if any, to be
accommodated thereon; the relationship of the property to the surrounding area;
and such other information as is needed to determine conformance with this
title.
(Ord. 1111, § 1(part), 1997: Ord. 644, § 10.050, 1974)
§ 17.12.110  FILING FEES.
   The City Council shall establish application fees and fee policies by
separate resolution for the performance of the actions and reviews required by
this title.
(Ord. 1111, § 1(part), 1997: Ord. 1061, § 31, 1993: Ord. 1012, § 9, 1990: Ord.
920, § 1, 1989; Ord. 644, § 10.060, 1974)
§ 17.12.120  NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING.
   A.   Each notice of hearing authorized by this title shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city at least ten days prior to the
date of the hearing.
   B.   In addition, the following notice requirements shall apply.
      1.   A notice of hearing on a variance shall be mailed to the applicant
and to all owners of record of property on the most recent property tax
assessment role available to the city within 100 feet of the subject property.
      2.   A notice of a hearing on a conditional use or an amendment to a
zoning map shall be mailed to the applicant and to all owners of record of
property on the most recent property tax assessment role available to the city
within 300 feet of the subject property.
      3.   A notice of a hearing shall be mailed to the residents of a property
located within the above notice areas.
   C.   Notice shall also be provided to any neighborhood or community
organization recognized by the city and whose boundaries include the site.
   D.   Notice distances will be measured from the exterior boundaries of the
subject property for which the application request has been made.
   E.   The notice shall be mailed at least 20 days prior to the date of
hearing.
   F.   Failure of a person to receive the notice prescribed in this section
shall not impair the validity of the hearing.
   G.   The notice provisions of this section shall not restrict the giving of
notice by other means, including the posting of property or the use of radio.
   H.   When a zone change is proposed for a mobile home park, the residents of
the mobile home park shall be given 20 days’ notice of the required public
hearing.
   I.   Reserved.
   J.   All notices of public hearings shall contain the following information:
      1.   Explain the nature of the application and the proposed use or uses
which could be approved;
      2.   List of applicable criteria from this title and the comprehensive
plan that apply to the application at issue;
      3.   Set forth the street address or other easily understood geographic
identifier;
      4.   State the date, time and location of the hearing;
      5.   State that the failure of an issue to be raised in a hearing, in
person or by letter, or failure to provide sufficient specificity to afford the
decision maker an opportunity to respond to the issue precludes appeal to the
Land Use Board of Appeals based on that issue;
      6.   Include the name and telephone number of a local government
representative to contact for more information;
      7.   State that a copy of the application, all documents and evidence
relied upon by the applicant and applicable criteria are available for
inspection at no cost and a copy will be provided at reasonable cost;
      8.   State that a copy of the staff report will be available for
inspection at no cost at least seven days prior to the hearing and a copy will
be provided at reasonable cost; and
      9.   Include a general explanation of the requirements for submission of
testimony and the procedure for conduct of hearings.
(Ord. 1235, § 1(part), 2013; Ord. 1111, § 1(part), 1997: Ord. 1069, § 11, 1994;
Ord. 1012, § 10, 1990: Ord. 827, 1981; Ord. 644, § 10.070, 1974)
§ 17.12.130  PUBLIC HEARING PROCEDURE.
   A.   Order of public hearing procedure.
      1.   At the outset of the hearing, the Chair shall review the public
hearing procedure.
      2.   City staff shall briefly review the basic facts involved in the
proposal.
      3.   The Chair shall provide the opportunity for questions to be asked by
the Board or from the floor regarding clarification of the matter to be heard.
      4.   All those persons who support the proposed application shall first
be permitted to present their case. The applicant or his or her representative
shall proceed first to be followed by all others who support the application.
      5.   All those who oppose the proposed application shall then present
their case. Representatives of a group shall proceed first followed by others
in opposition.
      6.   All those who do not necessarily support or oppose the proposed
application shall then have an opportunity to speak.
      7.   City staff shall then make further presentation, if appropriate.
City staff may also answer questions or clarify issues during other stages of
the hearing whenever permitted by the Chair during the hearing.
      8.   Following all presentation, brief rebuttal shall be permitted by all
parties in the same general order as initial presentations. The Chair shall
have broad discretion to limit rebuttal to avoid repetition and redundancy.
   B.   Members of the Board conducting the hearing may question anyone making
a presentation at a hearing, but the questioning shall occur after, not during,
the individual’s presentation.
   C.   Any questions from the floor shall be addressed to the Chairperson. The
Chair shall then direct the question to the appropriate person.
   D.   No person shall be disorderly, disruptive or abusive during the conduct
of the hearing.
   E.   No person shall testify without receiving recognition from the Chair
and stating his or her full name and address.
   F.   All presentations shall be as brief as possible and redundancy and
repetition shall be avoided.
   G.   The Chair shall have authority to:
      1.   Regulate the course and decorum of the hearing;
      2.   Dispose of procedural matters;
      3.   Rule on relevancy of testimony and request documentation at any
time; and
      4.   Impose reasonable limitations on the number of witnesses and time
limits for presentation and rebuttal.
   H.   At the close of all presentations and rebuttal, the Chair shall declare
that the hearing is closed, and thereafter, no further evidence or argument
shall be received. Once a hearing has been closed, it shall be reopened only
upon vote of the City Council or Planning Commission.
   I.   Any person making a presentation may present one or more written
exhibits, visual aids, affidavits and similar material to be considered as a
part of the evidence.
   J.   At City Council hearings, all Planning Commission minutes and records
shall be a part of the record before the City Council. A Planning Commission
representative may testify as part of the city staff presentation at a City
Council hearing.
   K.   The Planning Commission or City Council may allow a continuance of the
public hearing in order to obtain additional information or to serve further
notice upon other persons it decides may be interested in the proposal being
considered. If continued, the time and date when the hearing is to be resumed
shall be announced.
(Ord. 1111, § 1(part), 1997: Ord. 644, § 10.080, 1974)
§ 17.12.140  GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.
   A.   An applicant may apply at one time for all permits or zone changes
needed for a development project.
   B.   The city shall take final action on all land use actions, limited land
use actions or zone change applications including all appeals, within 100 days
of completion of the application for all applications listed under O.R.S.
197.311 or within 120 days of completion of the application for all other land
use actions, limited land use actions or zone change applications that do not
also require a comprehensive plan amendment. Applications or appeals which
require consideration by agencies or entities outside the city jurisdiction are
excepted from this deadline. The 120-day deadline may be extended for a
reasonable amount of time at the request of the applicant.
   C.   If an application is incomplete, the city shall notify the applicant
within 30 days of receipt of the application and allow the applicant to submit
the missing information. If the applicant refuses to submit the missing
information, the application shall be deemed complete, at least for the purpose
of subsection B. of this section, on the thirty-first day after the city
received the application. If the applicant agreed to supply the missing
information, the application shall be deemed complete for the purpose of
subsection B. of this section when the missing information is supplied.
   D.   If the application was complete when first submitted, or if the
applicant supplies requested additional information within 180 days of initial
submittal, approval or denial of the application shall be based upon the
standards and conditions which were in effect at the time of submittal.
   E.   If an application is not acted upon within the time period specified in
subsection B. of this section:
      1.   The city shall refund to the applicant either the unexpended portion
of any application fees previously paid or 50% of the total amount of the fees,
whichever is greater.
      2.   The applicant may apply in the Circuit Court of Linn County for a
writ of mandamus to compel the city to issue the approval.
   F.   Ex parte contacts with a member of the decision making body shall not
invalidate a final decision or action of the decision making body. The member
receiving the information shall report the information for the record at the
hearing. The Chair shall allow rebuttal of the content at the first hearing
where action will be considered or taken.
(Ord. 1270, 2018; Ord. 1111, § 1(part), 1997: Ord. 1012, § 11, 1990)
§ 17.12.150  ENFORCEMENT.
   A.   Penalty. Violation of this title constitutes a violation and may be
prosecuted under the provisions of Sweet Home Municipal Code
Chapter 9.36 as now enacted or hereafter amended. Each day's violation is a
separate offense.
   B.   Alternative remedy. In case a structure is located, constructed,
maintained, repaired, altered or used, or land is used in violation of this
title, the structure or land thus in violation shall constitute a nuisance. The
city may, as an alternative to other remedies that are legally available for
enforcing this title, institute injunction, mandamus, abatement or other
appropriate proceedings to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove the unlawful
location, construction, maintenance, repair, alteration or use. For abatement
the city may follow the procedure set out in Sweet Home Municipal Code Article
II of
Chapter 8.04 as now enacted or hereafter amended, except no hearing need be
held before abatement occurs if a hearing before the Planning Commission or
City Council has already been held on the issue in dispute and the body has
made a final decision thereon. The city can recover its expenses as set forth
in the abatement procedure.
   C.   Permits or approval, including renewals and extensions, shall not be
issued for development on property in which uncorrected code violations exist
except to the extent the permits or approvals are needed to correct the
violation.
(Ord. 1277, § 1, 2019; Ord. 1235, § 1(part), 2013; Ord. 1111, § 1(part), 1997)
CHAPTER 17.16:  OFFICIAL CITY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Section
   
17.16.010   Adoption of Comprehensive Plan.
   
17.16.020   Official land use guide.
§ 17.16.010  ADOPTION OF COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
   A.   The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare of the City of Sweet Home and to assist in implementing the
adopted Statewide Planning Goals.
   B.   The amendments to the Comprehensive Plan, as attached to the ordinance
codified herein, are approved, based on the findings and facts as presented in
Appendix G of the Transportation System Plan and testimony received by the
Sweet Home City Council after holding a public hearing on June 14, 2005.
   C.   The study attached to the ordinance codified herein is added as a
specific technical resource documents to the Comprehensive Plan, replacing the
Sweet Home Transportation System Plan by W&H Pacific done in 1998. This study
is adopted and incorporated into the Comprehensive Plan by reference and serves
as an official document of the specific topics: Sweet Home Transportation
System Plan, Satre Associates, 2005.
(Ord. 1172, §§ 1-3, 2005)
§ 17.16.020  OFFICIAL LAND USE GUIDE.
   The Comprehensive Plan as amended and approved by ordinance by the City
council is the official guide for decisions related to land use, and by this
reference is made a part thereof.
(Ord. 1235, § 1(part), 2013)
CHAPTER 17.20:  ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES
Section
   
17.20.010   Classification of zones.
   
17.20.020   Location of zones.
   
17.20.030   Zoning maps.
   
17.20.040   Zoning of annexed areas.
   
17.20.050   Zone boundaries.
§ 17.20.010  CLASSIFICATION OF ZONES.
   For the purposes of this title, the following zones are established:
 
Zone Abbreviated Designation
Residential Low-density                R-1
Residential High-density               R-2
  Residential Medium-density          R-3
Residential Mixed Use                  R-4
Commercial Central                     C-1
Commercial Highway                     C-2
Commercial Neighborhood                C-3
Industrial                             M
Planned Development                    PD
Recreation Commercial                  RC
Residential Industrial                 R/M (T)
Transitional Natural Resources Overlay NR
 
(Ord. 1235, § 1(part), 2013; Ord. 1182, § 3, 2006; Ord. 1069, 1994; Ord. 905,
1983; Ord. 644, § 10, 1974)
§ 17.20.020  LOCATION OF ZONES.
   The boundaries for the zones listed in this title are indicated on the City
Zoning Map of 2003 and all amendments made, which are adopted by reference. The
boundaries shall be modified in accordance with zoning map amendments which
shall be adopted by reference.
(Ord. 1235, § 1(part), 2013; Ord. 1882, § 4, 2006; Ord. 906, 1983; Ord. 644, §
20, 1974)
§ 17.20.030  ZONING MAPS.
   A zoning map or zoning map amendment adopted by §
17.20.020 of this title or by an amendment thereto shall be prepared by
authority of the City Council. The map or map amendment shall be dated with the
effective date of the ordinance that adopts the map or map amendment. A
certified print of the adopted map or map amendment shall be maintained in the
office of the City Clerk as long as this title remains in effect.
(Ord. 644, § 30, 1974)
§ 17.20.040  ZONING OF ANNEXED AREAS.
   All areas annexed to the city shall continue to be zoned under the existing
county zoning, unless the area or a part of the area is specifically placed in
a zone or zones by the City Council, after receiving and considering the
recommendations of the city’s Planning Commission.
(Ord. 673, 1976; Ord. 644, § 40, 1974)
§ 17.20.050  ZONE BOUNDARIES.
   Unless otherwise specified, zone boundaries are section lines, subdivision
lines, lot lines, centerlines of street or railroad rights-of-way or such lines
extended.
(Ord. 644, § 50, 1974)
CHAPTER 17.24:  R-1 RESIDENTIAL LOW-DENSITY ZONE
Section
   
17.24.010   Purpose.
   
17.24.020   Uses permitted outright.
   
17.24.030   Conditional uses permitted.
   
17.24.040   Lot size and width.
   
17.24.050   Yard setbacks.
   
17.24.060   Lot coverage.
   
17.24.070   Building height.
   
17.24.080   Minimum building size.
   
17.24.090   Homes on individual lots.
   
17.24.100   Garage and off-street parking requirements.
§ 17.24.010  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the R-1 zone is to provide areas suitable and desirable for
single-family homes, associated public service uses and duplexes on corner
lots. The R-1 zone is most appropriate in areas which have developed or will
develop with single-family homes at a density which warrants provision of
public water and sewer facilities.
(Ord. 1121, (part), 1998; Ord. 644, § 10(part), 1974)
§ 17.24.020  USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT.
   In an R-1 zone, the following primary residential uses and their accessory
uses are permitted outright:
   A.   Single-family dwelling;
   B.   Two-family dwelling on corner lots where each living unit has access
from a separate street; and
   C.   Residential facility or home.
   D.   Accessory dwelling. A maximum of one accessory dwelling is allowed per
legal single-family dwelling. The unit may be a detached building, in a portion
of a detached accessory building (e.g., above a garage or workshop), or a unit
attached or interior to the primary dwelling (e.g., an addition or the
conversion of an existing floor); subject to the following standards:
      1.   A detached accessory dwelling shall not exceed 864 square feet of
floor area, or 10% of lot area, whichever is smaller.
      2.   An attached or interior accessory dwelling shall not exceed 864
square feet of floor area, or 75% of the primary dwelling's floor area,
whichever is smaller. However, accessory dwellings that result from the
conversion of a level or floor (e.g., basement, attic, or second story) of the
primary dwelling may occupy the entire level or floor, even if the floor area
of the accessory dwelling would be more than 864 square feet.
      3.   A detached accessory dwelling shall have a roof with a minimum pitch
of three feet in height for each 12 feet in width.
      4.   An accessory dwelling shall be placed on a foundation that meets the
requirements of all applicable building codes.
      5.   One off-street parking space shall be provided for each accessory
dwelling. In addition, parking shall be increased for the primary dwelling if
needed so that the primary dwelling is provided two off-street parking spaces.
      6.   Unless otherwise specified, accessory dwellings shall meet all other
development standards (e.g., height, setbacks, lot coverage, etc.) for
accessory buildings in the zoning district.
(Ord. 1270, 2018; Ord. 1121, (part), 1998: Ord. 1069, 1994; Ord. 1052, 1992;
Ord. 1039, §§ 3, 5, 1992; Ord. 644, § 10(part), 1974)
§ 17.24.030  CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   In an R-1 zone, the following uses and their accessory uses may be permitted
subject to the provisions of
Chapter 17.80:
   A.   Airport;
   B.   Cemetery;
   C.   Church, religious or philanthropic institution; including activities
customarily associated with the practices of the religious activity, including:
      1.   Worship services;
      2.   Religion classes;
      3.   Weddings;
      4.   Funerals;
      5.   Meal programs;
      6.   Child care, but not including private or parochial school education
for pre-kindergarten through grade 12 or higher education;
      7.   Providing housing or space for housing in a building that is
detached from the place of worship, provided:
         a.   At least 50% of the residential units provided under this
paragraph are affordable to households with incomes equal to or less than 60%
of the median family income for the county in which the real property is
located;
         b.   The real property is in an area zoned for residential use that is
located within the urban growth boundary; and
         c.   The housing or space for housing complies with applicable land
use regulations and meets the standards and criteria for residential
development for the underlying zone; and
      8.   Housing and space for housing provided under subsection 7. of this
section must be subject to a covenant appurtenant that restricts the owner and
each successive owner of the building or any residential unit contained in the
building from selling or renting any residential unit described in subsection
7.a. of this section as housing that is not affordable to households with
incomes equal to or less than 60% of the median family income for the county in
which the real property is located for a period of 60 years from the date of
the certificate of occupancy.
   D.   Community center;
   E.   Hospital;
   F.   Private golf course, country club or recreational club;
   G.   Public school and private school offering curricula similar to public
school;
   H.   Public utility facility;
   I.   Boarding or rooming house;
   J.   Bed and breakfast establishments;
   K.   Reserved;
   L.   Secondary use on a lot without a primary use;
   M.   Duplexes not meeting §
17.24.020(B);
   N.   RV for government facility caretaker;
   O.   Amateur radio, police and fire antennas; and
   P.   Any other use that is compatible with the purpose and intent of the
zone, and that would have off-site impacts that would not significantly exceed
those that are typical of the other conditionally permitted uses listed in this
section.
(Ord. 1277, § 1, 2019; Ord. 1270, 2018; Ord. 1240, § 31, 2015; Ord. 1160, § 3,
2003; Ord. 1121, (part), 1998: Ord. 1101, 1997; Ord. 1078, 1994; Ord. 1069,
1994; Ord. 1061, 1993; Ord. 1039, 1992; Ord. 905, 1983; Ord. 644, § 10(part),
1974)
§ 17.24.040  LOT SIZE AND WIDTH.
   Except as provided in §
17.08.050, the minimum lot size and width in a R-1 zone shall be as follows:
   A.   The minimum lot area shall be 8,000 square feet; and
   B.   The minimum lot width at the front building line shall be 80 feet.
(Ord. 1121, (part), 1998: Ord. 905, §§ 4, 5, 1983; Ord. 644, § 10(part), 1974)
§ 17.24.050  YARD SETBACKS.
   Except as provided in §
17.08.060, in a R-1 zone, yard setbacks shall be as follows.
   A.   The front yard shall be a minimum of 20 feet.
   B.   Each side yard shall be a minimum of five feet, and the total of both
side yard setbacks shall be a minimum of 13 feet.
   C.   The street side yard shall be a minimum of 15 feet.
   D.   The rear yard shall be a minimum of 15 feet.
   E.   On a flag lot, or similarly configured lot, the inset front yard
setback shall be a minimum of 15 feet.
   F.   Regardless of the side and rear yard requirements of the zone, an
accessory structure, excluding detached accessory dwellings, may be built to
within five feet of side or rear lot line; provided, the structure is more than
70 feet from the street abutting the front yard and 20 feet from the street
abutting the street side yard.
(Ord. 1270, 2018; Ord. 1235, § 1(part), 2013; Ord. 1121, (part), 1998: Ord.
1101, 1997; Ord. 644, § 10(part), 1974)
§ 17.24.060  LOT COVERAGE.
   In an R-1 zone, buildings shall not occupy more than 35% of the lot area.
(Ord. 1121, (part), 1998: Ord. 905, 1983; Ord. 644, § 10(part), 1974)
§ 17.24.070  BUILDING HEIGHT.
   Except as provided in §
17.08.070, in a R-1 zone building heights shall be as follows.
   A.   The height of a building for a dwelling, excluding detached accessory
dwellings, shall not exceed a height of 30 feet.
   B.   Accessory structures, including detached accessory dwellings, shall not
exceed 20 feet in height at the apex of the roof.
(Ord. 1270, 2018; Ord. 1121, (part), 1998: Ord. 644, § 10(part), 1974)
§ 17.24.080  MINIMUM BUILDING SIZE.
   Dwellings, excluding accessory dwellings, in the R-1 zone shall be a minimum
size of 1,000 square feet.
(Ord. 1270, 2018; Ord. 1121, (part), 1998: Ord. 1069, 1994: Ord. 838, 1981;
Ord. 644, § 10(part), 1974)
§ 17.24.090  HOMES ON INDIVIDUAL LOTS.
   A.   A home, including accessory dwellings, shall be placed on a foundation
enclosed at the perimeter with no more than 24 inches of the enclosing material
exposed above grade. Where the building site has a sloped grade, no more than
24 inches of the enclosing material shall be exposed on the uphill side of the
home. If the home is placed on a basement, the 24-inch limitation will not
apply.
   B.   The base of a home, including accessory dwellings, must be enclosed
continuously at the perimeter with either concrete, concrete block, brick,
stone, or combination thereof, or shall have continuous skirting which matches
the exterior.
   C.   A home, excluding accessory dwellings, shall have a nominal width of at
least 28 feet.
   D.   A home, including accessory dwellings, shall have a roof with a minimum
pitch of three feet in height for each 12 feet in width.
(Ord. 1270, 2018; Ord. 1235, § 1(part), 2013; Ord. 1121, (part), 1998: Ord.
1069, 1994)
§ 17.24.100  GARAGE AND OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   All dwellings, excluding accessory dwellings, in the R-1 zone will have at
minimum the following:
   A.   A garage or carport; and
   B.   Two hard surfaced off-street parking spaces shall be provided.
(Ord. 1270, 2018; Ord 1121, (part), 1998)
CHAPTER 17.28:  R-2 RESIDENTIAL HIGH-DENSITY ZONE
Section
   
17.28.010   Purpose.
   
17.28.020   Uses permitted outright.
   
17.28.030   Conditional uses permitted.
   
17.28.040   Lot size and width.
   
17.28.050   Yards.
   
17.28.060   Lot coverage.
   
17.28.070   Building height.
   
17.28.080   Minimum building size.
   
17.28.090   Homes on individual lots.
   
17.28.100   Garage and off street parking requirements.
   
17.28.110   Standards for new and expanded manufactured home parks.
§ 17.28.010  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the R-2 zone is to provide areas suitable and desirable for
high-density residential development, and particularly for apartments, but
where other types of residential and related public service uses are
appropriate. The R-2 zone is most appropriate in areas which have been
developed for high-density residential use or which are suitable for such use
due to proximity to downtown Sweet Home and to highway-related commercial areas
inside the city.
(Ord. 1182, § 1, 2006)
§ 17.28.020  USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT.
   In a R-2 zone, the following primary residential uses and their accessory
uses are permitted outright:
   A.   A use permitted outright in a R-1 zone;
   B.   Multi-family dwelling;
   C.   Two-family dwellings;
   D.   Manufactured home park; and
   E.   Single-family attached dwellings.
(Ord. 1182, § 1, 2006)
§ 17.28.030  CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   In a R-2 zone, the following uses and their accessory uses may be permitted
subject to the provisions of
Chapter 17.80:
   A.   A use permitted as a conditional use in a R-1 zone;
   B.   Professional office, except for veterinarian;
   C.   Club, lodge, fraternal organization;
   D.   Amateur radio, police and fire antennas; and
   E.   Any other use that is compatible with the purpose and intent of the
zone, and that would have off-site impacts that would not significantly exceed
those that are typical of the other conditionally permitted uses listed in this
section.
(Ord. 1277, § 1, 2019; Ord. 1182, § 1, 2006)
§ 17.28.040  LOT SIZE AND WIDTH.
   Except as provided in, Sweet Home Municipal Code §
17.08.050, the minimum lot size and width in a R-2 zone shall be as follows:
   A.   The minimum lot area for a multi-family dwelling shall be 2,500 square
feet per dwelling unit;
   B.   The minimum lot area for a two-family dwelling shall be 6,000 square
feet;
   C.   The minimum lot area for a single-family dwelling and all other uses
permitted in a R-2 zone shall be 5,000 square feet;
   D.   Single family attached dwellings shall have a minimum lot area of 2,500
square feet per dwelling unit;
   E.   The minimum lot width at the front building line shall be as follows:
      1.   Seventy feet for a corner lot;
      2.   Sixty feet for an interior lot; and
      3.   Twenty five feet for a single-family attached dwelling lot.
(Ord. 1182, § 1, 2006)
§ 17.28.050  YARDS.
   Except as provided in
Chapter 17.80 and §§
17.08.030 through 17.08.130, in a R-2 zone, yard setbacks shall be as follows:
   A.   The front yard setback shall be a minimum of 20 feet;
   B.   Each side yard setback shall be a minimum of five feet;
   C.   The street yard setback shall be a minimum of 15 feet;
   D.   The rear yard setback shall be a minimum of ten feet;
   E.   Single-family attached dwellings:
      1.   Front shall be a minimum of 20 feet;
      2.   The sides between units shall be zero feet;
      3.   The sides on exterior boundaries shall be five feet;
      4.   Street side shall be a minimum of 15 feet; and
      5.   Rear shall be a minimum of ten feet.
   F.   On a flag lot or similarly configured lot, the inset front yard setback
shall be a minimum of ten feet.
(Ord. 1235, § 1(part), 2013; Ord. 1182, § 1, 2006)
§ 17.28.060  LOT COVERAGE.
   Building coverage shall meet the following standards: all buildings, except
single-family attached dwellings, shall occupy not more than 60% of the lot
area.
(Ord. 1182, § 1, 2006)
§ 17.28.070  BUILDING HEIGHT.
   Except as provided in Sweet Home Municipal Code §
17.08.060, in a R-2 zone building heights shall be as follows:
   A.   Single-family dwellings shall not exceed a height of 30 feet;
   B.   Two-family, single-family attached dwellings and multi-family dwellings
shall not exceed a height of 40 feet; and
   C.   Accessory structures, including detached accessory dwellings, shall not
exceed 20 feet in height at the apex of the roof.
(Ord. 1270, 2018; Ord. 1182, § 1, 2006)
§ 17.28.080  MINIMUM BUILDING SIZE.
   Dwellings, excluding accessory dwellings, in the R-2 zone shall have a
minimum building size of 720 square feet.
(Ord. 1270, 2018; Ord. 1182, § 1, 2006)
§ 17.28.090  HOMES ON INDIVIDUAL LOTS.
   A.   A home, including accessory dwellings, shall be placed on a foundation
enclosed at the perimeter with no more than 32 inches of the enclosing material
exposed above grade. Where the building site has a sloped grade, no more than
32 inches of the enclosing material shall be exposed on the uphill side of the
home. If the home is placed on a basement, the 32 inch limitation will not
apply.
   B.   The base of a home, including accessory dwellings, must be enclosed
continuously at the perimeter with either concrete, concrete block, brick,
stone or combination thereof, or shall have continuous skirting which matches
the exterior.
   C.   A home, excluding accessory dwellings, shall have a nominal width of at
least 24 feet.
   D.   A home, including accessory dwellings, shall have a roof with a minimum
pitch of three feet in height for each 12 feet in width.
(Ord. 1270, 2018; Ord. 1182, § 1, 2006)
§ 17.28.100  GARAGE AND OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   A.   All single-family, two-family and single-family attached dwellings,
excluding accessory dwellings, will have, at minimum, the following:
      1.   A garage or carport; and
      2.   Two hard surfaced off-street parking spaces shall be provided.
   B.   Multi-family dwellings will have a minimum of two parking spaces per
unit.
(Ord. 1270, 2018; Ord. 1235, § 1(part), 2013; Ord. 1182, § 1, 2006)
§ 17.28.110  STANDARDS FOR NEW AND EXPANDED MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS.
 
Description City Standard
1.    Minimum size of park                                                   1 acre
                                                                                (ORS)
                                                                                4,000
2.    Minimum size of dwelling space                                         square
                                                                                feet
3.    Minimum width of dwelling space                                        40 feet
4.    Minimum length of dwelling space                                       80 feet
5.    Minimum distance between dwellings and the public right-of-way         20 feet
6.   Minimum distance between dwellings and all other exterior property lines15 feet
                                                                                6' on
7.    Exterior boundary fencing                                              sides
                                                                                and rear
                                                                                10' at
8.    Landscaping                                                            front
                                                                                entrance
9.    Must meet the minimum standards set in the Manufactured Dwelling Parks  
Administrative Rules - Chapter 918 Division 600
 
(Ord. 1182, § 1, 2006)
CHAPTER 17.30:  R-3 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL ZONE
Section
   
17.30.010   Purpose.
   
17.30.020   Uses permitted outright.
   
17.30.030   Conditional uses permitted.
   
17.30.040   Lot size and width.
   
17.30.050   Yards.
   
17.30.060   Lot coverage.
   
17.30.070   Building height.
   
17.30.080   Minimum building size.
   
17.30.090   Standards for homes on individual lots.
   
17.30.100   Garage and off street parking requirements.
§ 17.30.010  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the R-3 zone is to provide areas suitable and desirable for
single-family homes, duplexes on corner lots, condominiums, town houses and
appropriate community facilities.
(Ord. 1165, § 1, 2005)
§ 17.30.020  USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT.
   The following primary residential uses and their accessory uses are
permitted outright:
   A.   A use permitted outright in a R-1 zone;
   B.   Two-family dwellings; and
   C.   Single-family attached dwellings.
(Ord. 1165, § 1, 2005)
§ 17.30.030  CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   The following uses and their accessory uses may be permitted subject to the
provisions of
Chapter 17.80:
   A.   A use permitted as a conditional use in a R-1 zone;
   B.   Multi-family dwellings;
   C.   Professional offices; and
   D.   Any other use that is compatible with the purpose and intent of the
zone, and that would have off-site impacts that would not significantly exceed
those that are typical of the other conditionally permitted uses listed in this
section.
(Ord. 1277, § 1, 2019; Ord. 1165, § 1, 2005)
§ 17.30.040  LOT SIZE AND WIDTH.
   The minimum lot size and width shall be as follows: the maximum net density
shall not exceed nine dwelling units per acre:
   A.   Single-family dwellings shall have a minimum lot area of 5,000 square
feet;
   B.   Two-family dwellings shall have a minimum lot area of 6,000 square
feet;
   C.   Single-family attached dwellings shall have a minimum lot area of 4,800
square feet per dwelling unit;
   D.   The minimum lot width at the front building line shall be as follows:
      1.   Seventy feet for a corner lot; and
      2.   Sixty feet for an interior lot.
(Ord. 1165, § 1, 2005)
§ 17.30.050  YARDS.
   Yard setbacks shall be as follows:
   A.   Single-family and two-family dwelling units, including accessory
dwellings:
      1.   The front shall be a minimum of 20 feet;
      2.   Each side shall be a minimum of five feet;
      3.   The street side yard shall be a minimum of 15 feet;
      4.   The rear shall be a minimum of ten feet;
      5.   On a flag lot, the inset front yard setback shall be a minimum of
ten feet; and
      6.   No building shall be located closer than one-half the distance of
the right-of-way projected for the abutting street, based on the street
classification, plus the required front setback from a centerline of a street
other than an alley.
   B.   Single-family attached dwellings:
      1.   Front shall be a minimum of 20 feet;
      2.   The sides between units shall be zero feet;
      3.   The sides on exterior boundaries shall be five feet;
      4.   Street side shall be a minimum of 15 feet; and
      5.   Rear shall be a minimum of ten feet.
(Ord. 1270, 2018; Ord. 1165, § 1, 2005)
§ 17.30.060  LOT COVERAGE.
   Building coverage shall meet the following standards.
   A.   A single-family dwelling, not including an associated detached
accessory dwelling, shall not exceed 35% of the land area.
   B.   Two-family dwellings shall not exceed 50% of the land area.
   C.   Single-family attached dwellings shall not exceed 60% of the land area.
(Ord. 1270, 2018; Ord. 1165, § 1, 2005)
§ 17.30.070  BUILDING HEIGHT.
   Building heights shall be as follows.
   A.   Single-family dwellings shall not exceed a height of 30 feet.
   B.   Two-family and single-family attached dwellings shall not exceed a
height of 40 feet.
   C.   Accessory structures, including detached accessory dwellings, shall not
exceed 20 feet in height at the apex of the roof.
(Ord. 1270, 2018; Ord. 1165, § 1, 2005)
§ 17.30.080  MINIMUM BUILDING SIZE.
   Primary use buildings, which do not include accessory dwellings, shall have
a minimum building size of 850 square feet.
(Ord. 1270, 2018; Ord. 1165, § 1, 2005)
§ 17.30.090  STANDARDS FOR HOMES ON INDIVIDUAL LOTS.
   A.   A home, including accessory dwellings, shall be placed on a foundation
enclosed at the perimeter with no more than 32 inches of the enclosing material
exposed above grade. Where the building site has a sloped grade, no more than
32 inches of the enclosing material shall be exposed on the uphill side of the
home. If the home is placed on a basement, the 32-inch limitation will not
apply.
   B.   The base of a home, including accessory dwellings, must be enclosed
continuously at the perimeter with either concrete, concrete block, brick,
stone or combination thereof, or shall have continuous skirting which matches
the exterior.
   C.   A home, excluding accessory dwellings, shall have a nominal width of at
least 24 feet.
   D.   A home, including accessory dwellings, shall have a roof with a minimum
pitch of three feet in height for each 12 feet in width.
(Ord. 1270, 2018; Ord. 1165, § 1, 2005)
§ 17.30.100  GARAGE AND OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   All dwellings, excluding accessory dwellings, will have at minimum the
following:
   A.   A garage or carport; and
   B.   One hard surfaced off-street parking spaces shall be provided.
(Ord. 1270, 2018; Ord. 1165, § 1, 2005)
CHAPTER 17.31:  R-4 RESIDENTIAL MIXED USE ZONE
Section
   
17.31.010   Purpose.
   
17.31.020   Uses permitted outright.
   
17.31.030   Conditional uses permitted.
   
17.31.040   Development standards.
§ 17.31.010  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the R-4 Zone is to provide a zone for primarily medium to
high density residential mixed-use developments, with limited commercial,
institutional, office and service uses distributed on site in a manner
sensitive to the street environment and adjacent residential uses.
(Ord. 1166, § 1, 2005)
§ 17.31.020  USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT.
   The following uses and their accessory uses shall be permitted outright:
residential uses: a use permitted outright in any residential zone.
(Ord. 1166, § 1, 2005)
§ 17.31.030  CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   The following uses and their accessory uses may be permitted subject to the
provisions of this section and
Chapter 17.80.
   A.   Church, non-profit religious or philanthropic institution; including
activities customarily associated with the practices of the religious activity,
including:
      1.   Worship services.
      2.   Religion classes.
      3.   Weddings.
      4.   Funerals.
      5.   Meal programs.
      6.   Child care, but not including private or parochial school education
for prekindergarten through grade 12 or higher education.
      7.   Providing housing or space for housing in a building that is
detached from the place of worship, provided:
         a.   At least 50% of the residential units provided under this
paragraph are affordable to households with incomes equal to or less than 60%
of the median family income for the county in which the real property is
located;
         b.   The real property is in an area zoned for residential use that is
located within the urban growth boundary; and
         c.   The housing or space for housing complies with applicable land
use regulations and meets the standards and criteria for residential
development for the underlying zone.
      8.   Housing and space for housing provided under subsection 7. of this
section must be subject to a covenant appurtenant that restricts the owner and
each successive owner of the building or any residential unit contained in the
building from selling or renting any residential unit described in subsection
7.a. of this section as housing that is not affordable to households with
incomes equal to or less than 60% of the median family income for the county in
which the real property is located for a period of 60 years from the date of
the certificate of occupancy.
   B.   Community center;
   C.   Governmental structure or use of land or public utility facility;
   D.   Food store, restaurant, and retail, except marijuana facilities are
prohibited;
   E.   Drug store;
   F.   Barber or beauty shop;
   G.   Laundromat, clothes cleaning establishment;
   H.   Rooming or boarding house;
   I.   Bed and breakfast establishment;
   J.   Professional office;
   K.   Veterinary;
   L.   Amateur radio, police and fire antenna; and
   M.   Any other use that is compatible with the purpose and intent of the
zone, and that would have off-site impacts that would not significantly exceed
those that are typical of the other conditionally permitted uses listed in this
section.
(Ord. 1277, § 1, 2019; Ord. 1270, 2018; Ord. 1255, § 2, 2017; Ord. 1166, § 1,
2005)
§ 17.31.040  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   A.   The following special standards shall apply.
      1.   Residential uses, not including accessory dwellings, shall be
subject to a maximum density of 35 dwelling units per acre.
      2.   Residential uses, including accessory dwellings, shall be subject to
the lot size and width, yard, lot coverage and building height requirements of
the R-2 zone.
      3.   The residential uses are required to be developed prior to or
concurrently with non-residential uses, with the exception of non-residential
uses that are in existence as of the adoption of this R-4 Zone.
      4.   Non-residential uses shall be subject to the following standards.
         a.   Off-street parking will be based on the city parking standards.
         b.   Building height shall not exceed 45 feet.
         c.   Yard setbacks:
            (1)   Front, from either a public or private street, shall be 20
feet;
            (2)   Sides, none, except if abutting residential zones, and then
the side yard shall be at least ten feet. The required side yard shall be
increased by one-half foot for each foot the building height exceeds 20 feet;
and
            (3)   Rear, none, except if abutting residential zones, and then
the rear yard shall be at least ten feet. The required rear yard shall be
increased by one-half foot for each foot the building height exceeds 20 feet.
         d.   A maximum of 10,000 square feet per acre of non-residential uses
listed in §
17.31.030 shall be permitted; provided that a minimum of 20 dwelling units per
acre are built prior to or in conjunction with these uses.
      5.   No establishment situated within a R-4 zone shall exceed a size of
10,000 square feet, including building, storage, sales and off-street parking
and loading areas, unless allowed as a part of an approved planned development.
      6.   R-4 areas will be situated on either an arterial or collector street
as indicated in the Transportation System Plan.
      7.   Areas zoned R-4 shall normally be located on only one side of a
street or on one corner of an intersection.
      8.   Vehicular ingress and egress points shall be limited to one ingress
point and one egress point. These points shall be a minimum of 50 feet from an
intersection.
      9.   All parking areas and service drives shall be hard surfaced and
clearly marked.
      10.   Off-street parking areas intended for five or more cars shall be
provided with screening consisting of a fence, wall, hedge or similar sight-
obscuring material.
      11.   No more than one sign, not to exceed 25 square feet in area, shall
be permitted for each commercial use. The sign shall be placed flat against the
side of the building.
   B.   Therefore, this chapter shall be in full force and effect after the
passage by the Council and approval by the Mayor.
(Ord. 1270, 2018; Ord. 1166, § 1, 2005)
CHAPTER 17.32:  C-1 COMMERCIAL CENTRAL ZONE
Section
   
17.32.010   Purpose.
   
17.32.020   Uses permitted outright.
   
17.32.030   Conditional uses permitted.
   
17.32.040   Yards.
   
17.32.050   Building height.
   
17.32.060   Open storage.
   
17.32.070   Use of residential structures in commercial zones.
   
17.32.090   Exterior lighting.
§ 17.32.010  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the C-1 zone is to provide an area suitable and desirable for
retail and service enterprises, offices, financial institutions and public
service uses which are appropriate in the intensively developed commercial
center of the community in order to meet shopping and other business needs of
area residents. The C-1 zone is appropriate only in the downtown area of the
city.
(Ord. 644, § 10(part), 1974)
§ 17.32.020  USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT.
   In a C-1 zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted
outright:
   A.   Two-family dwellings, multi-family dwellings and residential facilities
shall be subject to the requirements of the R-2 zone;
   B.   Parking lot;
   C.   Family day care center;
   D.   Community center;
   E.   Bus depot, taxicab stand;
   F.   Club, lodge, fraternal organization;
   G.   Newspaper office, print shop;
   H.   Motel, hotel, rooming/boarding house, bed and breakfast establishment;
   I.   A commercial enterprise which may be classified as belonging to one of
the following use groups:
      1.   Retail store or shop, such as food store, drug store, apparel store,
hardware store or furniture store;
      2.   Automobile, boat, truck or trailer sales establishment; provided any
associated repair shall be incidental to the operation and that all sales,
service, storage, repair and display shall occur within an enclosed building;
      3.   Personal or business service establishment such as barber or beauty
shop, drycleaning establishment, tailor shop or locksmith;
      4.   Repair shop for the type of goods offered for sale in retail trade
establishment permitted in a C-1 zone, such as shoe repair shop, small
appliance repair shop, television repair shop or watch repair shop;
      5.   Eating or drinking establishments such as restaurant, tavern or
cocktail lounge;
      6.   Office, business or professional;
      7.   Financial institution, such as bank; and
      8.   Indoor commercial amusement or recreation establishment such as
bowling alley, theater or pool hall.
   J.    Antique shop or second-hand store; provided, all business, service,
storage, sales, repair and display shall be conducted entirely within an
enclosed building; and
   K.   The following shall apply to single-family dwellings and related
accessory structures existing as of June 1996:
      1.   Single-family dwellings may be replaced within one year following
fire or other catastrophic loss. Single-family dwellings must meet the
standards of the R-1 zone;
      2.   Single-family dwellings may be maintained, altered or enlarged,
provided such work shall not cause the structure to deviate further from the
standards of the R-1 zone.
(Ord. 1235, § 1(part), 2013; Ord. 1182, § 5, 2006; Ord. 1111, 1997; Ord. 1097,
1996; Ord. 1061, 1993; Ord. 1039, 1992; Ord. 1012, 1990; Ord. 905, §§ 9, 10,
1983; Ord. 644, § 10(part), 1974)
§ 17.32.030  CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   In a C-1 zone, the following uses and their accessory uses may be permitted
subject to the provisions of
Chapter 17.80:
   A.   Church, nonprofit religious or philanthropic institution; including
activities customarily associated with the practices of the religious activity,
including:
      1.   Worship services.
      2.   Religion classes.
      3.   Weddings.
      4.   Funerals.
      5.   Meal programs.
      6.   Child care, but not including private or parochial school education
for prekindergarten through grade 12 or higher education.
      7.   Providing housing or space for housing in a building that is
detached from the place of worship, provided:
         a.   At least 50% of the residential units provided under this
paragraph are affordable to households with incomes equal to or less than 60%
of the median family income for the county in which the real property is
located;
         b.   The real property is in an area zoned for residential use that is
located within the urban growth boundary; and
         c.   The housing or space for housing complies with applicable land
use regulations and meets the standards and criteria for residential
development for the underlying zone.
      8.   Housing and space for housing provided under subsection 7. of this
section must be subject to a covenant appurtenant that restricts the owner and
each successive owner of the building or any residential unit contained in the
building from selling or renting any residential unit described in subsection
7.a. of this section as housing that is not affordable to households with
incomes equal to or less than 60% of the median family income for the county in
which the real property is located for a period of 60 years from the date of
the certificate of occupancy.
   B.   Governmental structure or use of land;
   C.   Public utility facility;
   D.   Automobile service station; provided, that no major automobile repair,
overhaul or reconstruction shall be permitted; and provided, further, that any
incidental automobile repair shall be performed entirely within an enclosed
building;
   E.   Any use permitted in a C-1 zone with customer drive-in service
facilities;
   F.   Veterinarian office, animal hospital; provided, all animals shall be
kept at all times within an enclosed building;
   G.   Amateur radio antennas;
   H.   Commercial radio stations and antennas;
   I.   Marijuana retailer or medical dispensary; and
   J.   Any other use that is compatible with the purpose and intent of the
zone, and that would have off-site impacts that would not significantly exceed
those that are typical of the other conditionally permitted uses listed in this
section.
(Ord. 1277, § 1, 2019; Ord. 1270, 2018; Ord. 1255, § 3, 2017; Ord. 1160, § 5,
2003; Ord. 1061, 1993; Ord. 644, § 10(part), 1974)
§ 17.32.040  YARDS.
   Except as provided in
Chapter 17.80, in a C-1 zone yards shall be as follows.
   A.   A front yard abutting a residential zone shall be a minimum of 20 feet.
   B.   A street side yard abutting a residential zone shall be a minimum of 15
feet.
   C.   A side or rear yard abutting a residential zone shall be a minimum of
ten feet.
   D.   Where a side or rear yard is not required and a structure is not to be
erected at the property line, it shall be set back at least three feet from the
property line.
   E.   Setbacks for automobile service stations. Freestanding gasoline pumps
and pump islands may occupy a required front or street side yard; provided,
they are a minimum of 15 feet from the property line separating the yard from
the street.
(Ord. 1101, 1997; Ord. 644, § 10(part), 1974)
§ 17.32.050  BUILDING HEIGHT.
   Except as provided in
Chapter 17.80 and §§
17.08.030 through 17.08.130, in a C-1 zone no building shall exceed a height of
40 feet.
(Ord. 644, § 10(part), 1974)
§ 17.32.060  OPEN STORAGE.
   In a C-1 zone, there shall be no open storage.
(Ord. 1235, § 1(part), 2013; Ord. 1026, 1991)
§ 17.32.070  USE OF RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES IN COMMERCIAL ZONES.
   In a C-1 zone, preexisting residential structures may be occupied by uses
permitted in the zone provided the structure meets minimum building and safety
standards as outlined in the building codes.
(Ord. 1235, § 1(part), 2013; Ord. 1101, 1997)
§ 17.32.090  EXTERIOR LIGHTING.
   Exterior lighting shall be located in such a manner so as not to face
directly, shine or reflect glare onto a street, a highway or a lot in a
residential zone.
(Ord. 1101, 1997)
CHAPTER 17.36:  C-2 COMMERCIAL HIGHWAY ZONE
Section
   
17.36.010   Purpose.
   
17.36.020   Uses permitted outright.
   
17.36.030   Conditional uses permitted.
   
17.36.040   General standards.
   
17.36.050   Yards.
   
17.36.060   Lot coverage.
   
17.36.070   Building height.
   
17.36.080   Open storage.
   
17.36.090   Exterior lighting.
   
17.36.100   Use of residential structures in commercial zones.
§ 17.36.010  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the C-2 zone is to provide areas suitable and desirable for
highway related commercial enterprises intended to meet the business needs of
area residents and highway travelers. The C-2 zone is appropriate in areas
along or near U.S. Highway 20 east and west of downtown Sweet Home which have
developed with commercial activities or which have potential for such activity
as long as sufficient vehicular access control is maintained.
(Ord. 644, § 20(part), 1974)
§ 17.36.020  USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT.
   In a C-2 zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted
outright:
   A.   A use permitted outright in the C-1 zone provided that the limitations
which apply to the conduct of activities in enclosed buildings in the C-1 zone
shall not apply in the C-2 zone.
   B.   Commercial enterprises with customer drive-in service facilities;
   C.   Antique shop, second-hand store;
   D.   Automobile service station;
   E.   Automobile, boat, truck, trailer sales, service, rental, display,
storage and repair;
   F.   Cabinet or similar woodworking shop;
   G.   Cold storage plant, ice processing plant;
   H.   Feed, seed store;
   I.   Heavy equipment, implement, machinery sales, service, rental, display,
storage and repair;
   J.   Lumber, building materials sales and storage;
   K.   Outdoor commercial amusement or recreation establishment such as
miniature golf course or drive-in theater, but excluding uses such as race
track or automobile speedway;
   L.   Plumbing, heating, electrical or paint contractors storage, sales or
repair shop;
   M.   Tire sales, repair shop;
   N.   Truck terminal, freight depot;
   O.   Warehouse, storage area;
   P.   Wholesale establishment;
   Q.   Rooming or boarding house; and
   R.   Bed and breakfast establishment.
(Ord. 1235, § 1(part), 2013; Ord. 1182, § 6, 2006; Ord. 1054, 1993; Ord. 1039,
1992; Ord. 905, 1983; Ord. 644, § 20(part), 1974)
§ 17.36.030  CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   In a C-2 zone, the following uses and their accessory uses may be permitted
subject to the provisions of
Chapter 17.36:
   A.   Church, non-profit religious or philanthropic institution; including
activities customarily associated with the practices of the religious activity,
including:
      1.   Worship services.
      2.   Religion classes.
      3.   Weddings.
      4.   Funerals.
      5.   Meal programs.
      6.   Child care, but not including private or parochial school education
for prekindergarten through grade 12 or higher education.
      7.   Providing housing or space for housing in a building that is
detached from the place of worship, provided:
         a.   At least 50% of the residential units provided under this
paragraph are affordable to households with incomes equal to or less than 60%
of the median family income for the county in which the real property is
located;
         b.   The real property is in an area zoned for residential use that is
located within the urban growth boundary; and
         c.   The housing or space for housing complies with applicable land
use regulations and meets the standards and criteria for residential
development for the underlying zone.
      8.   Housing and space for housing provided under subsection 7. of this
section must be subject to a covenant appurtenant that restricts the owner and
each successive owner of the building or any residential unit contained in the
building from selling or renting any residential unit described in subsection
7.a. of this section as housing that is not affordable to households with
incomes equal to or less than 60% of the median family income for the county in
which the real property is located for a period of 60 years from the date of
the certificate of occupancy.
   B.   Governmental structure or use of land;
   C.   Public utility activity;
   D.   Veterinarian office, animal hospital;
   E.   Single-family residences or manufactured homes meeting standards of §
17.24.090;
   F.   Machine and welding shops, sheet metal, wood, fiberglass manufacturing
and other similar uses;
   G.   A single-family dwelling occupied by the owner, manager, night watchman
or caretaker of the commercial establishment may be permitted accessory to the
commercial use;
   H.   Amateur radio antennas;
   I.   Commercial radio stations and antennas;
   J.   Marijuana retailer or medical dispensary; and
   K.   Any other use that is compatible with the purpose and intent of the
zone, and that would have off-site impacts that would not significantly exceed
those that are typical of the other conditionally permitted uses listed in this
section.
(Ord. 1277, § 1, 2019; Ord. 1270, 2018; Ord. 1255, § 4, 2017; Ord. 1160, § 7,
2003; Ord. 1101, 1997; Ord. 1069, 1994; Ord. 1054, 1993; Ord. 1012, 1990; Ord.
853, 1981; Ord. 644, § 20(part), 1974)
§ 17.36.040  GENERAL STANDARDS.
   In a C-2 zone, the following shall apply to all uses permitted outright
except two-family and multi-family dwellings.
   A.   A development plan shall be submitted to the city as a part of a
building permit or a change of use of the property.
   B.   The development plan shall show the locations of all existing and
proposed buildings and structures, all parking areas and vehicular ingress and
egress points, lighting, signs, screening, landscaping and such other data as
may have a bearing on adjacent properties.
   C.   Vehicular ingress and egress, signs, lighting, and landscaping and
screening must meet the standards of this title.
(Ord. 1235, § 1(part), 2013; Ord. 1111, 1997; Ord. 644, § 20(part), 1974)
§ 17.36.050  YARDS.
   Except as provided in
Chapter 17.80 and §§
17.08.030 through 17.08.130, in a C-2 zone yards shall be as follows:
   A.   The front yard shall be a minimum of 20 feet;
   B.   The street side yard shall be a minimum of 20 feet;
   C.   A side or rear yard abutting a residential zone shall be a minimum of
ten feet;
   D.   Where a side or rear yard is not required and a structure is not to be
erected at the property line, it shall be set back at least three feet from the
property line;
   E.   Setbacks for automobile service stations. Freestanding gasoline pumps
and pump islands may occupy a required front or street side yard; provided,
they are a minimum of 15 feet from the property line separating the yard from
the street.
(Ord. 1235, § 1(part), 2013; Ord. 1101, 1997; Ord. 644, § 20(part), 1974)
§ 17.36.060  LOT COVERAGE.
   In a C-2 zone, buildings shall not occupy more than 50% of the lot area.
(Ord. 644, § 20(part), 1974)
§ 17.36.070  BUILDING HEIGHT.
   Except as provided in
Chapter 17.80 and §§
17.08.030 through 17.08.130, no building shall exceed a height of 35 feet.
(Ord. 644, § 20(part), 1974)
§ 17.36.080  OPEN STORAGE.
   There shall be no open storage in the C-2 zone at any business or upon other
property excluding residences without first obtaining an annual open storage
permit.
(Ord. 1235, § 1(part), 2013; Ord. 1026, 1991)
§ 17.36.090  EXTERIOR LIGHTING.
   Exterior lighting shall be located in such a manner so as not to face
directly, shine or reflect glare onto a street, a highway or a lot in a
residential zone.
(Ord. 1101, 1997)
§ 17.36.100  USE OF RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES IN COMMERCIAL ZONES.
   Preexisting residential structures may be occupied by uses permitted in the
zone provided the structure meets minimum building and safety standards as
outlined in the building codes.
(Ord. 1235, § 1(part), 2013; Ord. 1101, 1997)
CHAPTER 17.40:  C-3 COMMERCIAL NEIGHBORHOOD ZONE
Section
   
17.40.010   Purpose.
   
17.40.020   Uses permitted outright.
   
17.40.030   Conditional uses permitted.
   
17.40.040   Special standards.
§ 17.40.010  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the C-3 zone is to provide areas suitable and desirable for
retail and service enterprises which are appropriate to meet the convenience
shopping needs of people living within the immediate surrounding area. Areas
designated for this purpose are intended to be extremely limited in size. They
should be spaced at intervals of at least one-half mile from each other in
order to assure their compatibility with surrounding areas and that the areas
will be developed and maintained at a suitable neighborhood scale.
(Ord. 644, § 30(part), 1974)
§ 17.40.020  USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT.
   In a C-3 zone, the following uses and their accessory uses shall be
permitted outright:
   A.   A use permitted outright in an R-3 zone;
   B.   Food store;
   C.   Drug store;
   D.   Variety store;
   E.   Barber or beauty shop;
   F.   Laundromat, clothes cleaning establishment;
   G.   Indoor snack bar, if accessory to, and an internal part of, a drug or
variety store;
   H.   Rooming or boarding house; and
   I.   Bed and breakfast establishment.
(Ord. 905, 1983; Ord. 687, (part), 1977; Ord. 644, § 30(part), 1974)
§ 17.40.030  CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   In a C-3 zone, the following uses and their accessory uses may be permitted
subject to the provisions of this section and
Chapter 17.80:
   A.   Church, non-profit religious or philanthropic institution; including
activities customarily associated with the practices of the religious activity,
including:
      1.   Worship services.
      2.   Religion classes.
      3.   Weddings.
      4.   Funerals.
      5.   Meal programs.
      6.   Child care, but not including private or parochial school education
for prekindergarten through grade 12 or higher education.
      7.   Providing housing or space for housing in a building that is
detached from the place of worship, provided:
         a.   At least 50% of the residential units provided under this
paragraph are affordable to households with incomes equal to or less than 60%
of the median family income for the county in which the real property is
located;
         b.   The real property is in an area zoned for residential use that is
located within the urban growth boundary; and
         c.   The housing or space for housing complies with applicable land
use regulations and meets the standards and criteria for residential
development for the underlying zone
      8.   Housing and space for housing provided under subsection 7. of this
section must be subject to a covenant appurtenant that restricts the owner and
each successive owner of the building or any residential unit contained in the
building from selling or renting any residential unit described in subsection
7.a. of this section as housing that is not affordable to households with
incomes equal to or less than 60% of the median family income for the county in
which the real property is located for a period of 60 years from the date of
the certificate of occupancy.
   B.   Community center;
   C.   Governmental structure or use of land, or public utility facility. All
equipment and material storage shall be within an enclosed building. No
workshop areas shall be permitted;
   D.   Office, business or professional, but not including veterinarian; and
   E.   Any other use that is compatible with the purpose and intent of the
zone, and that would have off-site impacts that would not significantly exceed
those that are typical of the other conditionally permitted uses listed in this
section.
(Ord. 1277, § 1, 2019; Ord. 1270, 2018; Ord. 687, (part), 1977; Ord. 644, § 30
(part), 1974)
§ 17.40.040  SPECIAL STANDARDS.
   In a C-3 zone, the following special standards shall apply.
   A.   Residential uses shall be subject to the requirements of the R-2 zone.
   B.   Uses other than residential shall be subject to the requirements of the
C-2 zone.
   C.   The maximum size of any C-3 zoned area shall be two acres. No
establishment situated within a C-3 zone shall exceed a size of 10,000 square
feet, including building, storage, sales and off-street parking and loading
areas.
   D.   Areas zoned C-3 shall be located no closer than one-half mile to each
other.
   E.   Areas zoned C-3 shall be situated on either an arterial or collector
street as indicated on the city comprehensive plan.
   F.   All parking areas and service drives shall be permanently surfaced and
clearly and permanently marked.
   G.   Off-street parking areas intended for five or more cars shall be
provided with screening consisting of a fence, wall, hedge or similar sight-
obscuring material installed within six months of completion of the parking
area and shall be maintained in good condition.
   H.   Marijuana facilities are prohibited.
(Ord. 1255, § 5, 2017; Ord. 1235, § 1(part), 2013; Ord. 905, 1983; Ord. 687,
(part), 1977; Ord. 644, § 30(part), 1974)
CHAPTER 17.44:  M INDUSTRIAL ZONE
Section
   
17.44.010   Purpose.
   
17.44.020   Uses permitted outright.
   
17.44.030   Conditional uses permitted.
   
17.44.040   Limitation on use.
   
17.44.050   Yards.
   
17.44.060   Lot coverage.
   
17.44.070   Building height.
   
17.44.090   Exterior lighting.
§ 17.44.010  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the M zone is to provide areas suitable and desirable for all
types of industrial activity; provided that, development controls are utilized
to minimize possible harmful effects related to air and water pollution and to
potential nuisance hazards such as fire, explosion or noise. The M zone is
appropriate in those large areas already developed for industrial use and in
those areas possessing site characteristics suitable for industry, such as good
access to highway and rail facilities, readily available water and sewer
systems, level and well drained sites, and little or no potential hazard to
nearby residential or commercial areas.
(Ord. 644, § 10(part), 1974)
§ 17.44.020  USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT.
   In an M zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted
outright:
   A.   Truck terminal, freight depot;
   B.   Wholesale establishment;
   C.   A use involving manufacture, research, warehousing, assembly,
processing or fabricating, except the following:
      1.   A use listed as a conditional use in the M zone; and
      2.   A use which has been declared a nuisance by statute, ordinance or a
court of competent jurisdiction.
   D.   Amateur radio antennas; and
   E.   Commercial radio stations and antennas.
(Ord. 1160, § 7, 2003; Ord. 644, § 10(part), 1974)
§ 17.44.030  CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   In an M zone, the following uses and their accessory uses may be permitted
subject to the provisions of
Chapter 17.80:
   A.   Manufacturing and related uses including:
      1.   Cement, lime or similar products manufacture;
      2.   Explosives storage or manufacture;
      3.   Petroleum products manufacture or refining;
      4.   Pulp mill;
      5.   Rendering plant, tannery, slaughterhouse;
      6.   Smelting, refining of metallic ore; and
      7.   Other uses similar to the above which may possess characteristics
injurious to public health and safety due to emission of smoke, noise, dust,
odor, refuse, fumes, vibration or similar hazard.
   B.   Airport;
   C.   Automobile wrecking yard, junkyard;
   D.   Public utility or safety facility;
   E.   Retail sales or repair when secondary to the outright use;
   F.   Heavy equipment repair;
   G.   Feed, seed store;
   H.   Plumbing, heating, electrical or paint contractor’s storage, sales or
repair shop;
   I.   Controlled recreation;
   J.   A single-family dwelling occupied by the owner, manager, night
watchperson or caretaker of the industrial establishment may be permitted
accessory to the industrial use;
   K.   Marijuana producer, marijuana processor, marijuana wholesaler, a
marijuana laboratory, a marijuana test facility, a marijuana grow site, and a
marijuana processor site; and
   L.   Any other use that is compatible with the purpose and intent of the
zone, and that would have off-site impacts that would not significantly exceed
those that are typical of the other conditionally permitted uses listed in this
section.
(Ord. 1277, § 1, 2019; Ord. 1255, § 6, 2017; Ord. 1101, 1997; Ord. 1061, 1993;
Ord. 905, 1983; Ord. 644, § 10(part), 1974)
§ 17.44.040  LIMITATION ON USE.
   Uses permitted outright involving manufacture and all conditional uses shall
meet all applicable standards and regulations of the Oregon State Board of
Health, the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality, the Mid-Willamette
Valley Air Pollution Authority and any other public agency having appropriate
regulatory jurisdiction. Prior to approval of conditional use permits or zoning
permits, evidence shall be submitted to the city indicating that the proposed
activity has been approved by all appropriate regulatory agencies.
(Ord. 644, § 10(part), 1974)
§ 17.44.050  YARDS.
   Except as provided in
Chapter 17.80 and §§
17.08.030 through 17.08.130, in an M zone yards shall be as follows.
   A.   The front yard shall be a minimum of 20 feet.
   B.   The street side yard shall be a minimum of 20 feet.
   C.   A side or rear yard abutting a residential zone shall be a minimum of
20 feet.
   D.   Where a side or rear yard is not required and a structure is not to be
erected at the property line, it shall be set back at least three feet from the
property line.
(Ord. 1235, § 1(part), 2013; Ord. 1101, 1997; Ord. 644, § 10(part), 1974)
§ 17.44.060  LOT COVERAGE.
   In an M zone, buildings shall not occupy more than 50% of the lot area.
(Ord. 644, § 10(part), 1974)
§ 17.44.070  BUILDING HEIGHT.
   Except as provided in
Chapter 17.80 and §§
17.08.030 through 17.08.130, in an M zone building heights shall not be
restricted. However, all buildings exceeding 35 feet in height to be
constructed or substantially altered or extended shall meet all applicable
state of Oregon and city standards related to public safety and fire
protection.
(Ord. 644, § 10(part), 1974)
§ 17.44.090  EXTERIOR LIGHTING.
   Exterior lighting shall be located in such a manner so as not to face
directly, shine or reflect glare onto a street, a highway or a lot in a
residential zone.
(Ord. 1101, 1997)
CHAPTER 17.48:  PD PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ZONE
Section
   
17.48.010   Purpose.
   
17.48.020   Establishment in combination with the underlying zone.
   
17.48.030   Standards and requirements.
   
17.48.040   Application.
   
17.48.050   Review criteria.
   
17.48.060   Action and findings by the Planning Commission.
   
17.48.070   Changes to approved plans.
   
17.48.080   Effective date of development plan approval.
   
17.48.090   Noncompliance with the approved development plan.
§ 17.48.010  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of Planned Development Zone is to make possible a greater
variety and diversification in the relationships between buildings and open
spaces in planned building groups, while insuring compliance with the purposes
and objectives of the zoning regulations and the intent and purpose of this
chapter.
(Ord. 1154, § 1, 2003)
§ 17.48.020  ESTABLISHMENT IN COMBINATION WITH THE UNDERLYING ZONE.
   A PD zone is an overlay zone that can be applied in conjunction with any
other zone designation. Although this overlay designation permits modifications
to the site development standards of the underlying zone standards, it does not
permit changes in uses specified by the underlying zone. The following
subsections allow for Planning Commission review of a detailed development
plan. When a planned development project is proposed without a Planned
Development Zone designation, the Official Zoning Map shall be amended with a
planned development overlay designation for the subject development site.
(Ord. 1154, § 1, 2003)
§ 17.48.030  STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.
   Approval of a request for a planned development is dependent upon the
submission of an acceptable plan and satisfactory assurance that it will be
carried out. The following minimum standards and requirements shall apply.
   A.   A use permitted in an underlying zone may be permitted in a planned
development.
   B.   A planned development must meet the applicable requirements of Oregon
Revised Statutes for planned developments.
   C.   Public and private streets shall be developed to city standards.
   D.   Pedestrian walkways and bikeways shall be provided for adequate
internal pedestrian and bicycle traffic and shall connect to any adjacent
existing or planned sidewalks, bikeways, access corridors or public trails.
   E.   All utility facilities shall be installed underground and in accordance
with city standards.
   F.   Open space areas and facilities include such things as landscaped
areas, natural areas, golf courses and other recreational facilities, but does
not include streets, sidewalks, bikeways, access corridors or trails.
   G.   1.   A facility providing services in support of uses within a planned
development may be permitted in any zone within the planned development.
Services in support may include such services as housekeeping, landscape
maintenance, security, meeting rooms, clubhouses, swimming pools, tennis
courts, catered food service facilities, parking, offices and related
facilities for staff, administrators, owners associations and owners and their
guests.
      2.   Provisions shall be made to buffer these uses from incompatible uses
on adjoining properties.
   H.   Phases, if proposed, shall be:
      1.   Substantially and functionally self-contained and self-sustaining
with regard to access, parking, utilities, open spaces and similar physical
features; capable of substantial occupancy, operation and maintenance upon
completion of construction and development;
      2.   Arranged to avoid conflicts between higher and lower density
development;
      3.   Properly related to other services of the community as a whole and
to those facilities and services yet to be provided; and
      4.   Provided with such temporary or permanent transitional features,
buffers or protective areas as may be required to prevent damage or detriment
to any completed phases and to adjoining properties not in the planned
development.
(Ord. 1154, § 1, 2003)
§ 17.48.040  APPLICATION.
   The person filing the application must be the owner or his or her agent. If
the planned development is to include land in more than one ownership, the
application must be submitted jointly by all of the owners of the separately
owned properties to be included.
   A.   Application requirements.
      1.   One copy of the narrative on eight and one-half inches by 11 inches
sheets;
      2.   Four sets of scaled drawings of the conceptual development plan,
with sheet size not to exceed 24 inches by 36 inches. Where necessary, an
overall plan with additional detail sheets may be submitted;
      3.   One set of the development plan shall be reduced to fit on eight and
one-half inches by 11 inches sheets of paper. Names and numbers must be legible
on this sheet size; and
      4.   After the application is accepted as complete, any revisions may
require a new application, additional filing fees and rescheduling of the
public hearing.
   B.   Development plan required. All applications shall be accompanied by a
development plan drawn to scale showing the following:
      1.   Use or uses;
      2.   Dimensions and locations of proposed structures and of areas to be
reserved for vehicular and pedestrian circulation, parking, public uses, open
spaces, including landscaping;
      3.   Drawings and sketches demonstrating the design and character of the
proposed uses and the physical relationships of the uses; and
      4.   Such other pertinent information shall be included as may be
considered necessary by the review authority to make a determination that the
contemplated arrangement or use makes it necessary and desirable to apply
regulations and requirements differing from those ordinarily applicable under
this ordinance and Title 16 of this code of ordinances.
   C.   Narrative requirements. A written statement shall include the following
information:
      1.   A description of the character of the proposed development;
      2.   Analysis of how the application meets the review criteria;
      3.   Intentions with regard to ownership in the planned development;
      4.   Quantitative data for the following where appropriate:
         a.   Total number and type of dwelling units;
         b.   Parcel sizes;
         c.   Proposed lot coverage of buildings and structures where known;
         d.   Gross densities per acre;
         e.   Total amount of open space; and
         f.   Total amount of nonresidential construction.
      5.   General statement of intentions concerning timing, responsibilities
and assurances for all public and non-public improvements; and
      6.   Statement describing project phasing, if proposed.
(Ord. 1154, § 1, 2003)
§ 17.48.050  REVIEW CRITERIA.
   A.   Requests for approval of a planned development shall be reviewed to
assure consistency with the purposes of this chapter, policies and density
requirements of the Comprehensive Plan, and any other applicable policies and
standards adopted by the city.
   B.   The project will be compatible with adjacent developments, with
consideration of the following factors, if applicable:
      1.   Basic site design, including the organization of uses on a site;
      2.   Visual elements (scale, structural design and form, materials and so
forth);
      3.   Noise reduction;
      4.   Noxious odors;
      5.   Lighting;
      6.   Signage;
      7.   Landscaping for buffering and screening;
      8.   Traffic;
      9.   Effects on off-site parking; and
      10.   Effects on air and water quality.
   C.   The applicant has, through investigation, planning and programming,
demonstrated the soundness of the proposal and their ability to carry out the
project as proposed.
   D.   Construction can begin within six months of the conclusion of any
necessary action by the city, or within such longer period of time as may be
established by the Planning Commission.
   E.   The proposal conforms with location and general development standards
of the city.
   F.   The project will benefit the city and the general public in terms of
need, convenience, service and appearance so as to justify any necessary
variances to the regulations of Titles 16 and 17 of this code of ordinances.
   G.   The project will satisfactorily take care of the traffic it generates
by means of adequate off-street parking, access points and additional street
right-of-way and improvements and any other traffic facilities required on or
off site.
   H.   The project will satisfactorily take care of sewer and water needs
consistent with city policy and plans.
   I.   A planned development in a residential zone will not result in a higher
density than permitted by the Comprehensive Plan for the underlying zone.
(Ord. 1154, § 1, 2003)
§ 17.48.060  ACTION AND FINDINGS BY PLANNING COMMISSION .
   The Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing in accordance with
Chapter 17.12 of this code of ordinances. Following the close of the hearing,
the Planning Commission shall either approve, conditionally approve or deny the
development plan. The Commission’s decision shall include findings that specify
how the application has or has not complied with the above review criteria. A
planned development as authorized shall be subject to all conditions imposed
and shall be varied from other provisions of this chapter only to the extent
specified in the approval.
(Ord. 1154, § 1, 2003)
§ 17.48.070  CHANGES TO APPROVED PLANS.
   An applicant may petition for review of an approved development plan for the
purpose of modifying that plan. The petition must include a statement of the
reasons for any changes, as well as graphical and text representations of the
proposed changes.
   A.   Major changes. When determined by the Community Development Director
that the proposed change is a major change from one or more of the review
criteria listed above, a hearing with notice as required in
Chapter 17.12 of this code of ordinances shall be scheduled before the Planning
Commission. In reviewing the proposed modification, the Planning Commission
shall follow the procedure required for submittal and review of a new plan. The
Planning Commission may consider the redesign of the development plan in whole
or in part.
   B.   Minor changes. When the Community Development Director determines that
proposed modifications of a plan reduce negative effects or have no effect on
the surrounding area, they may be reviewed and approved as an administrative
action.
(Ord. 1154, § 1, 2003)
§ 17.48.080  EFFECTIVE DATE OF DEVELOPMENT PLAN APPROVAL.
   A.   The following effective dates apply to a planned development approval.
The Planning Commission may establish different time frames.
      1.   Construction must begin within six months of the conclusion of any
necessary action by the city.
      2.   Approval of a development plan shall be valid for a three-year
period from the date of approval without documented progress to complete
implementation of an approved development plan.
      3.   The Planning Commission may permit implementation of the development
plan in phases.
   B.   At its discretion and without a public hearing, the Commission may
extend the approval one time for a period not to exceed two additional years.
(Ord. 1154, § 1, 2003)
§ 17.48.090  NONCOMPLIANCE WITH THE APPROVED DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
   If the Community Development Director determines that the development
substantially differs from the approved plans, the Community Development
Director shall notify the developer, Code Enforcement Officer and the Building
Official in writing. Enforcement of the approved development plans will proceed
under the available processes.
(Ord. 1154, § 1, 2003)
CHAPTER 17.52:  MI MOBILE HOME INFILL OVERLAY ZONE
Section
   
17.52.010   Purpose.
   
17.52.020   Establishment.
   
17.52.030   Uses permitted.
   
17.52.040   Designation on the zoning map.
§ 17.52.010  PURPOSE.
   The mobile home infill overlay is intended to meet the requirements of
O.R.S. 197.295 through O.R.S. 197.313, by allowing the permanent placement of
mobile homes on individual, residentially zoned lots. This overlay zone will
complement the city’s other procedures for reviewing mobile home placement
applications by establishing an expedited procedure for the placement of better
quality doublewide mobile homes in designated areas of the city.
(Ord. 1028, (part), 1991)
§ 17.52.020  ESTABLISHMENT.
   The M-I overlay is applied to three areas of the city.
   A.   The first area consists of residentially zoned lots east of Clark Mill
Road to the city limits and north of Highway 20 to the city limits (excluding
lots directly abutting Highway 20).
   B.   The second area consists of residentially zoned lots east of 35th
Avenue to the city limits and south of Highway 20 to the city limits (excluding
lots directly abutting Highway 20).
   C.   The third area consists of residential lots west of 18th Avenue to the
city limits and north of the railroad tracks to the city limits.
(Ord. 1028, (part), 1991)
§ 17.52.030  USES PERMITTED.
   In an area where a M-I zone is combined, in addition to the uses permitted
in the underlying zone, a doublewide mobile home on an individual lot is
permitted outright, subject to the placement standards of §
17.80.080J. All other uses permitted in the basic or underlying zone with which
an M-I overlay is combined are subject to the provisions of the underlying
zone.
(Ord. 1028, (part), 1991)
§ 17.52.040  DESIGNATION ON THE ZONING MAP.
   The mobile home infill area shall be designated by an M-I symbol on the
zoning map and shall be in addition to the symbol for the underlying zone.
(Ord. 1028, (part), 1991)
CHAPTER 17.60:  RC RECREATION COMMERCIAL ZONE
Section
   
17.60.010   Purpose.
   
17.60.020   Uses permitted outright.
   
17.60.030   Conditional uses permitted.
   
17.60.040   Special standards.
   
17.60.050   Development Plan Review.
§ 17.60.010  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the RC zone is to provide and maintain areas which possess
unique characteristics for recreation-related commercial and residential
development, and which are suitable and desirable for recreation businesses for
tourists and recreationists in the area. A high standard is essential in order
to maintain and enhance the appearance of the area and its unique value to the
community.
(Ord. 1155, § 1, 2003)
§ 17.60.020  USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT.
   In an RC zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted
outright:
   A.   Motel, hotel or resort;
   B.   Recreational vehicle park;
   C.   Recreational vehicle park with owner time share;
   D.   Museum or art gallery;
   E.   Community center, meeting facility, convention center or similar use;
   F.   Residential uses related to or in conjunction with a recreational
development;
   G.   Eating and drinking establishment;
   H.   Bed and breakfast establishment;
   I.   Recreational retail;
   J.   Arts and crafts workshops and retail sales;
   K.   Amusement or recreation services;
   L.   Recreational teaching facilities;
   M.   Single-family dwellings on legal lots of record at the time of
enactment of this chapter;
   N.   Residential facilities; and
   O.   Accessory dwelling. A maximum of one accessory dwelling is allowed per
legal single-family dwelling. The unit may be a detached building, in a portion
of a detached accessory building (e.g., above a garage or workshop), or a unit
attached or interior to the primary dwelling (e.g., an addition or the
conversion of an existing floor); subject to the following standards:
      1.   A detached accessory dwelling shall not exceed 864 square feet of
floor area, or 10% of lot area, whichever is smaller.
      2.   An attached or interior accessory dwelling shall not exceed 864
square feet of floor area, or 75% of the primary dwelling's floor area,
whichever is smaller. However, accessory dwellings that result from the
conversion of a level or floor (e.g., basement, attic, or second story) of the
primary dwelling may occupy the entire level or floor, even if the floor area
of the accessory dwelling would be more than 864 square feet.
      3.   A detached accessory dwelling shall have a roof with a minimum pitch
of three feet in height for each 12 feet in width.
      4.   An accessory dwelling shall be placed on a foundation that meets the
requirements of all applicable building codes.
      5.   One off-street parking space shall be provided for each accessory
dwelling. In addition, parking shall be increased for the primary dwelling if
needed so that the primary dwelling is provided two off-street parking spaces.
      6.   Unless otherwise specified, accessory dwellings shall meet all other
development standards (e.g., height, setbacks, lot coverage, etc.) for
accessory buildings in the zoning district.
(Ord. 1270, 2018; Ord. 1155, § 1, 2003)
§ 17.60.030  CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   In an RC zone, the following uses and their accessory uses may be permitted
as a part of a planned development (PD), or subject to the provisions of this
section and
Chapter 17.80:
   A.   Aggregate extraction;
   B.   Light industrial uses;
   C.   Recreation oriented uses or activities not listed above;
   D.   Residential uses not related to or in conjunction with a recreational
development;
   E.   Public storage facility;
   F.   Non-recreational retail;
   G.   Governmental structure or use of land, or public utility facility. All
equipment and material storage shall be within an enclosed building;
   H.   Marijuana retailer or medical dispensary; and
   I.   Any other use that is compatible with the purpose and intent of the
zone, and that would have off-site impacts that would not significantly exceed
those that are typical of the other conditionally permitted uses listed in this
section.
(Ord. 1277, § 1, 2019; Ord. 1255, § 7, 2017; Ord. 1155, § 1, 2003)
§ 17.60.040  SPECIAL STANDARDS.
   In an RC zone, the following special standards shall apply unless modified
as a part of a planned development.
   A.   Single-family dwellings and accessory uses, including accessory
dwellings, shall meet the following minimum standards.
      1.   Minimum lot size shall be 8,000 square feet.
      2.   Minimum lot width shall be 80 feet.
      3.   Minimum yard setbacks:
         a.   Front, from either a public or private street, shall be a minimum
of 20 feet;
         b.   Side shall be a minimum five feet with a combined minimum of 13
feet;
         c.   Street side shall be minimum of 15 feet;
         d.   A garage shall have a minimum setback of 20 feet from the point
of access to the vehicle doors; and
         e.   Rear shall be a minimum of 15 feet.
      4.   Detached accessory dwellings shall not exceed 20 feet in height at
the apex of the roof. All other buildings shall not exceed 30 feet in height.
      5.   Building coverage shall not exceed 35% of the land area.
      6.   A carport or garage is required for each single-family dwelling; not
including accessory dwellings.
      7.   Off-street parking will be based on the city parking standards.
   B.   Two-family dwellings and accessory uses shall meet the following
standards.
      1.   Minimum lot size shall be 5,000 square feet.
      2.   Minimum lot width shall be 60 feet.
      3.   Minimum yard setbacks:
         a.   Front, from either a public or private street, shall be a minimum
of 20 feet;
         b.   Side shall be a minimum of five feet;
         c.   Street side shall be minimum of 15 feet;
         d.   A garage shall have a minimum setback of 20 feet from the point
of access to the vehicle doors; and
         e.   Rear shall be a minimum of ten feet.
      4.   Building height shall not exceed 40 feet.
      5.   Building coverage shall not exceed 50% of the land area.
      6.   A carport or garage for each unit is required.
      7.   Off-street parking will be based on the city parking standards.
   C.   Multi-family dwellings and accessory uses shall meet the following
standards.
      1.   Minimum lot size shall be 1,245 square feet per unit.
      2.   Minimum yard setbacks:
         a.   Front, from either a public or private street, shall be 20 feet;
         b.   Side shall be a minimum ten feet;
         c.   Street side shall be minimum of 15 feet;
         d.   A garage shall have a minimum setback of 20 feet from the point
of access to the vehicle doors; and
         e.   Rear shall be a minimum of ten feet.
      3.   Building height shall not exceed 40 feet.
      4.   Building coverage shall not exceed 60% of the land area.
      5.   Off-street parking will be based on the city parking standards.
   D.   Single-family attached dwellings shall meet the following standards.
      1.   Minimum lot size shall be 1,245 square feet per unit.
      2.   Minimum yard setbacks:
         a.   Front, from either a public or private street, shall be 20 feet;
         b.   Sides between units shall be zero;
         c.   Sides on exterior boundaries shall be five feet;
         d.   Street side shall be a minimum of 15 feet;
         e.   A garage shall have a minimum setback of 20 feet from the point
of access to the vehicle doors; and
         f.   Rear shall be a minimum of ten feet.
      3.   Building height shall not exceed 40 feet.
      4.   Building coverage shall not exceed 60% of the land area.
      5.   Off-street parking will be based on the city parking standards.
   E.   Commercial establishments shall meet the following standards.
      1.   Off-street parking will be based on the city parking standards.
      2.   A minimum of 15% of the land area shall be designed as open space
with appropriate landscaping. To the maximum extent feasible, natural features
of the land shall be preserved.
      3.   Building height shall not exceed 45 feet.
      4.   Yard setbacks:
         a.   Front, from either a public or private street, shall be 20 feet;
and
         b.   (1)   Sides, none, except if abutting residential zones, and then
the side yard shall be at least ten feet.
            (2)   The required side yard shall be increased by one-half foot
for each foot the building height that exceeds 20 feet.
         c.   (1)   Rear, none, except if abutting residential zones, and then
the rear yard shall be at least ten feet.
            (2)   The required rear yard shall be increased by one-half foot
for each foot that the building height exceeds 20 feet.
(Ord. 1270, 2018; Ord. 1155, § 1, 2003)
§ 17.60.050  DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW.
   In the RC Zone, submittal of a plan for development on a specific piece of
property shall comply with the following.
   A.   The site plan, with proposed land uses, shall include accurate
measurements from property lines to and between all structures.
   B.   Building types, with approximate dimensions should be submitted. The
plans should indicate the general height, bulk and appearance of buildings.
   C.   Vehicular and pedestrian access and circulation must be included on the
plan.
   D.   The configuration, including a count and size of all spaces and aisle
widths, of all parking areas should be included.
   E.   Existing natural features such as streams, riparian zone, wetlands and
topography must be shown before construction and include proposed impacts to
the natural resources.
   F.   Proposals for landscaping, fencing or other barriers should be included
on the plan.
   G.   Proposals for the location, size, height and lighting of signs should
be submitted.
   H.   Proposals for the provision of water, fire suppression, sewage, storm
drainage, exterior lighting and solid waste must be submitted.
(Ord. 1155, § 1, 2003)
CHAPTER 17.68:  R/M(T) RESIDENTIAL INDUSTRIAL TRANSITIONAL
Section
   
17.68.010   Purpose.
   
17.68.020   Establishment.
   
17.68.030   Uses permitted.
   
17.68.040   Conditional uses permitted.
   
17.68.050   Limitations.
§ 17.68.010  PURPOSE.
   The R/M(T) zone is a transitional zone which provides a process that allows
for the consideration of converting property in a residential area to
industrial uses (e.g., sites for small industry, expansion to existing
industry, etc.). It is not the intent of the zone to allow industrial
development to occur at the cost of existing residential development.
Industrial development should be allowed only when measures have been taken to
protect remaining residential property from nuisances which may result from
industrial activities (i.e., noise, smoke, odor, dust, fire or explosion hazard
or pollution of air and water). In order to protect existing residential
development from potential industrial nuisances and to facilitate an orderly
and efficient conversion of land from residential to industrial uses, it is
intended that all industrial uses in the zone shall be subject to conditional
use process.
(Ord. 791, (part), 1980; Ord. 644, § 20(part), 1974)
§ 17.68.020  ESTABLISHMENT.
   An R/M(T) zone may be applied to any residential zoned neighborhood or area
which is adjacent to industrial zoned land and has been designated industrial
by the city’s Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. 791, (part), 1980; Ord. 644, § 20(part), 1974)
§ 17.68.030  USES PERMITTED.
   In an R/M(T) zone, the following uses and their accessory uses are permitted
outright:
   A.   Single-family dwelling;
   B.   Residential facility; and
   C.   Manufactured homes meeting the standards of §
17.24.090.
   D.   Accessory dwelling. A maximum of one accessory dwelling is allowed per
legal single-family dwelling. The unit may be a detached building, in a portion
of a detached accessory building (e.g., above a garage or workshop), or a unit
attached or interior to the primary dwelling (e.g., an addition or the
conversion of an existing floor); subject to the following standards:
      1.   A detached accessory dwelling shall not exceed 864 square feet of
floor area, or 10% of lot area, whichever is smaller.
      2.   An attached or interior accessory dwelling shall not exceed 864
square feet of floor area, or 75% of the primary dwelling's floor area,
whichever is smaller. However, accessory dwellings that result from the
conversion of a level or floor (e.g., basement, attic, or second story) of the
primary dwelling may occupy the entire level or floor, even if the floor area
of the accessory dwelling would be more than 864 square feet.
      3.   A detached accessory dwelling shall have a roof with a minimum pitch
of three feet in height for each 12 feet in width.
      4.   One off-street parking space shall be provided for each accessory
dwelling. In addition, parking shall be increased for the primary dwelling if
needed so that the primary dwelling is provided two off-street parking spaces.
      5.   Unless otherwise specified, accessory dwellings shall meet all other
development standards (e.g., height, setbacks, lot coverage, etc.) for
accessory buildings in the zoning district.
(Ord. 1270, 2018; Ord. 1069, 1994; Ord. 1039, (part), 1992; Ord. 791, (part),
1980; Ord. 644, § 20(part), 1974)
§ 17.68.040  CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED.
   In the R/M(T) zone, all uses allowed in the industrial zone and accessory
uses may be permitted subject to the provisions of this section and
Chapter 17.80. In addition, rooming and boarding houses shall be permitted
subject to the provisions of this chapter and
Chapter 17.80.
(Ord. 905, 1983; Ord. 791, (part), 1980; Ord. 644, § 20(part), 1974)
§ 17.68.050  LIMITATIONS.
   A.   Single-family dwellings and residential facilities shall be subject to
the standards of the R-1 zone except building size for which R-2 standards
shall apply.
   B.   Uses permitted conditionally involving manufacture shall meet all
applicable standards and regulations of the Oregon State Board of Health, the
Oregon Department of Environmental Quality and any other public agency having
appropriate regulatory jurisdiction. Prior to approval of conditional use
permits or zoning permits, evidence shall be submitted to the city indicating
that the proposed activity has been approved by appropriate regulatory
agencies.
   C.   All industrial uses shall be subject to the yard lot coverage and
building height standards of the M zone.
   D.   Marijuana facilities are prohibited.
(Ord. 1255, § 8, 2017; Ord. 1069, 1994; Ord. 1039, 1992; Ord. 905, §§ 2, 3,
1983; Ord. 791, (part), 1980; Ord. 644, § 20(part), 1974)
CHAPTER 17.72:  NR NATURAL RESOURCES
Section
   
17.72.010   Purpose.
   
17.72.020   Establishment.
   
17.72.030   Applicability.
   
17.72.040   Activities subject to review.
   
17.72.050   Exceptions in the riparian zone.
   
17.72.060   Agency review.
   
17.72.070   General development standards.
   
17.72.080   Variances.
   
17.72.090   Mitigation standards.
   
17.72.100   Plan amendment option.
§ 17.72.010  PURPOSE.
   The NR zone is designed to protect identified significant natural resources
in the City of Sweet Home. The intent of this zone is to ensure reasonable
economic use of property while protecting valuable natural resources.
(Ord. 1156, § 1, 2003)
§ 17.72.020  ESTABLISHMENT.
   An NR zone is an overlay zone that can be applied in conjunction with any
other zone designation. The NR zone is applied to natural resource areas
identified in this chapter.
(Ord. 1156, § 1, 2003)
§ 17.72.030  APPLICABILITY.
   The procedures and requirements of the NR Zone apply to any parcel
designated as having one of the following identified natural resources:
   A.   Significant wetlands, as mapped in the city’s Local Wetlands Inventory
(LWI); and
   B.   Riparian corridors, as mapped in the city’s Riparian Inventory.
(Ord. 1156, § 1, 2003)
§ 17.72.040  ACTIVITIES SUBJECT TO REVIEW.
   In an NR zone, the following actions are subject to the review:
   A.   New structural development;
   B.   Exterior expansion of any building or structure;
   C.   Increases in impervious surfaces or storage areas;
   D.   Grading, excavation or fill; and
   E.   Removal of native vegetation.
(Ord. 1156, § 1, 2003)
§ 17.72.050  EXCEPTIONS IN THE RIPARIAN ZONE.
   The following activities may be excepted from the requirements of this
chapter upon administrative review approval that they are designed to meet the
standards listed in this chapter.
   A.   Drainage facilities, utilities and irrigation pumps;
   B.   Streets, roads, driveways or paths;
   C.   Water-related and water-dependent uses;
   D.   Replacement of existing structures with structures in the same location
that do not disturb additional riparian surface area;
   E.   Removal of non-native vegetation and replacement with native plant
species; and
   F.   Alteration of the area by placement of structures or impervious
surfaces within the Riparian Zone upon demonstration that equal or better
protection for identified resources will be ensured through restoration of
riparian areas, enhanced buffer treatment or similar measures; providing that,
the alterations not exceed 50% of the width of the riparian area, measured from
the upland edge of the Zone.
(Ord. 1156, § 1, 2003)
§ 17.72.060  AGENCY REVIEW.
   Decisions made by the City of Sweet Home under this chapter do not supercede
the authority of the state or federal agencies which may regulate or have an
interest in the activity in question.
   A.   It is the responsibility of the landowner or applicant to ensure that
any necessary state or federal permits or clearances are obtained.
   B.   The city will notify the Division of State Lands for development
permits and other land use decisions affecting inventoried wetlands.
(Ord. 1156, § 1, 2003)
§ 17.72.070  GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   A.   The City of Sweet Home has adopted safe harbor setback methodology for
the identification of significant riparian corridors and significant wetlands.
These resources are identified on the Local Wetlands Inventory and Riparian
Inventory Maps. Property owners are responsible to have a qualified
professional identify the wetlands boundary on the affected property.
 
Natural Area               Width of Vegetated Corridor, per side
South Santiam River        75'
Ames Creek and Wiley Creek 50'
 
   B.   Setbacks for structures within a riparian corridor are measured from
the top of bank, which is the line of ordinary high water in a two-year event.
   C.   For an exception to be allowed, the applicant shall comply with the
following requirements:
      1.   Demonstrate that no other practicable access to the buildable area
exists;
      2.   Design roads, driveways and paths to be the minimum width necessary
while allowing for safe passage of vehicles and/or pedestrians;
      3.   Consider the need for future extensions of shared access, access
easements or private streets in order to avoid subsequent encroachments into a
significant natural resource;
      4.   During construction, no stockpiling of fill materials, parking or
storage of equipment shall be allowed within a significant natural resource;
      5.   Erosion control measures, such as silt fences and biofilter bags,
shall be used to reduce the likelihood of sediment and untreated stormwater
entering a significant natural resource;
      6.   Utilities and drainage facilities: Public and private utilities or
drainage facilities may be placed when it is shown that no other practicable
alternative location exists. If a utility or drainage facility is allowed, the
following standards shall apply:
         a.   Demonstrate that no other practicable access exists;
         b.   The corridor necessary to construct utilities shall be the
minimum width practical so as to minimize intrusion into a significant natural
resource;
         c.   Removal of trees and native vegetation shall be avoided unless
absolutely necessary. Native vegetation shall be used to restore the vegetative
character of the construction corridor;
         d.   The existing grade of the land shall be restored after
construction; and
         e.   No stockpiling of fill materials, parking or storage of equipment
shall be allowed within a significant natural resource.
      7.   Structures or other non-conforming alterations existing fully or
partially within a significant Natural Resource may be expanded provided the
expansion occurs outside of a significant natural resource. Substantial
improvement of a non-conforming structure in a significant natural resource
shall require compliance with the standards of this chapter.
      8.   Existing lawn within a significant natural resource may be
maintained, but not expanded within the limits of a significant natural
resource. Development activities shall not justify replacement of native
vegetation, especially riparian vegetation, with lawn.
   D.   1.   Removal of non-native vegetation and replacement with native plant
species is allowed and shall comply with the following requirements.
      2.   The replacement vegetation shall at a minimum:
         a.   Cover the area from which vegetation was removed;
         b.   Maintain or exceed the density of the removed vegetation; and
         c.   Maintain or improve the shade provided by the vegetation.
   E.   Trees in danger of falling and thereby posing a hazard to life or
property may be removed, following consultation and approval from the Community
Development Director.
   F.   The control or removal of nuisance plants should primarily be by non-
chemical means (e.g. hand-pulling).
      1.   If non-chemical means fail to adequately control nuisance plant
populations, a glyphosate based herbicide, or other environmentally safe
herbicide, may be used.
      2.   No pre-emergent herbicides or auxin herbicides that pose a risk of
contaminating water should be used.
      3.   Herbicide applications must be applied according to manufactured
specifications.
(Ord. 1156, § 1, 2003)
§ 17.72.080  VARIANCES.
   A variance to the provisions of this chapter may be applied for to consider
hardships, claims of map errors verified by DSL, and when necessary to allow
reasonable economic use of the subject property. Permanent alteration of the
significant natural resource by an action requiring a variance is subject to
the mitigation procedures and criteria of this chapter.
(Ord. 1156, § 1, 2003)
§ 17.72.090  MITIGATION STANDARDS.
   When impacts to any identified significant natural resource occur,
mitigation will be required.
   A.   For impacts to wetlands, the following standards and criteria shall
apply.
      1.   The applicant must obtain a fill and removal permit from the Oregon
Division of State Lands and U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
      2.   The applicant must provide an approved mitigation plan that complies
with all Oregon Division of State Lands and U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
wetland regulations.
   B.   For impacts to riparian corridors, the following standards and criteria
shall apply:
      1.   A mitigation plan prepared by a qualified professional shall be
submitted to the city. The mitigation plan shall meet the following criteria:
         a.   Mitigation for impacts to a non-wetlands riparian area shall
require a minimum mitigation area ratio of one to one;
         b.   The mitigation plan shall document:
            (1)   The location of the impact;
            (2)   The existing conditions of the resource prior to impact;
            (3)   The location of the proposed mitigation area;
            (4)   A detailed planting plan of the proposed mitigation area with
species and density; and
            (5)   A narrative describing how the resource will be replaced.
      2.   Mitigation shall occur on-site and as close to the impact area as
possible. If this is not feasible, mitigation shall occur within the same
drainage basin as the impact.
      3.   All vegetation planted within the mitigation area shall be native to
the region. Species to be planted in the mitigation area shall replace those
impacted by the development activity.
      4.   Trees shall be planted at a density of not less than five per 1,000
square feet. Shrubs shall be planted at a density of not less than ten per
1,000 square feet.
(Ord. 1156, § 1, 2003)
§ 17.72.100  PLAN AMENDMENT OPTION.
   A.   Any owner of property affected by the NR Zone may apply for a Zone
amendment. The amendment must be based on a specific development proposal. The
effect of the amendment would be to remove the NR Zone from all or a portion of
the property. The applicant shall demonstrate that such an amendment is
justified by completing an Environmental, Social, Economic and Energy (ESEE)
Consequences Analysis prepared in accordance with Oregon Administrative Rules.
If the application is approved, then the ESEE analysis shall be incorporated by
reference into the applicable Sweet Home Inventory and the Maps shall be
amended.
   B.   The ESEE analysis shall adhere to the following requirements.
      1.   The ESEE analysis must demonstrate to the ultimate satisfaction of
the Sweet Home City Council that the adverse economic consequences of not
allowing the conflicting use are sufficient to justify the loss, or partial
loss, of the resource.
      2.   The ESEE analysis must demonstrate why the use cannot be located on
land outside of the natural resource area.
      3.   The ESEE analysis shall be prepared by a qualified professional
experienced in the preparation of Goal 5 ESEE analyses, with review by DLCD.
(Ord. 1156, § 1, 2003)
CHAPTER 17.80:  CONDITIONAL USES
Section
   
17.80.010   Purpose.
   
17.80.020   Process.
   
17.80.030   Application requirements.
   
17.80.040   Use criteria.
   
17.80.050   Conditions of approval.
   
17.80.060   Modification to approved plans and developments and transfers.
   
17.80.070   Expiration of approval.
   
17.80.080   Termination of a conditional use.
§ 17.80.010  PURPOSE.
   Certain uses require a case-by-case review and analysis due to the nature of
their potential impacts on surrounding land uses and public facilities.  These
are identified as conditional uses.  A conditional use is an activity which is
basically similar to other uses permitted in the zone.  It is the intent of
this chapter to provide standards and procedures so that these uses may be
permitted, enlarged or altered in a manner that will not be detrimental to the
public health, safety and general welfare, or to adjacent properties.  Nothing
in this chapter guarantees that a conditional use permit will be issued.
(Ord. 1225, § 1, 2011)
§ 17.80.020  PROCESS.
   An application for a conditional use permit shall be processed as a quasi-
judicial land use decision.  Notice will be provided as per §
17.12.120.  The Planning Commission will hold a public hearing following the
procedures in §
17.12.130.  Ministerial decisions will be made without public notice or
hearing.
(Ord. 1225, § 1, 2011)
§ 17.80.030  APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   An application for a conditional use must meet the submittal requirements
and the decision criteria noted below.
   A.   The applicant shall file an application with the city.  Within 30 days
following the filing of the application, the City Planner will make a
determination of completeness regarding the application.  If deemed complete,
the application will be processed in accordance with this title.
   B.   The application form shall be accompanied by the following information:
      1.   A site plan drawn to scale showing the dimensions and arrangement of
the proposed development on the subject lot;
      2.   Narrative describing the proposed use and the impacts on the
neighborhood;
      3.   For commercial activities, a proposed plan of business operation;
      4.   Off street parking and on-site circulation plans for vehicles,
bicycles, and pedestrians;
      5.   The location and dimensions of entrances and exits;
      6.   A Traffic Impact Study, if required by the City Engineer and the
City Planner;
      7.   Landscape plans;
      8.   A signage plan, if applicable;
      9.   Drawings of the exterior for new buildings;
      10.   Photographs of existing buildings if no changes are to be made to
the exterior of the building.
(Ord. 1225, § 1, 2011)
§ 17.80.040  USE CRITERIA.
   The criteria that will be used in approving, approving with conditions, or
denying an application, or to enlarge or alter a conditional use, will be based
on findings with respect to each of the following standards and criteria.
   A.   The request complies with the requirements of the underlying zone or
overlay zone, city codes, state and federal laws.
   B.   The site size, dimensions, location, topography and access are adequate
for the needs of the proposed use, considering, but not limited too, the
following:
      1.   Building size;
      2.   Parking;
      3.   Traffic;
      4.   Noise;
      5.   Vibration;
      6.   Exhaust and emissions;
      7.   Light and glare;
      8.   Erosion;
      9.   Odor;
      10.   Dust;
      11.   Visibility;
      12.   Safety;
      13.   Building, landscaping or street features.
   C.   Any negative impacts of the proposed use on adjacent properties and on
the public can be mitigated through application of other code standards, or
other reasonable conditions of approval that include but are not limited to
those listed in this chapter.
   D.   All required public facilities have adequate capacity, as determined by
the city, to serve the proposed use.
   E.   Home occupations must meet the following standards:
      1.   The home occupation shall be secondary to the residential use.
      2.   All aspects of the home occupation shall be contained and conducted
within a completely enclosing building.
      3.   No materials or mechanical equipment shall be used which are
detrimental to residential use of the dwelling or nearby dwellings because of
vibration, noise, dust, smoke, odor, interference with the electrical grid,
radio or television reception or other similar factors.
      4.   Vehicles related to the home occupation shall be parked in a manner
so as to not block any driveway or impede the safe flow of traffic.
   F.   Marijuana facilities must be located in a fixed location. No temporary
or mobile sites of any sort are allowed.
   G.   Marijuana facilities may not have any drive up services.
   H.   Marijuana facilities must be located at least 1,000 feet from the
property boundary of any school.
   I.   Marijuana facilities must be sited on a property so as to be at least
100 feet from the boundary of any residentially zoned property.
(Ord. 1255, § 9, 2017; Ord. 1235, § 1(part), 2013; Ord. 1225, § 1, 2011)
§ 17.80.050  CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL.
   In approving a conditional use permit application, the Planning Commission
may impose, in addition to those standards and requirements expressly specified
by this chapter, additional conditions determined to be necessary to assure
that the proposed development meets the decision criteria as well as the best
interests of the surrounding properties, the neighborhood, and the city as a
whole. 
   A.   These conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:
      1.   Requiring larger setback areas, lot area, and/or lot depth or width;
      2.   Limiting the hours, days, place and/or manner of operation;
      3.   Requiring site or architectural design features that minimize
environmental impacts such as noise, vibration, exhaust/emissions, light,
glare, erosion, odor or dust;
      4.   Limiting the building height, size or lot coverage, or location on
the site;
      5.   Designating the size, number, locations and/or design of vehicle
access points, parking areas, or loading areas;
      6.   Increasing the number of required parking spaces;
      7.   Requiring street right-of-ways to be dedicated and streets,
sidewalks, curbs, planting strips, pathways or trails to be improved, so long
as findings in the development approval indicate how the dedication and/or
improvements, if not voluntarily accepted by the applicant, are roughly
proportional to the impact of the proposed development;
      8.   Limiting the number, size, location, height and lighting of signs;
      9.   Limiting or setting standards for the location, design, and/or
intensity of outdoor lighting;
      10.   Requiring fencing, screening, landscaping, berms, drainage, water
quality facilities or other facilities to protect adjacent or nearby property,
and the establishment of standards for their installation and maintenance;
      11.   Designating sites for open space or outdoor recreation areas;
      12.   Requiring the protection and preservation of existing trees, soils,
vegetation, watercourses, habitat areas, drainage areas, and historic or
cultural resources;
      13.   Requiring ongoing maintenance of buildings and grounds;
      14.   Setting a time limit for which the conditional use is approved.
   B.   Uses existing prior to the effective date of this chapter and
classified in Title 17 as a conditional use shall meet the criteria for
modification of approved plans and developments.
   C.   The Planning Commission may require the applicant of an approved
conditional use permit to enter into an agreement with the city for
improvements in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 16.24.  This is to assure that the conditions of approval are completed
according to the plans as approved by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 1225, § 1, 2011)
§ 17.80.060  MODIFICATION TO APPROVED PLANS AND DEVELOPMENTS AND TRANSFERS.
   A.   Acceptable modification requests of an approved plan or existing
development may be processed as a ministerial decision with, no notice or
hearing, by the City Planner only if the following threshold criteria can be
met:
      1.   There will be no change in land use;
      2.   The proposed change does not result in an increase in the overall
impacts to adjacent properties;
      3.   There is no increase in the amount of operational activity;
      4.   The proposed change does not violate the standards of the land use
zone;
      5.   The proposed change does not result in a change to lot or parcel
boundary lines.
   B.   Proposed changes that do not meet the above criteria shall be processed
as a new application.
   C.   Transfers.
      1.   A conditional use permit is transferable to an applicant's
successors within six months of a change in ownership or management of an
approved use if it complies with the approval of the original application and
meet the criteria for an acceptable modification.
      2.   Between six months and one year from a change of ownership or
management, the City Planner may review and approve a transfer of the
conditional use permit if it complies with the approval of the original
application and meets the criteria for an acceptable modification.
(Ord. 1225, § 1, 2011)
§ 17.80.070 EXPIRATION OF APPROVAL.
   A conditional use permit shall be void one year after the date of the
Planning Commission approval if the use has not been substantially established
within that time period. 
   A.   Substantial establishment of a use will be determined based on the
following:
      1.   The approved use has been lawfully established; or
      2.   New construction required for the operation of the conditional use
permit has been permitted and construction has progressed in a timely manner as
determined by the building permit process.
      3.   All conditions of approval have been met or any failure to fully
comply is not the fault of the applicant and progress continues to be made
towards compliance.
   B.   The City Planner may grant one extension of up to one year for a
conditional use permit that contained a one year initial duration upon written
request of the applicant and  prior to the expiration of the approved period.
   C.   Requests other than a one year request made prior to the expiration of
the approved period must be approved by the Planning Commission.
   D.   A conditional use permit not meeting the above time frames will be
expired and a new application will be required.
(Ord. 1225, § 1, 2011)
§ 17.80.080  TERMINATION OF A CONDITIONAL USE.
   A conditional use permit may be terminated by the Planning Commission.  A
termination will be processed in the same manner as a new conditional use
application. 
   A.   The following persons may initiate a termination hearing:
      1.   The owner of the subject property;
      2.   The Planning Commission;
      3.   The city.
   B.   A termination shall be based on facts including  any one or more of the
following:
      1.   Approval of the conditional use was obtained by misrepresentation;
      2.   The use does not meet the conditions specifically established in the
conditional use approval;
      3.   The use is in violation of any provision of this title or any other
applicable city codes, or statutes;
      4.   The use has been inactive for a period exceeding one year.
(Ord. 1225, § 1, 2011)
CHAPTER 17.84:  NONCONFORMING USES
Section
   
17.84.010   Purpose.
   
17.84.020   Continuation of a nonconforming use.
   
17.84.030   Nonconforming structure.
   17.84.035   Nonconforming parcels.
   
17.84.040   Discontinuance of a nonconforming use.
   
17.84.050   Change of a nonconforming use.
   
17.84.060   Destruction of a nonconforming use or structure.
   
17.84.070   Repairs and maintenance.
   
17.84.080   Completion of structure.
§ 17.84.010  PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to permit preexisting uses and structures
which do not conform to the use or standards of this title to continue under
conditions specified herein.
(Ord. 1235, § 1(part), 2013; Ord. 644, § 7.010, 1974)
§ 17.84.020  CONTINUATION OF A NONCONFORMING USE.
   A.   Subject to the provisions of this chapter, a nonconforming use of a
structure or a nonconforming use may be continued and maintained.
   B.   In any commercial or industrial zone, a preexisting single-family
dwelling may be altered or extended provided that such alteration or extension
shall not exceed the standards of the R-2 zone.
(Ord. 1235, § 1(part), 2013)
§ 17.84.030  NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE.
   A structure conforming as to use but nonconforming as to height, setback,
lot coverage or similar dimensional standard may be altered or extended if the
alteration or extension does not cause the structure to deviate further from
the standards of this title.
(Ord. 644, § 7.030, 1974)
§ 17.84.035  NONCONFORMING PARCELS.
   Parcels not conforming to the size and dimensional standards of the zone may
be adjusted if the adjustment does not cause the parcel to deviate further from
the standards of this title.
(Ord. 1235, § 1(part), 2013)
§ 17.84.040  DISCONTINUANCE OF A NONCONFORMING USE.
   A.   If a nonconforming use involving a structure is discontinued from
active use for a period of one year, further use of the property shall be for a
conforming use.
   B.   If a nonconforming use not involving a structure is discontinued from
active use for a period of six months, further use of the property shall be for
a conforming use.
(Ord. 644, § 7.040, 1974)
§ 17.84.050  CHANGE OF A NONCONFORMING USE.
   If a nonconforming use is changed, it shall be changed to a use conforming
to the regulations of the zone in which it is located.
(Ord. 644, § 7.050, 1974)
§ 17.84.060  DESTRUCTION OF A NONCONFORMING USE OR STRUCTURE.
   If a nonconforming structure or a structure containing a nonconforming use
is destroyed by any cause to an extent exceeding 60% of its fair market value
as indicated by the records of the County Assessor, a future structure or use
on the site shall be in accordance with the provisions of the zone in which the
property is located.
(Ord. 644, § 7.060, 1974)
§ 17.84.070  REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE.
   Any building housing a nonconforming use may be maintained or restored to
conform with the standards of the Building Code, including repair or
replacement of fixtures, wiring or plumbing; provided, the building is not
increased in cubic content or floor area.
(Ord. 644, § 7.070, 1974)
§ 17.84.080  COMPLETION OF STRUCTURE.
   Nothing contained in this title shall require any change in the plans,
construction, alteration or designated use of a structure for which a building
permit has been lawfully issued and construction has commenced prior to
adoption of this title; provided the structure, if nonconforming or intended
for a nonconforming use, is completed and in use within one year from the time
the permit is issued.
(Ord. 644, § 7.080, 1974)
CHAPTER 17.88:  VARIANCES
Section
   
17.88.010   Purpose.
   
17.88.020   Process.
   
17.88.030   Application requirements.
   
17.88.040   Approval criteria.
   
17.88.050   Reserved.
   
17.88.060   Expiration of approval.
   
17.88.070   Extensions.
   
17.88.080   Termination of a variance.
§ 17.88.010  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide flexibility to development
standards in recognition of the complexity and wide variation of site
development opportunities and constraints. The variance procedures are intended
to permit efficient use of land while ensuring that the purpose of each
development standard is met.
(Ord. 1229, § 1, 2012)
§ 17.88.020  PROCESS.
   An application for a variance shall be processed as a quasi-judicial land
use decision.  Notice will be provided as per §
17.12.120.  The Planning Commission will hold a public hearing following the
procedures in §
17.12.130.  Ministerial decisions that do not require interpretation or the
exercise of policy or legal judgment will be made without public notice or
hearing.
(Ord. 1229, § 1, 2012)
§ 17.88.030  APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   An application for a variance must meet the following submittal
requirements.
   A.   The applicant shall file an application with the city.  Within 30 days
following the filing of the application, the city will make a determination of
completeness of the application.  If deemed complete, the application will be
processed in accordance with this title.
   B.   The application form shall be accompanied by the following information:
      1.   A site plan drawn to scale, considering, but not limited to, the
following:
         a.   The dimensions and arrangement of the existing and proposed
development on the subject property;
         b.   Adjoining properties, streets, alleys, structures and drainage
ways;
         c.   Identification of all requested variations;
         d.   Vehicle and pedestrian access ways;
         e.   Fences and walls;
         f.   Off street parking areas;
         g.   Natural features, such as waterways, floodplain, floodway or
riparian areas, wetlands, trees, topography, etc.
      2.   Narrative describing the requested variation(s), alternatives
considered, and the reason for the choices made.
      3.   A review of how the application meets the review criteria.
(Ord. 1229, § 1, 2012)
§ 17.88.040  APPROVAL CRITERIA.
   The Planning Commission may approve a variance upon finding that it meets
all of the following criteria:
   A.   The variance is necessary because the subject Code provision does not
account for special or unique physical circumstances of the subject site,
existing development patterns, or adjacent land uses. A legal lot determination
may be sufficient evidence of a hardship for purposes of approving a variance:
   B.   The variance is the minimum necessary to address the special or unique
physical circumstances related to the subject site:
   C.   The need for the variance is not self-imposed by the applicant or
property owner (for example, the variance request does not arise as a result of
a property line adjustment or land division approval previously granted to the
applicant):
   D.   The variance does not conflict with other applicable city policies or
other applicable regulations:
   E.   The variance will result in no foreseeable harm to adjacent property
owners or the public; and
   F.   All applicable building code requirements and engineering design
standards shall be met.
(Ord. 1277, § 1, 2019; Ord. 1229, § 1, 2012)
§ 17.88.050  RESERVED.
§ 17.88.060  EXPIRATION OF APPROVAL.
   A variance shall be void one year, or other time specifically set by the
Planning Commission, after the date of the Planning Commission approval if the
development has not been substantially established within that time period.
   A.   Substantial establishment of a development will be determined based on
the following:
      1.   The approved development has been lawfully established; or
      2.   New construction required in association with the variance has been
permitted and has progressed in a timely manner as determined by the building
permit process;
      3.   All conditions of approval have been met or any failure to fully
comply is not the fault of the applicant and progress continues to be made
towards compliance.
(Ord. 1229, § 1, 2012)
§ 17.88.070  EXTENSIONS.
   A.   The City Planner may grant one extension of up to one year for a
variance that contained a one year initial duration upon written request of the
applicant and prior to the expiration of the approved period.  This must be a
ministerial decision.
   B.   The Planning Commission may grant one extension of up to two years upon
written request of the applicant and prior to the expiration of the approved
period.  This must be a ministerial decision.
   C.   A variance not meeting the above standards for extensions shall expire
and a new application will be required.
(Ord. 1229, § 1, 2012)
§ 17.88.080  TERMINATION OF A VARIANCE. 
   A variance may be terminated by the Planning Commission.  A termination will
be processed in the same manner as a new variance application.
   A.   The following may initiate a termination hearing:
      1.   The owner of the subject property;
      2.   The Planning Commission;
      c.   The city.
   B.   A termination shall be based on findings including any one or more of
the following:
      1.   The approval of the variance was obtained by misrepresentation; or
      2.   The development does not meet the conditions specifically
established in the variance approval; or
      3.   The development is in violation of any provision of this title or
any other applicable city codes or state statutes.
(Ord. 1229, § 1, 2012)
CHAPTER 17.92:  OPEN STORAGE OF PROPERTY IN C-1 AND C-2 ZONES
Section
   
17.92.010   Generally.
   
17.92.020   Abatement.
   
17.92.030   Violation—Penalty.
§ 17.92.010  GENERALLY.
   The open storage of property in C-1 and C-2 zones shall be in accordance
with the following rules, guidelines and standards.
   A.   No person shall have, allow or permit open storage of property in C-
1 or C-2 zones without first obtaining an open storage permit from the city.
   B.   OPEN STORAGE OF PROPERTY means to put aside or accumulate property, for
use when needed or later sale or disposal, in an area that is exposed to the
public view from a public street (not alley). For purposes of this title, an
annual permit is not required for:
      1.   Two or fewer enclosed trash/waste receptacles;
      2.   Operable vehicles that are parked not exceeding 30 days on the
property;
      3.   Merchandise displayed for sale or rent by a business for less than
24 hours at a time;
      4.   Displays of new or used automobiles, trailers, trucks, boats or
other mobile equipment, that are for sale or rent, but not parts thereof;
      5.   Nursery plants, shrubs or trees;
      6.   Permanent in place storage fuel tanks; and
      7.   Operable and in use (maintained and stocked) vending machines.
   C.   A nonrefundable fee to recover the cost of processing the permit shall
be charged by the city in the amount of zero dollars per year. The fee shall
not be charged for subsequent years if the permit conditions are not changed.
The permit may be updated during the year at no extra charge. If the city
initiates a permit review, no fee will be charged.
   D.   Each person wishing to obtain a permit shall apply for the permit on
forms provided by the city before January 30 of each year or before any open
storage is permitted.
   E.   The permit shall contain at least the following information and
provisions:
      1.   The name, address and phone number of the owner of the real property
and personal property;
      2.   The name, address and phone number of applicant, if other than the
owner;
      3.   The address of the real property;
      4.   The type of business to be conducted on the premises;
      5.   The area to be used for open storage;
      6.   The kinds of property to be stored;
      7.   How the property is to be stored;
      8.   The terms, conditions and restrictions of the permit; and
      9.   The city can require further information if needed to make a
decision on the permit.
   F.   The following standards shall be used in issuing a permit and no permit
shall be issued unless the minimum standards are met:
      1.   When practicable, open storage of property is to be confined to an
area on the property that is the furthest from the public street so that it has
the least visual impact, e.g., at the rear of a building if less exposed to the
public view;
      2.   When practicable, open storage shall not occur within 20 feet of a
public street;
      3.   Property that is dirty, greasy, broken or dismantled is not
appropriate for open storage;
      4.   Parts of vehicles, equipment or other property that is disassembled,
disconnected or separated from its primary, central or main component or part
is not appropriate for open storage;
      5.   Merchandise displayed for sale or rent shall be displayed in a way
that does not look cluttered or haphazard, e.g., stacked firewood vs. piled
firewood;
      6.   Property that by its use, design or construction is or was to be
used inside a structure (out of the elements) is not appropriate for open
storage, e.g., bed springs and mattress; appliances; plumbing fixtures; sofa;
household furniture; and
      7.   Property that is waste product or scrap material of the business is
not appropriate for open storage, e.g., worn out tires even if they have
economic value.
   G.   If a permit is given to allow certain open storage for one year, that
does not waive or forfeit the right of the city to initiate in the annual
renewal process further improvements and upgrading of the premises to
accomplish the goals of this title and §§
17.32.060 and
17.36.080 in succeeding years.
   H.   In considering an open storage permit for C-1 or C-2 zones, the City
Manager shall either approve the permit, deny the permit, or refer it to the
Planning Commission for a decision. A decision of either the City Manager or
Planning Commission may be appealed, using procedures as specified in §
17.12.090.
(Ord. 1027, § 1, 1991)
§ 17.92.020  ABATEMENT.
   Abatement of violations of this title can be accomplished by any remedy open
to the city, including using the procedures for abatement of nuisances set out
in other city ordinances, including Sweet Water Municipal Code
Chapter 8.04 and
10.16 of this code. If abatement is performed by the city, the cost thereof
shall become a lien on the property and/or an obligation of the owner of the
property, as set out in the procedures followed for abatement.
(Ord. 1027, § 3, 1991)
§ 17.92.030  VIOLATION—PENALTY.
   Violations of this chapter constitute an infraction and may be prosecuted
under the provisions of
Chapter 9.36 as now enacted or hereafter amended. It is the duty of the owner
of the property (both personal and real) as well as the applicant and possessor
of the premises to abide by the terms, conditions and restrictions of the
permit.
(Ord. 1027, § 2, 1991)
CHAPTER 17.96:  SIGNS
Section
   
17.96.010   Purpose.
   
17.96.020   Definitions.
   
17.96.030   General standards.
   
17.96.040   Design and construction.
   
17.96.050   Types of signs.
   
17.96.060   Exemptions.
   
17.96.070   Marquee signs.
   
17.96.080   Temporary signs.
   
17.96.090   Prohibited signs.
   
17.96.100   Signs in residential zones.
   
17.96.110   Signs in commercial and industrial zones.
   
17.96.120   Signs on public property.
   
17.96.130   Special signs.
   
17.96.140   Enforcement.
   
17.96.150   Interpretation.
   
17.96.160   Violation—Penalty.
§ 17.96.010  PURPOSE.
   A.   The purpose of this chapter is to provide reasonable and necessary
regulations for the design, construction, placement and maintenance of signs to
protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the community. The
regulations allow a variety of sign types and sizes. The sign standards are
intended to allow for signs with adequate visibility to adjacent streets, but
not necessarily to streets farther away.
   B.   The regulations for signs have the following specific objectives:
      1.   To ensure that signs are designed, constructed, installed and
maintained to ensure public and traffic safety and enhance the appearance of
the city;
      2.   To reflect and support the desired character and development
patterns of the community;
      3.   To provide for adequate and effective signs without dominating the
visual landscape;
      4.   To balance the needs of business with the desire to preserve and
enhance the visual character of the city;
      5.   To allow clear visibility of traffic signs and signal devices,
pedestrians, driveways, intersections and other necessary clear vision areas.
(Ord. 1222, § 1, 2010)
§ 17.96.020  DEFINITIONS.
   ABANDONED SIGN.  A sign structure with a display surface associated with a
use of a property that has ceased for a period of at least six months.
   ALTERED.  The modification of the size, shape, or height of a sign,
including the replacement of the display surface materials with other
comparable materials and the sign structure. This does not include normal
maintenance and repair of an existing sign.
   AWNING.  A permanent roofed structure which may be free-standing or
partially attached to a building for the purpose of providing shelter.
   CLEARANCE. The distance measured from the highest point of the grade below
the sign to the lowest point of the sign.
   CURB LINE. The face of the curb that delineates the roadway line from block
to block, excluding pedestrian and parking bulb outs.
   DISPLAY SURFACE. The area made available by the sign structure for the
purpose of displaying the message.
   ERECT.  To build, construct, attach, place, suspend or affix, including the
painting of wall signs.
   HEIGHT.  The distance measured from the highest point of the natural grade
below the sign to the highest attached component of the sign.
   ILLUMINATED.  A sign that contains or consists of lights or a light source
including the following:
      EXPOSED ILLUMINATION. A light source that is seen such as neon, fiber
optics, LED, bare bulbs, or similar light sources.
      EXTERNAL ILLUMINATION. An external light source directed to illuminate
the exterior surface of the sign.
      INTERNAL ILLUMINATION.  A source of illumination from within a sign.
   MARQUEE. A permanent roofed structure attached to and supported by the
building and projecting over public property.
   MURAL.  Artwork on the inventory of and under the ownership of the Sweet
Home Active Revitalization Effort (SHARE) - Mural Committee, a part of the
Sweet Home Economic Development Group (SHEDG).
   NATURAL GRADE. The elevation of the original or undisturbed natural surface
of the ground.
   NONCONFORMING SIGN.  A sign lawfully existing at the time this chapter
becomes effective which does not conform to the requirements of this chapter.
   PERMANENT. Any sign intended to be used for a period greater than 60 days.
   SIGN. Any object or device or part thereof that is used to advertise or
identify an object, person, institution, organization, business, product,
service, event or location by means including words, pictures, graphics, logos,
symbols, colors, motion, illumination or projected images.
   SIGN STRUCTURE. Any structure which supports a sign.
   WORK OF ART.  A work made and\or valued primarily for an artistic rather
than practical function.
(Ord. 1222, § 1, 2010)
§ 17.96.030  GENERAL STANDARDS.
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to erect, repair, alter, relocate or
maintain within the city, any sign except as provided in this chapter.
   B.   Signs shall not be attached to an approved sign without permits to
ensure compliance with this chapter.
   C.   Signs, along with their supports, braces, guys, anchors and electrical
equipment, shall be kept fully operable, in good repair and maintained in a
safe condition.
   D.   The display surfaces of signs shall be kept clean and legible.
   E.   Signs which do not conform to this chapter but which existed and were
maintained as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter
shall be considered nonconforming signs.
   F.   Any nonconforming sign that is altered or relocated shall immediately
comply with all provisions of this chapter.
   G.   Sign area includes the area within a perimeter enclosing the limits of
words, pictures, graphics, logos, symbols, colors, motion, illumination or
projected images used to advertise or identify an object. The area of a sign
with no such perimeter or the area of a sign with irregular shape shall be
computed by enclosing the surface area within a known geometric size or shape.
The measurable area shall not include the essential sign structure,
foundations, supports, pole covers, or decorative roofing provided there is no
advertising copy, symbols or logos present.
(Ord. 1222, § 1, 2010)
§ 17.96.040  DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION.
   Signs shall be designed and constructed to comply with the provisions of
this chapter and of building codes, as adopted in Title 15 for the use of
materials, loads and stresses. Illuminated signs may require an electrical
permit that must be obtained from the appropriate governmental agency,
currently the Linn County Building Department.
   A.   All signs are subject to Sweet Home Building Inspection Program permit
or a zoning permit, unless specifically exempted by this chapter.
   B.   Where a permit is required, construction documents shall include a site
plan and show the dimensions, material and required details of construction,
including loads, stresses and anchors.
   C.   Signs shall be designed and constructed for wind and seismic load and
working stresses to meet building codes.
   D.   LED signs shall have photocell(s) that dim to 50% levels during the
night hours.
   E.   Guy wires are permitted for support of a sign only in instances in
which no other means of safe support exists.
   F.   Trusses and frames which support signs, excepting sandwich board signs,
will be enclosed with the supporting structures constructed as a part of the
continuation of the sign.
(Ord. 1222, § 1, 2010)
§ 17.96.050  TYPES OF SIGNS.
   A.   Awning sign. Any sign that is displayed on or is a part of a fabric,
metal or other structural awning material supported entirely from the exterior
wall of a building.
   B.   Directional sign. An on-premise sign designed to be read by a person
already on the premises and used only to identify and locate an office,
entrance, exit, telephone or similar place, service or route.
   C.   Double faced sign. When two display surfaces supported by the same sign
structure are placed back-to-back, or the distance between each sign face does
not exceed two feet at any point, the display surfaces shall be regarded as a
single sign.
   D.   Flexible sign. A windsock, flag, pennant, streamer, banner or similar
sign or structure that identifies the building or the business and/or attracts
attention to the business and is constructed of cloth, canvas or similar
material.
   E.   Group sign. A sign identifying a group of businesses located on the
same property, such as a shopping center shall be considered independent of the
permitted sign area for the individual businesses.
   F.   Household sign. A sign placed at a single family residence identifying
the occupants.
   G.   Marquee sign. A sign placed under a marquee or awning.
   H.   Projecting sign. A sign that projects from and is supported by a wall
of a building or structure and perpendicular or nearly perpendicular to the
structure or wall.
   I.   Reader board. A sign designed so that the message may be changed by
removal or addition of specially designed letters that attach to the display
surface of the sign.
   J.   Sandwich board sign. A temporary sign of A-frame construction, usually
two sided, designed for placement on the sidewalk in front of a place of
business.
   K.   Temporary sign. Any sign, regardless of construction material, which is
not permanently mounted.
   L.   Wall sign. A display surface attached flat onto a building or
structure.
   M.   Window sign. A sign placed in or on a window or glass door in a
building.
(Ord. 1222, § 1, 2010)
§ 17.96.060  EXEMPTIONS.
   A.   The following are not included as signs:
      1.   Flags of nations, states, and cities;
      2.   Window displays that are not signs;
      3.   Works of art.
   B.   Signs exempt from the Building Inspection Program permits include the
following:
      1.   Signs painted directly on a structure. The Planning Office will
issue a sign permit for these signs;
      2.   Signs erected by a transportation authority;
      3.   Signs under two and a half square feet in area.
(Ord. 1222, § 1, 2010)
§ 17.96.070  MARQUEE SIGNS.
   No part of a sign located under a marquee or awning shall project more than
12 inches below the marquee or awning and shall be at least eight feet above
grade.
(Ord. 1222, § 1, 2010)
§ 17.96.080  TEMPORARY SIGNS.
   A.   Temporary signs in a residential zone must be removed within 60 days of
being placed on a property.
   B.   Temporary signs may not be located on private property without consent
of the property owner or their agent.
(Ord. 1222, § 1, 2010)
§ 17.96.090  PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   No sign shall be constructed, erected or maintained that:
   A.   Intends to be, is an imitation of, or resembles an official traffic
sign or signal;
   B.   By reason of its size, location, movement, content, coloring or manner
of illumination:
      1.   May be interpreted as a traffic control device;
      2.   Blocks from view any traffic signal or street sign; or
      3.   May pose a hazard to pedestrians or vehicular traffic.
   C.   Is affixed to a utility pole without special approval from City Council
and the appropriate utility;
   D.   Is affixed to a mural;
   E.   Is attached to or painted on vehicles visible from the right-of-way
unless the vehicle is used for transport in the normal day-to-day operations of
a business;
   F.   Is illuminated by flashing, chasing, intermittent effects or that has
any movement or animation that may create a safety hazard;
   G.   Projects any sound that may create a safety hazard;
   H.   Shines directly into any adjacent residential quarters or onto vehicle
drivers;
   I.   Obstructs any fire escape, window, door or opening used as a means of
egress;
   J.   Prevents free passage from one part of a roof to any other part of the
roof or any opening required for ventilation;
   K.   Substantially obstructs the view of a sign on adjoining property when
viewed from a distance of 200 feet at any point four feet above the grade of
the traffic lane closest to the street property line.
(Ord. 1222, § 1, 2010)
§ 17.96.100  SIGNS IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES.
   In an R-l and R-2 zone, the following signs shall be allowed:
   A.   A household sign not exceeding six inches by 18 inches in size, is not
illuminated and is located entirely within the property lines of the lot;
   B.   The maximum square footage of signs in a residential zone shall not
exceed 60 square feet;
   C.   Neighborhood organizations may place signs on private property with
owner approval, provided that the sign does not exceed 18 inches by 24 inches
in size, and is not illuminated;
   D.   Commercial and professional uses and residential care facilities
allowed in a residential zone may have one of the following principal signs:
      1.   One monument or ground-mounted sign with up to 32 square feet of
sign area and a maximum of five feet in height, or
      2.   Signs attached to the structure not to exceed a maximum combined
sign area of 12 square feet for each principal use in the building;
   E.   Multi-family dwellings and subdivisions may have two monument or
ground-mounted signs up to a total of 32 square feet of sign area and a maximum
of five feet in height located at the principal entrances to the multi-family
dwelling or subdivision;
   F.   A temporary sign shall not exceed six square feet in area;
   G.   A directional sign shall not exceed two square feet in area.
(Ord. 1222, § 1, 2010)
§ 17.96.110  SIGNS IN COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL ZONES.
   Size:
   A.   The total square footage of signs for each property may not exceed an
area equal to one square foot for each linear foot of public frontage of the
property. Regardless of frontage, all properties are allocated at least 50
square feet of signage.
   B.   In addition to square footage authorized for each property based on
public frontage, an additional square footage for each business, as identified
by a current certificate of occupancy, located on that property, is authorized
as follows:
      1.   If a business is located less than 50 feet from a public right-of-
way, that business is allocated an additional 16 square feet of sign area,
regardless of frontage.
      2.   If a business is located more than 50 feet but less than 100 feet
from a public right-of-way, that business is allocated an additional 32 square
feet of sign area, regardless of frontage.
      3.   If a business is located more than 100 feet but less than 200 feet
from a public right-of-way, that business is allocated an additional 100 square
feet of sign area, regardless of frontage.
      4.   If a business is located more than 200 feet from a public right-of-
way, that business is allocated an additional 200 square feet of sign area,
regardless of frontage.
   C.   A group sign, excluded from any square footage authorized, may not
exceed an area equal to one square foot for each foot of public frontage of the
property or 200 square feet, whichever is the least.
   D.   Temporary and flexible signage is not included in the allocated square
footage on a property in these zones.
   E.   Signs in these zones may be illuminated.
   F.   Signs in the Central Commercial (C-l) zone must conform to the
following standards:
      1.   Every sign must maintain a minimum horizontal distance between the
sign and the curb line of not less than two feet;
      2.   A sign projecting more than two-thirds of the distance from the
property line to the curb line shall have a minimum clearance of at least 12
feet;
      3.   A sign projecting less than two-thirds of the distance from the
property line to the curb line shall have a minimum clearance of at least eight
feet.
   G.   Signs in the Highway Commercial (C-2) and Recreational Commercial (RC)
and Industrial(M) zones must conform with the following standards:
      1.   No sign shall be located so it will extend beyond the property
lines;
      2.   Signs shall meet one of the following standards:
         a.   The display surface of the sign must have a minimum clearance of
12 feet if located within five feet of the property line;
         b.   If a display surface has a clearance of less than 12 feet, all
parts of the sign shall be located a minimum of five feet behind the property
line.
   H.   Signs in the Neighborhood Commercial (C-3) zone must conform with the
following standards:
      1.   No more than one sign, not to exceed 25 square feet in area.
      2.   The sign shall be placed flat against the building.
(Ord. 1235, § 1(part), 2013; Ord. 1222, § 1, 2010)
§ 17.96.120  SIGNS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   A.   The city or another public agency sign shall be allowed to be erected,
installed, replaced, or maintained in or on any public property, including
streets.
   B.   Temporary signs may not be located in public right-of-ways, except as
allowed by this section:
      1.   Flexible signs in existing pole hole locations in sidewalks, or as
approved in the future by the appropriate jurisdiction, as long as the display
surface does not exceed 12 inches in width, three feet in length, and is not
located in an area that will block the view of vehicular or pedestrian traffic;
      2.   In the Central Commercial zone, sandwich board signs may be placed
on the sidewalk as long as they do not exceed six square feet in size, three
feet in height, and are not located in an area that will block the view of
vehicular or pedestrian traffic. Placement of a sandwich board must maintain a
clear pedestrian passage area of at least four feet for Americans with
Disabilities Act passage clearance. Placement should take into consideration
curb parking and the ability to open car doors.
   C.   Banners for special events may be placed over right-of-ways at
locations with permanent attachments with approval of the jurisdictions having
authority of the right-of-way and the structure where the banner will be
attached.
(Ord. 1222, § 1, 2010)
§ 17.96.130  SPECIAL SIGNS.
   Signs that either do not lend themselves to the ordinary processes of
measurement because they are integrated into the design of the building
structure or signs designed for a special purpose that makes strict application
to this chapter difficult may be permitted as a conditional use when the
Planning Commission finds such signs conform with the intent of this chapter
and are appropriate to the type of development or structure to which they are
related.
(Ord. 1222, § 1, 2010)
§ 17.96.140  ENFORCEMENT.
   A.   All required permits must be obtained prior to placement of the sign.
   B.   Signs that do not comply with this chapter or that are abandoned are
declared a nuisance and the city may cause the removal of the sign.
   C.   The city may use
Chapter 8.04 Article II for the abatement procedures for this chapter.
   D.   If the owner of the sign, or the owner of the premises upon which the
sign was located, does not pay the costs of removal, the city may dispose of
the sign.
(Ord. 1222, § 1, 2010)
§ 17.96.150  INTERPRETATION.
   Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this chapter are less
restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other applicable codes,
the provisions which are more restrictive shall govern.
(Ord. 1222, § 1, 2010)
§ 17.96.160 VIOLATION—PENALTY.
   Violation of this chapter constitutes a violation and may be prosecuted
under the provisions of
Chapter 9.36. Each day the violation continues will be considered a separate
offense.
(Ord. 1222, § 1, 2010)
CHAPTER 17.98:  WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
Section
   
17.98.010   Purpose.
   
17.98.020   Definitions.
   
17.98.030   Review procedures.
   
17.98.040   Siting preferences.
   
17.98.050   Standards and requirements.
   
17.98.060   Attached telecommunications facilities.
   
17.98.070   Abandonment of facilities.
   
17.98.080   Application.
   
17.98.090   Special review criteria.
§ 17.98.010  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this section is:
   A.   To minimize adverse health, safety, public welfare or visual impacts of
towers, through careful design, siting, landscaping and innovative visual
compatibility techniques;
   B.   To encourage shared use/co-location of towers and antenna support
structures as a primary option rather than construction of additional single-
use towers;
   C.   To encourage utilization of technological designs that will either
eliminate or reduce the need for construction of new tower facilities;
   D.   To avoid potential damage to property caused by facilities, by ensuring
such structures are sound and carefully designed, constructed, modified,
maintained and removed when no longer used or are determined to be structurally
unsound; and
   E.   To ensure that towers are compatible with surrounding land uses.
(Ord. 1160, § 1, 2003)
§ 17.98.020  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANTENNA, WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS. The physical device, commonly in the
form of a metal rod, wire panel or dish, through which electromagnetic,
wireless telecommunications signals authorized by the Federal Communications
Commission are transmitted or received. ANTENNAS used by amateur radio
operators, police, fire and AM radio are excluded from this definition.
   ATTACHED WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY. A wireless telecommunications
facility that is affixed to an existing structure, other than a wireless
telecommunications tower.
   CO-LOCATION. A wireless telecommunications facility comprised of a single
telecommunications tower or building supporting one or more antennas, dishes or
similar devices owned or used by more than one provider.
   LATTICE TOWER. A support structure constructed of vertical metal struts and
cross braces forming a triangular or square structure which often tapers from
the foundation to the top.
   MONOPOLE. A support structure constructed of a single, self-supporting
hollow metal tube securely anchored to a foundation.
   PROVIDER. A company holding a Federal Communications Commission (FCC)
license that is in business to provide telecommunications services.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS. The transmission, via radio frequency
electromagnetic waves, between or among points specified by the user, of
information of the user’s choosing, without change in the form or content of
the information as sent and received.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS ACCESSORY STRUCTURE/EQUIPMENT. Equipment
shelters or radio equipment necessary for the operation of wireless
telecommunications in addition to the antenna and tower.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT SHELTER. The structure in which the
electronic radio equipment and relay equipment for a wireless
telecommunications facility is housed.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (WTF). A facility consisting of the
equipment and structures involved in receiving and or transmitting
telecommunications or radio signals.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS SUPPORT FACILITY. A wireless telecommunications
tower.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER. A structure intended to support equipment
used to transmit and/or receive telecommunications signals including monopoles,
guyed and lattice towers, but not excluding any other approved structure.
   VISUAL COMPATIBILITY CHARACTERISTICS. Characteristics that minimize the
visual impact of a tower or antennas.
(Ord. 1160, § 1, 2003)
§ 17.98.030  REVIEW PROCEDURES.
   A.   Wireless telecommunications facilities, hereby referred to as “WTFS”
and/or “facilities” within this section, require a conditional use permit.
   B.   The process of review is dependent on the type of facility proposed
(i.e. co-located/attached or freestanding) and its proposed location.
      1.   Notice.  When mailed notice of a public hearing or an administrative
action relating to a wireless communication facility is required by this
chapter, the notice shall be sent to owners of record of property where the
property is located as follows:
         a.   Within 300 feet from the exterior boundary of the subject
property when the proposed WTF meets the height requirement of this chapter;
and
         b.   For WTFs that exceed the height requirement of this chapter, an
additional 50 feet of notice area is required for every ten-foot increment in
height.
      2.   Action and findings by Planning Commission. For applications
proposing the siting of wireless telecommunications facilities through means
other than attachment, the Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing
in accordance with
Chapter 17.12 of this code. Following the close of the hearing, the Planning
Commission shall either approve, conditionally approve or deny the development
plan. A wireless communication facility, as authorized, shall be subject to all
conditions imposed and shall be varied from other provisions of this chapter
only to the extent specified in the approval.
      3.   Conditional uses permitted. Wireless telecommunications facilities
shall be permitted upon granting of a conditional use permit in all zones,
except subsection B.4. of this section.
      4.   Uses prohibited. Wireless telecommunications facilities shall be
prohibited in the Natural Resources Overlay Zone.
(Ord. 1160, § 1, 2003)
§ 17.98.040  SITING PREFERENCES.
   WTFs shall be sited in accordance with the following priorities, in order of
their preference. If the applicant proposes a facility on lower priority
preferences, the applicant shall prove conclusively, that each of the higher
priorities has been considered and found to be not feasible.
   A.   Priority #1. Use of an attached wireless communication facility whereby
transmission and reception devices are placed on existing structures which are
consistent in height with and situated similarly to types normally found in the
surrounding area, such as telephone, electrical or light poles.
   B.   Priority #2. Co-location by placement of antennas or other transmission
and reception devices on an existing tower, building or other structure, such
as a utility pole, water tank or similar existing structure.
   C.   Priority #3. Siting of a new tower, in a visually subordinate manner,
using visual compatibility techniques.
   D.   Priority #4. Siting of a new tower in a visually dominant location, but
employing visual compatibility techniques.
   E.   Priority #5. Siting of a tower in a visually dominant location, not
employing visual compatibility techniques.
(Ord. 1160, § 1, 2003)
§ 17.98.050  STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.
   A.   General; conflict. All facilities shall meet all requirements
established by the other provisions of SHMC that are not in conflict with the
requirements contained in this chapter.
   B.   General; compliance. All facilities shall comply with all federal,
state and city codes, including, but not limited to, Federal Communication
Commission and Federal Aviation Administration standards.
   C.   Access. Access shall meet the standards of the underlying zone.
   D.   Height.
      1.   Height of a facility shall be measured from the natural, undisturbed
ground surface below the center of the base of the proposed facility to the top
of the facility or if higher, the tip of the highest antenna or other
transmission or reception device.
      2.   No WTF shall exceed the height standard of this chapter, except
where attached to an existing structure that exceeds that height and the
attached antennas do not increase the total height of that structure by more
than ten feet.
   E.   Co-location.
      1.   New facilities, if technically feasible, will be designed and
constructed for three antennas/providers to co-locate on the facility and to
allow antennas mounted at varying heights.
      2.   The owner of a facility may not deny a wireless telecommunications
provider the ability to co-locate on its wireless communication facility at a
fair market rate or at another cost agreed to by the affected parties.
      3.   A facility may be attached to any existing structure as long as the
height of that structure is not increased by more than ten feet and so long as
it meets all relevant requirements of this section.
      4.   Co-location shall not be precluded simply because a reasonable fee
or shared use is charged or because reasonable costs necessary to adopt the
existing or proposed uses to a shared tower. The Planning Commission may
consider expert testimony to determine whether the fees and costs are
reasonable.
      5.   Co-location costs that exceed new tower development costs are
considered to be unreasonable.
   F.   Construction. All facilities must meet the requirements of the Uniform
Building Code and/or the Oregon Structural Specialty Code.
   G.   Design. Where possible new facilities will be located in such a manner
that they blend in with the background around them, using techniques to ensure
visual compatibility characteristics.
      1.   All new WTF towers shall be a monopole or lattice tower structure
constructed out of metal or other nonflammable material.
      2.   All accessory structures (i.e vaults, equipment rooms, utilities and
equipment enclosures) shall be concealed, camouflaged, shall be consistent with
the underlying zone or shall be placed underground.
      3.   Visible exterior surfaces of accessory facilities (i.e. vaults,
equipment rooms, utilities and equipment enclosures) shall be constructed out
of nonreflective materials.
      4.   WTFs shall be initially painted and thereafter repainted as
necessary with a “flat” paint. The color shall be one that will minimize the
facility’s visibility to the maximum extent feasible.
   H.   Landscaping. All WTFs shall be installed in such a manner as to
maintain and enhance existing vegetation. Where no vegetation exists, a
landscaping plan must be submitted for the site.
   I.   Lighting.  No lighting shall be permitted on a WTF except as required
for security and as required by the Federal Aviation Administration. Security
lighting shall be located in such a manner so as not to face directly, shine or
reflect glare onto any street or a lot in a residential zone.
   J.   Location. No telecommunications facility shall be installed on an
exposed ridge line unless it blends with the surrounding existing natural and
human-made environment in such a manner as to be visually compatible with the
environment.
   K.   Setbacks. Facilities shall be set back at least 25% of the tower height
from all property lines or shall meet the setbacks of the underlying zone,
which ever is greater.
   L.   Safety. All WTFs shall maintain in place a security program that will
deter unauthorized access and vandalism.
   M.   Underground equipment shelters. Underground equipment shelters should
be considered.
   N.   Signs.
      1.   Signs shall comply with the requirements set forth in this chapter.
      2.   All telecommunications facilities shall be clearly identified as to
the location and operator so as to facilitate emergency response.
(Ord. 1160, § 1, 2003)
§ 17.98.060  ATTACHED TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.
   All attached facilities shall be located and designed to appear an integral
part of the structure.
   A.   Roof mounted antennas and all building mounted accessory equipment
shall be located no closer to the nearest edge of the roof than the height of
the antenna or accessory equipment, whichever is greater.
   B.   Wall mounted antennas shall be architecturally integrated into the
building.
   C.   Wall mounted antennas shall be located no more than four feet from the
face of the wall.
   D.   Accessory structures for attached facilities, such as equipment
shelters, cabinets or other enclosed structures containing electronic
equipment, shall be camouflaged or otherwise constructed using visual
compatibility techniques.
(Ord. 1160, § 1, 2003)
§ 17.98.070  ABANDONMENT OF FACILITIES.
   Wireless telecommunications facilities that do not have functioning antennas
for a period of six months shall be considered abandoned and shall be removed
by the owner or operator within 60 days thereafter.
(Ord. 1160, § 1, 2003)
§ 17.98.080  APPLICATION.
   A.   Application requirements.
      1.   One copy of the narrative on eight and one-half inch by 11-inch
sheets;
      2.   A development site plan drawn to scale with sheet size not to
exceeding 24 inches by 36 inches. Where necessary, an overall plan with
additional detail sheets may be submitted;
      3.   All information necessary to evaluate the request;
      4.   One set of the plan shall be reduced to fit on eight and one-half
inch by 11-inch sheets of paper. Names and numbers must be legible on this
sheet size; and
      5.   After the application is accepted as complete, any revisions may
require a new application, additional filing fees and rescheduling of the
public hearing.
   B.   Development plan required. All applications shall be accompanied by a
development plan drawn to scale showing the following:
      1.   Use or uses;
      2.   Location of the proposed facility and relevant dimensions;
      3.   Height of the proposed facility;
      4.   Setbacks for the proposed facility;
      5.   A photo simulation of the proposed WTF for the maximum number of
providers;
      6.   Dimensions and location of areas to be reserved for vehicular and
pedestrian access and circulation;
      7.   A landscaping plan that indicates how the facility will be screened
from adjoining uses;
      8.   A fencing plan that indicates the location, height and design of any
proposed fencing;
      9.   A lighting plan that indicates the type and location of any proposed
lighting;
      10.   A sign plan that indicates the size, location, and design of any
proposed signage;
      11.   Drawings demonstrating the materials, color and design of the
proposed facility;
      12.   A map showing all existing wireless communication facility sites
operated by the provider within two miles of the Sweet Home boundary, or the
top of the nearby ridges, whichever is greater, including a description of the
facility at each location;
      13.   A propagation study indicting proposed facility and the adjacent
hand-off sites;
      14.   If provider proposes to construct a new facility (tower), all
applications shall include findings that demonstrate that it is not legally or
technically feasible to co-locate:
         a.   Documentation of the efforts that have been made to co-locate on
existing or previously approved towers;
         b.   Each provider shall make a good faith effort to contact the owner
(s) of all existing or approved towers and shall provide a list of all owners
contacted in the area, including the date, form of contact and the result of
contact; and
         c.   Documentation as to why co-locating on an existing or proposed
tower or attachment to existing structures within one-half mile of the proposed
site is not feasible.
      15.   Such other pertinent information shall be included as may be
considered necessary by the review authority to make a determination that the
contemplated arrangement or use makes it necessary and desirable to apply
regulations and requirements differing from those ordinarily applicable under
this chapter and the subdivision ordinance.
   C.   Narrative required. A written statement shall include the following
information:
      1.   The name and contact information for the provider;
      2.   A description of the character of the proposed facility;
      3.   Analysis of how the application meets the review criteria;
      4.   Applicants/providers shall provide evidence of legal access to the
proposed wireless telecommunications facility;
      5.   The applicant/provider shall provide evidence that legal access to
the facility site will be maintained for the duration of the facility’s
operation;
      6.   Where a proposed wireless telecommunications facility is located on
a property not owned by the provider, the applicant/provider shall present
documentation that the owner of the property has granted an easement or entered
into a lease for the proposed facility and that vehicular access is provided to
the facility;
      7.   The applicant shall provide evidence that describes the facility
tower’s structural capacity to carry the antennas of at least three wireless
telecommunications providers;
      8.   The applicant shall provide evidence of steps the provider will take
to avoid interference with normal radio and television reception in the
surrounding area and with any public safety agency or organization, per FCC
requirements;
      9.   a.   The applicant shall demonstrate that the WTF is intended to
provide service primarily within the community.
         b.   The city reserves the right to deny a permit if it is shown that
the facility is not intended to provide service primarily within the community.
      10.   The applicant/provider shall demonstrate that the wireless
telecommunications facility must be located where it is proposed in order to
service the provider’s service area. There shall be an explanation of why a
facility at this proposed site is technically necessary;
      11.   If the applicant/provider proposes a new tower or co-located
facility, the applicant shall provide evidence that the facility’s height is
the lowest height at which the gap in coverage can be filled;
      12.   a.   All applications shall include evidence that at least one
provider will use the proposed facility to provide wireless telecommunications
service immediately upon construction completion of the facility.
         b.   The city reserves the right to deny applications that propose a
facility without a provider.
      13.   The application shall include a written agreement that wireless
telecommunications facilities owned by the provider, that do not have an
operating antenna for a period of six months, shall be considered abandoned and
shall be removed by the operator within 60 days thereafter; and
      14.   The application shall include a written agreement from the property
owner that if the provider fails to remove an abandoned WTF, the property owner
has full legal and fiscal responsibility for the WTF removal.
(Ord. 1160, § 1, 2003)
§ 17.98.090  SPECIAL REVIEW CRITERIA.
   A.   Residential zones. A wireless telecommunications facility is not
allowed in any residential zone unless it is an attached WTF that meets the
requirements of this section.
      1.   Access. Standards for access are the set by the underlying zone.
      2.   Height. A facility that is attached to an existing structure may not
exceed the height of the existing structure, unless findings are made by the
Planning Commission that such an increase will have a minimal impact on the
appearance of the structure.
      3.   Landscaping. Existing trees and other screening vegetation in the
vicinity and along the access road shall be protected from damage, both during
the construction period and thereafter.
      4.   Signs. Facilities shall be identified with an identification sign
not exceeding two square feet in size.
      5.   Accessory facilities. Accessory structures for attached facilities,
such as equipment shelters, cabinets or other enclosed structures containing
electronic equipment, shall be camouflaged or otherwise constructed using
visual compatibility techniques.
   B.   Commercial zones. A wireless telecommunications facility in any
commercial zone must be either an attached WTF or a monopole, and that meets
the requirements of this section.
      1.   Access. Standards for access are the set by the underlying zone.
      2.   Height. The height of a WTF shall not exceed 80 feet.
      3.   Landscaping. Existing trees and other screening vegetation in the
vicinity and along the access road shall be protected from damage, both during
the construction period and thereafter. The accessory structure shall be
screened by an evergreen material with an ultimate height of at least eight
feet and a planted height of at least three feet. The landscaping must be
protected and maintained.
      4.   Signs. Facilities shall be identified with an identification sign
not exceeding two square feet in size.
      5.   Accessory facilities. Accessory structures for attached facilities,
such as equipment shelters, cabinets or other enclosed structures containing
electronic equipment, shall be camouflaged or otherwise constructed using
visual compatibility techniques.
   C.   Industrial zones.
      1.   Access. Standards for access are the set by the underlying zone.
      2.   Height. Facilities shall not exceed 100 feet.
      3.   Landscaping. Existing trees and other screening vegetation in the
vicinity and along the access road shall be protected from damage, both during
the construction period and thereafter. The accessory structure shall be
screened by an evergreen material with an ultimate height of at least eight
feet and a planted height of at least three feet. The landscaping must be
protected and maintained.
      4.   Signs. Facilities shall be identified with an identification sign
not exceeding two square feet in size.
      5.   Accessory facilities. Accessory structures for facilities, such as
equipment shelters, cabinets or other enclosed structures containing electronic
equipment, shall be camouflaged or otherwise constructed using visual
compatibility techniques.
(Ord. 1160, § 1, 2003)
CHAPTER 17.100:  VACATION OF PUBLIC WAYS
Section
   
17.100.010   Generally.
§ 17.100.010  GENERALLY.
   A.   Upon receiving a proposal to vacate all or part of any street, avenue,
boulevard, alley, plat, public square or other public place, or before
initiating such vacation proceedings on its own motion, the Council shall refer
the proposal to the Planning Commission.
   B.   The Planning Commission shall review the proposal, hold the hearings
thereon as it deems proper and make recommendations to the Council.
   C.   In the event that the Council finds that immediate action is necessary
to initiate proceedings for vacation before the proposal is referred to the
Planning Commission for consideration, the Council may proceed, but the
Planning Commission shall be promptly advised and afforded an opportunity to
make recommendations at the hearing before the Council.
(Ord. 728, §§ 1—3, 1974)
CHAPTER 17.104:  ANNEXATIONS
Section
   
17.104.010   Generally.
§ 17.104.010  GENERALLY.
   A.   Upon receiving any petition for annexation of territory to the city, or
before initiating any such action on its own motion, the Council shall refer
the proposal for annexation to the Planning Commission for its consideration
and recommendation.
   B.   The Planning Commission shall review the proposal for annexation, hold
such hearings as it deems proper, make such finding of facts as it deems proper
and make recommendations to the Council.
   C.   In the event that the Council finds that immediate action is necessary
to initiate proceedings for annexation, either before the proposal is referred
to the Planning Commission, or before recommendations are received from the
Planning Commission, the Council may proceed, but the Planning Commission shall
be promptly advised, so that it may have an opportunity to make recommendations
to the Council during the Council proceedings.
(Ord. 729, §§ 1—3, 1974)
TABLES
References to Oregon Revised Statutes
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO OREGON REVISED STATUTES
 
O.R.S. Cites Code Section
34.010 to 34.100        3.30.140,
                        13.12.160
87.152 et al.           10.28.060
88                      13.06.030
                        16.04.010,
                        16.04.020,
                        16.08.050,
                        16.16.030,
92                      16.20.010,
                        16.20.030,
                        16.20.040,
                        16.28.010,
                        16.32.020,
                        16.32.040
92.010.160              16.16.030
92.010 to 92.160        16.08.050,
                        16.20.010
92.040(3)               16.16.080
92.060                  16.20.030
92.190                  16.32.020,
                        16.32.050
93.600                  3.30.060
97.352                  3.30.020
98.005 et seq.          3.08.020
98.805                  10.08.130,
                        10.08.160
98.805 to 98.818        10.08.120
98.812                  10.08.130
98.812(1)               10.08.130
98.830                  10.08.160
98.830 to 98.840        10.08.135
100                     17.04.030
133                     6.12.060
                        3.08.030,
142.010 to 142.060      3.08.050,
                        3.08.090
153                     9.36.010
153.005                 2.12.070
161.405                 9.20.050
161.450                 9.20.050
161.455                 9.20.050
162.247                 2.52.090
163.005                 9.20.050
163.160 to 163.187      9.20.050
163.190                 9.20.050
163.195                 9.20.050
163.200                 9.20.050
163.205                 9.20.050
163.355 to 163.411      9.20.050
163.413                 9.20.050
163.415                 9.20.050
163.425                 9.20.050
163.427                 9.20.050
163.435                 9.20.050
163.445                 9.20.050
163.465                 9.20.050
164.015 to 164.140      9.20.050
164.245                 9.20.050,
                        10.08.055
164.255                 9.20.050
164.315 to 164.335      9.20.050
164.345 to 164.365      9.20.050
164.785                 9.20.050
164.805                 9.20.050
166.025                 9.20.050
166.065                 9.20.050
166.166                 10.08.055
166.155                 9.20.050
166.165                 9.20.050
166.172                 9.20.050
166.220                 9.20.050
166.282                 3.08.040
166.630                 9.20.050
166.635                 9.20.050
167.007 to 167.017      9.20.050
167.117                 5.24.010,
                        5.24.050
167.162                 3.08.030
167.222                 9.20.050
167.262                 9.20.050
183.415                 5.32.130
                        8.04.200 ,
183.450                 9.20.040 ,
                        12.12.190
187.010                 10.16.070
187.020                 10.16.070
192                     3.24.140
192.501(5)              3.34.120
195.305                 3.30.010,
                        3.30.020
197.295 through 197.313 17.52.010
197.311                 17.12.140
197.505 to 197.540      16.16.040
221.333                 9.36.030,
                        9.36.060
223                     13.12.090
223.205                 3.16.010
223.205 to 223.295      3.16.110
223.208                 13.12.090
223.297 to 223.314      13.12.160
223.387                 3.16.010
223.387(1)              3.28.010
223.430                 3.16.130
                        3.16.060,
223.505 to 223.595      8.04.250,
                        10.28.030
223.565                 3.20.010
223.805 to 223.880      3.16.010
223.930                 3.16.010
279.055, § 34(2)       2.08.010
279A.005                3.08.030
297                     3.24.140
305.220                 3.24.090,
                        3.34.170
305.620                 3.24.090,
                        3.34.170
314.400                 3.24.090,
                        3.34.170
320.300                 3.24.020
357.400 to 357.621      2.12.010
357.975                 2.12.070
357.990                 2.12.070
390.577                 10.32.060
401                     2.52.010,
                        2.52.040
419C.680                9.28.010
433.340 to 433.390      6.12.060
443.400 to 443.460      17.04.030
                        10.28.020,
446                     10.28.040,
                        10.28.050
                        15.01.030,
455                     15.06.010,
                        17.24.090
466.605                 2.52.020
471.410                 9.20.050
471.430                 9.20.050
475.525 to 475.894      9.20.050
475B.015(16)            3.34.020
475B.345                3.34.010,
                        3.34.030
475B.400 to 475B.525    3.34.020
475B.700 to 475B.755    3.34.170
609                     6.08.050
609.090                 6.08.080
609.100                 6.08.020
697.105                 3.34.100
726.010                 5.32.010
801 to 826              10.32.020
801.110                 8.08.010
801.190                 10.32.020
801.193                 10.32.020
801.194                 10.32.020
801.245                 10.32.020
801.366                 10.32.020
801.490                 10.32.160
803.420                 10.32.020
806                     10.32.120
810.425                 9.36.030,
                        9.36.060
810.430                 10.08.160
811.255                 10.32.040
816.320                 10.32.130
                        10.08.030,
819.110 to 819.215      10.11.020,
                        10.16.040
819.110                 3.08.080
819.120 to 819.260      10.08.030
819.140                 3.08.080
819.150                 3.08.080
819.160                 3.08.080,
                        3.08.090
819.185                 3.08.080
819.190                 3.08.080
819.200                 3.08.080
819.210 to 819.260      3.08.080
819.215                 3.08.080,
                        10.11.040
821.030                 10.32.070
821.040                 10.32.070
821.200                 10.32.030
821.200(1)              10.32.030
821.220                 10.32.070
821.230                 10.32.070
830.907 to 830.927      3.08.050
                        
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
102  1944 12.20.010—
          12.20.100
126  1947 5.28.010—
          5.28.050
190  1951 2.04.010—
          2.04.040
222  1952 1.04.010
260  1953 2.44.010
284  1955 12.20.030,
          12.20.050
320  1956 5.28.010—
          5.28.040
340  1958 2.04.010
368  1960 5.04.010,
          5.04.020
          5.08.010,
          5.08.020,
          10.04.010—
          10.04.130,
380  1961 10.04.150,
          10.08.010—
          10.08.110,
          10.08.150,
          10.20.010,
          10.20.020
          12.20.030,
427  1965 12.20.050,
          12.20.060
488  1965 10.04.030
505  1966 3.16.010—
          3.16.130
643  1974 2.48.010—
          2.48.040
          17.24.010—
          17.24.080,
          17.32.010—
          17.32.050,
          17.36.010—
          17.36.070,
          17.40.010—
          17.40.040,
          17.44.010—
644      17.44.070,
          17.68.010—
          17.68.050,
          17.12.010—
          17.12.130,
          17.20.010—
          17.20.050,
          17.84.010,
          17.84.030—
          17.84.080
651  1975 12.04.010—
          12.04.080
652  1975 2.20.010—
          2.20.090
659  1976 2.08.010,
          2.08.020
673  1976 17.20.040
687  1977 17.40.020—
          17.40.040
728  1978 17.100.010
729  1978 17.104.010
745  1978 3.16.140—
          3.16.200
747  1978 5.24.010—
          5.24.030
761  1979 2.04.010
776  1979 3.04.010—
          3.04.030
          12.12.010 ,
          12.12.020,
          12.12.040,
          12.12.060,
          12.12.070,
777  1979 12.12.090,
          12.12.100,
          12.12.120,
          12.12.130—
          12.12.160,
          12.12.200—
          12.12.220
791      17.68.010—
          17.68.050
794  1980 3.16.110
804  1980 5.04.010
827  1981 17.12.120
838  1981 17.24.080
853  1981 17.36.030
866  1982 10.04.010
873  1982 10.28.010—
          10.28.060
          5.04.020,
876  1982 5.28.050,
          10.04.150,
          12.12.210
          6.04.040,
          9.04.010—
          9.04.030,
          9.08.010,
          9.12.010,
          9.12.020,
886  1983 9.16.010,
          9.16.020,
          9.20.010,
          9.24.010—
          9.24.040,
          9.28.010
          9.32.010—
          9.32.030
896  1983 3.20.010
          17.12.020,
          17.20.010,
          17.24.030,
          17.24.040,
          17.24.060,
905  1983 17.32.020,
          17.36.020,
          17.40.020,
          17.40.040,
          17.44.030,
          17.68.040,
          17.68.050
906  1983 17.20.020
918  1984 10.04.010
919  1984 9.08.010
920  1984 17.12.110
928  1984 5.24.040
936  1985 10.04.010
939  1986 9.08.010
          8.08.010,
940  1986 8.08.020,
          8.08.040
948  1986 12.08.010—
          12.08.110
949  1986 2.04.020,
          2.04.030
952  1986 10.16.010—
          10.16.110
          6.04.010—
          6.04.030,
955  1986 8.04.010—
          8.04.270,
          9.20.020
956  1986 10.08.110,
          10.08.120
          3.08.010—
960  1986 3.08.070,
          3.08.130—
          3.08.190
966  1987 10.04.010
967  1987 9.08.010
969  1987 10.08.140,
          10.08.160
975  1988 6.12.010—
          6.12.090
977  1988 12.12.140
979  1988 2.44.020
983  1989 2.12.010—
          2.12.070
985  1989 10.08.030
987  1989 10.28.030
          8.04.010,
          8.04.020,
          8.04.120,
989  1989 8.04.150,
          8.04.190,
          8.04.200,
          8.04.250
990  1989 10.16.010
992  1989 3.08.080—
          3.08.120
1001 1989 8.04.010
1003 1989 10.04.010
1004 1989 9.08.010
1005 1989 12.20.090,
          12.20.100
1007     12.16.030
1010 1990 12.04.010,
          12.04.060
          17.12.090,
          17.12.110,
1012 1990 17.12.120,
          17.12.140,
          17.32.020,
          17.36.030
1018 1990 8.04.010
          3.24.010—
1022 1990 3.24.100,
          3.24.120—
          3.24.170
1026 1991 17.32.060,
          17.36.080
1027 1991 17.92.010—
          17.92.030
1028     17.52.010—
          17.52.040
          6.08.010,
1033 1991 6.08.100,
          6.08.110
1034 1991 9.08.010
1035 1991 10.04.010
          2.04.050,
          3.08.010,
          3.08.020,
          3.08.050,
          3.08.080,
          3.08.130,
          3.16.010,
          3.16.030,
          3.16.110,
          3.16.160,
          3.20.010,
          5.04.010,
          8.08.010—
          8.08.030,
1036 1991 9.04.020,
          9.24.040,
          9.28.010,
          9.32.010,
          9.32.030,
          10.04.020,
          10.04.050,
          10.04.090,
          10.04.140,
          10.08.010,
          10.08.030,
          10.08.150,
          10.16.040,
          10.20.010,
          10.24.010
1037 1991 5.12.010—
          5.12.130
1038 1992 8.04.130,
          8.04.170
          17.24.020,
          17.24.030,
1039 1992 17.32.020,
          17.36.020,
          17.68.030,
          17.68.050
1042 1992 10.04.020,
          10.04.055
1043 1992 9.20.020
1046 1992 1.01.010—
          1.01.090
1048 1992 9.20.020
1050 1992 2.04.030
1052 1992 10.28.020,
          17.24.020
1054 1993 17.36.020,
          17.36.030
1057 1993 12.04.090,
          12.04.100
1058 1993 8.04.025
          17.12.010,
          17.12.025,
          17.12.110,
1061 1993 17.24.030,
          17.32.020,
          17.32.030,
          17.44.030
1063 1993 12.04.010
1064 1993 9.28.010
1065 1993 9.08.010,
          10.04.010
          10.24.010,
1066 1993 10.24.020,
          12.12.040
1067 1994 12.04.010,
          17.08.100
1068     12.16.010—
          12.16.140
          17.12.120,
          17.20.010,
          17.24.020,
          17.24.030,
1069 1994 17.24.080,
          17.24.090,
          17.36.030,
          17.68.030,
          17.68.050
1072 1994 9.20.020
1073 1994 10.20.010
1078 1994 17.24.030
          8.08.010,
1086 1995 8.08.020,
          8.08.025,
          8.08.030
1088 1995 10.04.020,
          10.04.055
1090 1995 9.08.010,
          10.04.010
1091 1995 3.28.010—
          3.28.150
1092 1996 9.48.010—
          9.48.100
1097 1996 17.32.020
          17.08.010—
          17.08.100,
          17.24.030,
          17.24.050,
          17.32.040,
          17.32.070,
1101 1997 17.32.090,
          17.36.030,
          17.36.050,
          17.36.090,
          17.36.100,
          17.44.030,
          17.44.050,
          17.44.090
          17.12.010,
          17.12.020,
          17.12.025,
          17.12.030—
1111 1997 17.12.060,
          17.12.080—
          17.12.150,
          17.32.020,
          17.36.040
1112 1997 9.08.010,
          10.04.010
1113 1997 8.04.250,
          9.28.010
          17.08.030,
1121 1998 17.24.010—
          17.24.090
1126 1999 9.08.010,
          10.04.010
1128 2000 10.20.010,
          10.24.010
1132 2000 9.24.010
1137 2001 3.24.010—
          3.24.040
1147 2002 2.52.010—
          2.52.090
1153 2003 17.04.010—
          17.04.030
1154 2003 17.48.010—
          17.48.090
1155 2003 17.60.010—
          17.60.050
1156 2003 17.72.010—
          17.72.100
1159 2003 5.32.010—
          5.32.160
          17.08.070,
          17.24.030,
          17.32.030,
1160 2003 17.36.030,
          17.44.020,
          17.98.010—
          17.98.090
1165 2005 17.30.010—
          17.30.100
1166 2005 17.31.010—
          17.31.040
1167 2005 3.12.010
1172 2005 17.16.010
          5.32.030,
1180 2006 5.32.050,
          5.32.150
          17.20.010,
          17.20.020,
1182 2006 17.28.010—
          17.28.110,
          17.32.020,
          17.36.020
          10.08.030,
          10.08.120,
1187 2006 10.08.135,
          10.11.010—
          10.11.030
1191 2007 5.24.050
1198 2008 3.30.010—
          3.30.150
1201 2008 12.20.050
          16.04.010—
          16.04.030,
          16.08.010—
          16.08.060,
          16.12.010—
          16.12.075,
          16.16.010—
1202 2008 16.16.080,
          16.20.010—
          16.20.040,
          16.24.010—
          16.24.050,
          16.28.010—
          16.28.030,
          16.32.010—
          16.32.050
          2.08.010,
          2.08.020,
          2.52.020,
          3.08.030,
          3.08.040,
          3.08.050,
          3.08.080,
          3.08.150,
          3.08.160,
          3.30.010,
          3.30.020,
          5.08.030,
          5.12.040,
          5.12.050,
          6.04.020,
          6.04.040,
          6.04.060,
          8.04.025,
1203 2008 8.04.200,
          8.04.250,
          8.08.030,
          9.04.020,
          9.20.020,
          9.24.030,
          9.28.010,
          9.32.010,
          9.36.010 -
          9.36.060,
          10.04.030,
          10.11.040,
          10.20.030,
          12.12.010,
          12.16.080,
          13.04.030,
          13.04.080,
          13.06.030,
          13.06.070
          15.01.010—
          15.01.150,
          15.03.010—
          15.03.050,
1204 2008 15.06.010—
          15.06.030,
          15.16.010,
          15.16.020,
          15.20.010—
          15.20.040
1210 2009 5.24.050
1211 2009 17.08.030
1212 2009 17.08.030
1214 2010 15.01.150,
          15.03.010
1217 2010 15.03.010
          15.12.025,
          15.12.030,
          15.12.050—
1219 2010 15.12.070,
          15.12.120—
          15.12.150,
          15.12.170
1221 2010 15.03.010
1222 2010 17.96.010—
          17.96.160
1223 2011 2.60.010,
          2.60.020
          6.04.010—
1224 2011 6.04.070,
          6.12.020
1225 2011 17.80.010—
          17.80.080
          17.08.035,
1229 2012 17.88.010—
          17.88.080
1230 2012 8.04.045
          5.12.020,
          5.12.030,
          5.12.040,
1232 2013 5.12.060,
          5.12.070,
          5.12.100,
          5.12.130
          5.28.010,
          5.28.020,
1233 2013 5.28.045,
          5.28.047,
          5.28.050
1234 2013 15.12.050
          17.04.030,
          17.12.060,
          17.12.080,
          17.12.090,
          17.12.120,
          17.12.150,
          17.16.020,
          17.20.010,
          17.20.020,
          17.24.050,
          17.24.090,
          17.28.050,
          17.28.100,
1235 2013 17.32.020,
          17.32.060,
          17.32.070,
          17.36.020,
          17.36.040,
          17.36.050,
          17.36.080,
          17.36.100,
          17.40.040,
          17.44.050,
          17.80.040,
          17.84.010,
          17.84.020,
          17.84.035,
          17.96.110
          3.24.170,
          5.04.020,
          6.08.110,
          6.12.090,
          8.04.190,
          8.08.040,
          9.48.100,
          10.04.150,
1237 2013 10.08.160,
          10.24.020,
          10.28.060,
          12.04.100,
          12.08.110,
          12.12.210,
          12.16.130,
          12.20.100,
          13.08.800,
          13.16.070
1238 2014 8.12.010—
          8.12.120
          10.28.010—
1239 2014 10.28.040 ,
          10.28.060
          1.01.010,
          2.04.030 ,
          2.04.040 ,
          2.12.070,
          3.08.080,
          5.04.020,
          5.12.040,
          5.12.100,
          5.24.050,
          6.12.060,
          6.12.070,
          6.12.090,
          8.04.040,
          8.04.250,
1240 2015 9.24.040,
          10.08.030,
          10.11.020,
          10.16.040,
          10.24.020,
          12.08.110,
          12.12.100,
          12.12.210,
          13.04.180,
          13.09.130,
          13.12.180,
          13.20.070,
          15.12.190,
          15.03.040,
          17.24.030
          8.04.080,
          17.04.030,
1246 2015 17.08.030,
          17.08.033,
          17.08.040,
          17.12.060
          12.12.010 —
1248 2015 12.12.190,
          12.12.210,
          12.12.220
1250 2015 9.20.030
1251 2016 3.34.010–
          3.34.150
1253 2016 2.04.010
1254 2016 3.34.160
          17.04.030,
          17.31.030,
          17.32.030,
          17.36.030,
1255 2017 17.40.040,
          17.44.030,
          17.60.030,
          17.68.050,
          17.80.040
1256 2017 3.34.170
1257 2017 9.20.040
1258 2017 13.24.010–
          13.24.040
1260 2017 6.08.010-
          6.08.110
1263 2017 2.10.010–
          2.10.050
1264 2017 8.12.040,
          8.12.050
          12.16.040­
1265 2017 12.16.060,
          12.16.100
          13.04.020­
1266 2017 13.04.040,
          13.04.060
1267 2017 13.08.760
          3.24.010­
          3.24.100,
1268 2017 3.24.120­
          3.24.140,
          3.24.160­
          3.24.180
          17.04.030,
          17.08.090,
          17.12.140,
          17.24.020,
          17.24.030,
          17.24.050,
          17.24.070­
          17.24.100,
          17.28.070­
1270 2018 17.28.100,
          17.30.050­
          17.30.100,
          17.31.030,
          17.31.040,
          17.32.030,
          17.36.030,
          17.40.030,
          17.60.020,
          17.60.040,
          17.68.030
1271 2018 2.04.010
1274 2019 2.10.010,
          2.10.050
1275 2019 10.32.010­
          10.32.180
1276 2019 10.04.145
          16.04.030,
          16.08.010,
          16.12.030,
          16.16.030,
          17.04.030,
          17.08.100,
          17.12.020,
          17.12.085,
          17.12.087,
          17.12.090,
1277 2019 17.12.150,
          17.24.030,
          17.28.030,
          17.30.030,
          17.31.030,
          17.32.030,
          17.36.030,
          17.40.030,
          17.44.030,
          17.60.030,
          17.88.040
1278 2019 9.20.020
1279 2019 9.24.050
1280 2020 9.20.050
1281 2020 10.08.055
          2.04.030,
          5.12.050,
          5.24.020,
          5.24.050,
          5.28.020,
          5.32.050,
          6.04.020,
          8.12.020,
          9.24.010,
1282 2020 9.48.020,
          9.48.080,
          10.04.030,
          10.04.055,
          10.08.130,
          10.11.120,
          10.16.050,
          10.24.010,
          10.28.030,
          15.12.050
          5.04.010,
          5.25.010-
1285 2020 5.25.180,
          10.04.060,
          12.12.010,
          12.12.100
          3.16.010,
          3.16.060,
          3.16.100,
1286 2020 3.16.120,
          3.16.140,
          3.16.160–
          3.16.200
          15.12.010–
          15.12.080,
1287 2020 15.12.100,
          15.12.120–
          15.12.180
1289 2020 13.20.025,
          Ch. 13.20, Appx.
         
 
