


CITY OF SILVERTON CHARTER

Chapters:

I    Name and Boundaries

II    Powers

III    Form of Government

IV    Council

V    Powers and Duties of Officers

VI    Elections

VII    Vacancies in Office

VIII    Ordinances

IX    Public Improvements

X    Miscellaneous Provisions

CITY OF SILVERTON CHARTER

To provide for the government of the city of Silverton, Marion County, Oregon; and to repeal all Charter provisions of the city enacted prior to the time that this Charter takes effect.

Be it enacted by the people of the City of Silverton, Marion County, Oregon:


CHAPTER I NAME AND BOUNDARIES

Sections:

1.    Title of Enactment.

2.    Name of City.

3.    Boundaries.


Section 1. Title of Enactment.

This enactment may be referred to as the City of Silverton Charter of 1985.


Section 2. Name of City.

The municipality of the City of Silverton, Marion County, Oregon, shall continue to be a municipal corporation with the name “City of Silverton.”


Section 3. Boundaries.

The city shall include all territory encompassed by its boundaries as they now exist or hereafter are modified pursuant to law. The city recorder shall keep an accurate, up-to-date description of the boundaries and make copies of this Charter and the boundary descriptions available for public inspection. The copies and descriptions shall be available for public inspection during regular office hours.


CHAPTER II POWERS

Sections:

4.    Powers of the City.

5.    Construction of Powers.


Section 4. Powers of the City.

The city has all powers which the Constitutions, statutes, and common law of the United States and of this state expressly or impliedly grant or allow municipalities, as fully as though this Charter specifically enumerated each of those powers.


Section 5. Construction of Powers.

In this Charter no mention of a particular power is exclusive or restricts the scope of the powers which the city would have if the particular power were not mentioned. The Charter shall be liberally construed, so that, within the limits imposed by the Charter or the Constitution or laws of the United States or the State of Oregon, the city has all powers necessary or convenient for conducting its affairs, including all powers that cities may now or hereafter assume under the home rule provisions of the Constitution and laws of Oregon. The powers are continuing powers.


CHAPTER III FORM OF GOVERNMENT

Sections:

6.    Where Powers Vested.

7.    Council.

8.    Councilmembers.

9.    Mayor.

10.    Appointive Officers.

11.    Salaries.

12.    Qualifications of Elected Officers.


Section 6. Where Powers Vested.

Except as this Charter provides otherwise, all powers of the city are vested in the council.


Section 7. Council.

The council shall consist of a mayor and six (6) councilmembers elected from the city at large.


Section 8. Councilmembers.

The term of office of each councilmember in office when this Charter is adopted shall continue for the term for which each was elected. At each subsequent biennial general election, three (3) councilmembers shall be elected, each for a term of four (4) years.


Section 9. Mayor.

The present mayor shall serve the remainder of his term and at the general election of the year 1986, and every two years thereafter, a mayor shall be elected for a term of two years.


Section 10. Appointive Officers.

Additional officers of the city are a city manager/recorder and a municipal judge, each of whom the council shall appoint and may remove by majority vote of all members of the council. The municipal judge shall not be subject in judicial functions to supervision by any other officer.


Section 11. Salaries.

The council shall fix the amount of compensation for city officers and shall approve a compensation plan for city employees.


Section 12. Qualifications of Elected Officers.

No person shall be eligible for an elective office of the city unless at the time of election this person is a qualified elector within the meaning of the state Constitution and has resided in the city during the twelve (12) months immediately preceding the election. No person may be a candidate for the offices of mayor and councilmember at the same election. The council shall be final judge of the qualifications and election of its own members.


CHAPTER IV COUNCIL

Sections:

13.    Meetings.

14.    Quorum.

15.    Record of Proceedings.

16.    Proceedings to be Public.

17.    Mayor’s Function at Council Meetings.

18.    President of the Council.

19.    Vote Required.


Section 13. Meetings.

The council shall hold a regular meeting at least once each month in the city at a time and a place which it designates. It shall adopt rules for the government of its members and proceedings.


Section 14. Quorum.

A majority of the incumbent members of the council shall constitute a quorum for its business, but a smaller number may meet and compel the attendance of absent members in a manner provided by ordinance.


Section 15. Record of Proceedings.

The council shall cause a record of its proceedings to be kept. Except where exempted by state law, the council record of proceedings shall be public and available for inspection during business hours.


Section 16. Proceedings to be Public.

All deliberations and proceedings of the council shall be public except as otherwise authorized by state law.


Section 17. Mayor’s Function at Council Meetings.

The mayor shall preside over council deliberations and shall have a vote on all questions before the council. The mayor shall preserve order, enforce the rules of the council, and determine the order of business under the rules of the council.


Section 18. President of the Council.

At the first meeting after this Charter takes effect and thereafter at its first meeting of each odd-numbered year, the council shall elect a president from its membership. In the mayor’s absence from a council meeting, the president shall preside. Whenever the council determines that the mayor is unable to perform the functions of the office, the president shall act as mayor. A president of the council shall cast only one (1) vote on an issue before the council.


Section 19. Vote Required.

Except as this Charter otherwise provides, the concurrence of a majority of members of the council voting when a quorum of the council is present shall decide any question before it. No councilmember present at a council meeting shall abstain from voting without first stating reasons in detail at the meeting.


CHAPTER V POWERS AND DUTIES OF OFFICERS

Sections:

20.    Mayor.

21.    Municipal Judge.

22.    City Manager.

23.    City Manager Vacancy.

24.    Powers and Duties of the City Manager.

25.    City Manager — Seat at Meetings.

26.    Interference in Administration and Elections.


Section 20. Mayor.

The mayor shall appoint the council committees provided by the Rules of the Council. The mayor shall sign all records of proceedings approved by the council, countersign all orders of the city treasurer and all instruments and writings authorized by this Charter, the laws of the state or the council. The mayor shall have no veto power and shall sign all ordinances passed by the council within three (3) days after their passage.


Section 21. Municipal Judge.

(1) The municipal judge shall be the judicial officer of the city and shall hold within the city a court known as the municipal court for the City of Silverton, Marion County, Oregon. The court shall be open for the transaction of judicial business at times specified by the council. All areas within the city shall be within the territorial jurisdiction of the court. The municipal judge shall exercise original and exclusive jurisdiction of all offenses defined or authorized by ordinances of the city.

(2) The municipal judge shall have authority

(a) to issue process for the arrest of any person accused of an offense against the ordinances of the city,

(b) to commit any such person to jail or admit to bail pending trial,

(c) to issue and compel obedience to subpoenas,

(d) to compel witnesses to appear and testify in court on the trial of any cause before the court,

(e) to issue any process necessary to carry into effect the judgements of the court,

(f) to punish witnesses and others for contempt of court, and

(g) to issue search warrants.

When not governed by ordinances or this Charter, all proceedings in the municipal court for the violation of a city ordinance shall be governed by the applicable general laws of the state governing justices of the peace and justice courts.

(3) Notwithstanding this section or Section 10 of this Charter, the council may provide for the transfer of powers and duties of the municipal court to the appropriate court of the State of Oregon.


Section 22. City Manager.

(1) The council shall appoint a city manager for an indefinite term who shall hold office at the pleasure of the council and may be removed from office at any time with or without cause by majority vote of the entire council. The manager shall be chosen without regard to political considerations and solely on the basis of executive, educational, and administrative considerations. The manager need not be a resident of the state at the time of appointment, but within one (1) year thereafter, shall become, and remain during tenure, a resident of the city of Silverton. The council may enter into a contract with the manager stating terms and conditions of employment.

(2) Before taking office, the manager shall give a bond in an amount and with such surety as is approved by the council. The premiums on the bond shall be paid by the city.


Section 23. City Manager Vacancy.

(1) When the manager is disabled from acting as manager, or when the office becomes vacant, the council shall appoint a manager pro tem who shall possess the powers and duties of the manager. The manager pro tem may appoint or dismiss a department head or other employee only with the concurrence of four (4) members of the entire council. The manager pro tem shall not hold the position for more than six (6) months.

(2) If a vacancy occurs in the office of the manager, the council at its next meeting shall adopt a resolution of its intent to appoint another manager. Not later than six (6) months after adopting the resolution, the council shall appoint a manager to fill the vacancy.


Section 24. Powers and Duties of the City Manager.

The manager shall be the chief administrative officer. The manager may head one or more departments and shall be responsible to the city council for the proper administration of the city. To that end, the manager shall:

(1) See that all ordinances are enforced;

(2) Appoint all heads of departments and other city employees on the basis of merit and fitness alone and suspend or remove all employees of the city at the manager’s pleasure, except as limited by this Charter and except as the manager may authorize heads of departments to appoint, suspend or remove subordinates in such departments;

(3) Supervise or cause to be supervised any employees and to have general control of any employees to include but not limited to disciplining, assigning duties and accounting for performance;

(4) See that provisions of all franchises, contracts, leases and permits and privileges granted by the city are fully enforced and observed;

(5) Attend all meetings of the council unless excused by the mayor;

(6) Organize, disband, or reorganize departments, reassign employees to perform work in other departments or to work in more than one of said offices or departments provided that no such changes shall affect the powers or duties of any elective officer of the city;

(7) Keep the council advised as to the needs of the city;

(8) Prepare the annual budget;

(9) Prepare and furnish reports as requested by the council;

(10) Supervise the purchase of supplies, equipment and materials for which funds are provided in the budget and execute all contracts;

(11) Control, subject to ordinances as may from time to time be adopted, public utilities owned or operated by the city;

(12) Have general supervision over all city property and its use by the public or city employees;

(13) Devote full-time to the discharge of duties of the office;

(14) At the manager’s discretion, appoint advisory boards as desirable to assist or advise in work, provided no compensation is given to members of the boards;

(15) Perform such other duties as required by this Charter or as the council may require; and

(16) Serve as city recorder.


Section 25. City Manager — Seat at Meetings.

The manager and such other officers or employees of the city as the council designates shall be entitled to seats with the council, but shall have no vote on questions before the council. The manager shall have the right to take part in the discussion of all matters coming before the council.


Section 26. Interference in Administration and Elections.

(1) A member of the council shall not directly or indirectly, by suggestion or otherwise, attempt to influence the manager in making an appointment or in removal of an employee or purchasing supplies, or attempt to exact a promise relative to an appointment from any candidate for manager.

(2) A violation of this section forfeits the office of the offending member of the council, who may be removed by the council or a court of competent jurisdiction. The council may, however, in session, discuss with or suggest to the manager anything pertinent to city affairs or the interests of the city. Further, a councilmember may, at any time, request and receive from the manager or any other city employee information to which a private citizen is entitled.


CHAPTER VI ELECTIONS

Sections:

27.    Regulation of Elections.

28.    Tie Votes.

29.    Commencement of Terms of Office.

30.    Oath of Office.

31.    Nominations.


Section 27. Regulation of Elections.

Except as this Charter provides otherwise and as the council provides otherwise by ordinances relating to elections, the general laws of the State of Oregon shall apply to all city elections.


Section 28. Tie Votes.

In the event of a tie vote for candidates for an elective office, the successful candidate shall be determined by a public drawing of lots in a manner prescribed by the council.


Section 29. Commencement of Terms of Office.

The term of office of a person elected at a regular city election shall commence on the first council meeting of the year immediately following the election.


Section 30. Oath of Office.

Before entering upon the duties of office, each officer shall take an oath or shall affirm to support the Constitutions and laws of the United States and of the State of Oregon and to faithfully perform the duties of office.


Section 31. Nominations.

(1) A qualified elector who will have resided in the city during the 12 months preceding an election may be nominated for an elective city office to be filled at the election.

(2) A nomination may be by a prescribed petition that specifies the office sought. Nomination may also be made by filing a declaration of candidacy accompanied by a filing fee as determined by the council.

(3) The petition shall be signed by not fewer than 20 electors and shall include an affidavit of the circulator thereof, indicating the number of signers of the petition and stating that each signature was made in the presence of the circulator and is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be. Nomination petition signatures shall be certified with the elections clerk of Marion County before the petition is filed with the city recorder.

(4) Upon such certification of the signatures, all nomination papers shall be filed with the city recorder within the time limits as required by state and county election laws and regulations. The recorder shall make a record of the exact time at which each petition is filed and shall take and preserve the name and address of the person by whom it is filed. If the petition is insufficient, the city recorder shall notify the person who filed the petition within five (5) days after the filing. The deficient petition may be amended and filed again as a new petition, or a substitute petition for the same candidate may be filed within the regular time for filing nomination petitions.

(5) The recorder shall notify an eligible person of a nomination, and that person shall file with the recorder written acceptance of nomination within five (5) days of notification of nomination. Upon receipt of the acceptance of nomination, the recorder shall cause the’ nominee’s name to be printed on the ballot. The petition of nomination or declaration of candidacy for a successful candidate at an election shall be preserved in the office of the recorder until the term of office for which the candidate is elected expires.


CHAPTER VII VACANCIES IN OFFICE

Sections:

32.    What Creates Vacancy.

33.    Filling of Vacancies.


Section 32. What Creates Vacancy.

(1) An office shall be deemed vacant upon:

(a) the incumbent’s death,

(b) adjudicated incompetence,

(c) conviction of a felony,

(d) unlawful destruction of public records,

(e) resignation,

(f) recall from office,

(g) removal of residency from the city,

(h) ceasing to possess the qualifications for the office, or

(i) upon the failure of the person elected or appointed to the office to qualify within ten (10) days after the time for the term of office to commence.

(2) In the case of a mayor or councilmember an office also becomes vacant upon the incumbent’s absence from the city for thirty (30) days without the consent of the council or upon an absence from meetings of the council for sixty (60) days without like consent, and upon a declaration by the council of the vacancy.


Section 33. Filling of Vacancies.

Vacant elective city offices shall be filled by appointment by a majority vote of the remaining members of the council. The appointee’s term of office begins immediately on appointment and continues throughout the unexpired term of the appointee’s predecessor.


CHAPTER VIII ORDINANCES

Sections:

34.    Enacting Clause.

35.    Mode of Enactment.

36.    When Ordinances Take Effect.


Section 34. Enacting Clause.

The enacting clause of all ordinances hereafter passed shall be, “The City of Silverton ordains as follows:”.


Section 35. Mode of Enactment.

(1) Except as subsections (2) and (3) provide to the contrary, an ordinance shall, before enactment, be read fully and distinctly in open council meeting on two different days.

(2) Except as subsection (3) allows both readings by title only, an ordinance may be enacted at a single council meeting by unanimous vote of all councilmembers present after being read first in full and then by title.

(3) Any of the readings may be by title only if:

(a) no councilmember present at the meeting requests that the ordinance be read in full, or

(b) a copy of the ordinance is provided for each councilmember, three (3) copies are provided for public inspection in the office of the city recorder not later than one week before the first reading of the ordinance, and notice of the availability of copies is given by written posting at city hall or by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city not later than one week before the reading.

(4) An ordinance:

(a) enacted after being read by title only, under the provisions of subsection (3), shall have no legal effect if it differs from its terms as filed prior to the reading, unless each section incorporating such a difference is read fully and distinctly in open council meeting as finally amended prior to being approved by the council.

(b) may be amended at the time of enactment if the ordinance as amended deals with the same general subject.

(5) On the final vote on an ordinance, the ayes and nayes of the members of the council shall be taken and entered in the record of proceedings.

(6) On the enactment of an ordinance, the city manager/recorder shall endorse it with the date of enactment. Within three days thereafter, the mayor shall sign the ordinance.


Section 36. When Ordinances Take Effect.

An ordinance enacted by the council shall take effect on the thirtieth (30th) day after its enactment. When the council deems it advisable, however, an ordinance may provide a later time for it to take effect, and in case of an emergency, it may take effect immediately.


CHAPTER IX PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS

Sections:

37.    Condemnation.

38.    Improvements.

39.    Special Assessments.


Section 37. Condemnation.

Any necessity of taking property for the city by condemnation shall be determined by the council and declared by a resolution of the council describing the property and stating the uses to which it shall be devoted.


Section 38. Improvements.

(1) The procedure for making, altering, vacating, or abandoning a public improvement shall be governed by general ordinance or, to the extent not so governed, by the applicable state laws. Action on any proposed public improvement, except a water or sewer improvement declared by the council to be needed at once because of an emergency, shall be abandoned and not reinstated for six (6) months upon a remonstance thereto by the owners of land which bears 66.66 percent (66.66%) of the estimated assessed cost of the improvement.

(2) In this section, “owner” shall mean the record holder of legal title, or if land is being purchased under a land sales contract recorded or verified in writing by the record holder of legal title, the purchaser shall be deemed the “owner.”


Section 39. Special Assessments.

The procedure for levying, collecting, and enforcing the payment of special assessments for public improvements or other services to be charged against real property shall be governed by general ordinance.


CHAPTER X MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

Sections:

40.    Debt Limit.

41.    Existing Ordinances Continued.

42.    Repeal of Previously Enacted Provisions.

43.    Procedure for Amendment.

44.    Severability.

45.    Time of Effect of Charter.


Section 40. Debt Limit.

(1) Except by consent of the voters, the city’s indebtedness shall be in accordance with state law. For purposes of calculating the limitation, however, the legally authorized debt of the city in existence at the time this Charter takes effect shall not be considered. All city officials and employees who create or officially approve any indebtedness in excess of this limitation shall be jointly and severally liable for the excess.

(2) The city council, by resolution, may authorize the issuance and sale of revenue bonds all or a major portion of the proceeds which are to be used directly or indirectly in any trade or business carried on by any private corporation, nonprofit corporation, partnership, limited partnership, individual or entity or combination of the same. The city council, by ordinance, shall adopt standards and procedures by which to determine when such bonds shall be issued and sold hereunder. The bonds shall be secured solely by security financed, provided or arranged by the private entity in whose trade or business the proceeds of such bonds are to be used. No holder or holders of such bonds shall ever have the right to compel any exercise of the taxing power of the city to pay any such bonds or the interest thereon, nor to enforce payment thereof against any money or property of the city, except bond proceeds, real or personal property financed with bond proceeds, and payments made by a private entity in respect of such property. The city council may loan the proceeds of such bonds to such a private entity, and may acquire and dispose of real or personal property financed with bond proceeds by lease, lease purchase, installment sale, or otherwise. The city council may take any other action necessary to effectuate the powers granted herein. The issuance and sale of bonds issued hereunder shall not be subject to referendum. 


Section 41. Existing Ordinances Continued.

All ordinances of the city consistent with this Charter and in force when it takes effect shall remain in effect until amended or repealed.


Section 42. Repeal of Previously Enacted Provisions.

(1) All Charter provisions of the city enacted prior to the time that this Charter takes effect are hereby repealed.

(2) The repeal of the 1940 Charter, as amended, does not affect the validity of an outstanding bond issued by the city or impair the obligation of the city under the bond, or the rights of the holders of the bond.


Section 43. Procedure for Amendment.

(1) Amendments to this Charter may be proposed by the city council by resolution duly adopted at any regular meeting of the council and, when so adopted, shall be submitted to a vote of the legal voters of the city upon the date of any election in the State of Oregon which may be held after giving notice as provided in this Charter.

(2) This Charter may also be amended by proposal under the initiative provisions of Oregon statutes by a petition duly signed by an appropriate number of qualified electors.


Section 44. Severability.

If any provision of this Charter is held invalid, the other provisions of the Charter shall not be affected. If the application of the Charter or any of its provisions to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the application of the Charter and its provisions to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected.


Section 45. Time of Effect of Charter.

This Charter shall take effect, if approved by the voters, five (5) days following the official canvass of votes cast at the November 5, 1985 election.


Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Chapters:

1.01    Code Adoption

1.04    General Provisions

1.08    General Penalty


Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION

Sections:

1.01.005    2003 Silverton Municipal Code adopted.

1.01.010    Adoption.

1.01.020    Title – Citation – Reference.

1.01.030    Contents.

1.01.040    Ordinances passed prior to adoption of code.

1.01.050    Reference to amendments.

1.01.060    Title, chapter and section headings.

1.01.070    Reference to specific ordinances.

1.01.080    Effect of code on past actions and obligations.

1.01.090    Effective date.

1.01.100    Constitutionality.


1.01.005 2003 Silverton Municipal Code adopted.

A. The 2003 Silverton Municipal Code, as attached to the ordinance codified in this section as Exhibit “A,” and by this reference is hereby incorporated herein, is adopted by the council.

B. All prior versions of the Silverton Municipal Code, as well as any ordinances inconsistent therewith, are hereby repealed. (Ord. 03-106 §§ 1, 2, 2003)


1.01.010 Adoption.

There is adopted the “Silverton Municipal Code” as published by the city of Silverton. (Ord. 89-100 § 1, 1989)


1.01.020 Title – Citation – Reference.

This code shall be known as the “Silverton Municipal Code” and it shall be sufficient to refer to the code as the “Silverton Municipal Code” in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the code. Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the code, and such references shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the code. (Ord. 89-100 § 2, 1989)


1.01.030 Contents.

This code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative ordinances of the city of Silverton, Oregon. (Ord. 89-100 § 3, 1989)


1.01.040 Ordinances passed prior to adoption of code.

The last ordinance included in the original code is Ordinance No. 870, passed September 20, 1988. The following ordinances, passed subsequent to Ordinance No. 870 but prior to adoption of this code, are adopted and made a part of this code: Ordinances No. 871, outline approval of Oak Knoll Estates; No. 872, division cost for abutting property owners on Grant Street sewer assessment. (Ord. 89-100 § 4, 1989)


1.01.050 Reference to amendments.

Whenever a reference is made to this code as the “Silverton Municipal Code” or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. (Ord. 89-100 § 5, 1989)


1.01.060 Title, chapter and section headings.

Title, chapter and section headings contained in this code shall not govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. (Ord. 89-100 § 6, 1989)


1.01.070 Reference to specific ordinances.

The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with, ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 89-100 § 7, 1989)


1.01.080 Effect of code on past actions and obligations.

Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendments hereby of any ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the city shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee or penalty at the effective date due and unpaid under such ordinance, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee or penalty, or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 89-100 § 8, 1989)


1.01.090 Effective date.

This code shall become effective on the date the ordinance adopting this code as the “Silverton Municipal Code” shall become effective. (Ord. 89-100 § 9, 1989)


1.01.100 Constitutionality.

If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The council declares that it would have passed this code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this code should be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full force and effect. (Ord. 89-100 § 10, 1989)


Chapter 1.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

1.04.010    Definitions.

1.04.020    Interpretation of language.

1.04.030    Grammatical interpretation.

1.04.040    Titles of office.

1.04.050    Acts by agents.

1.04.060    Prohibited acts include causing and permitting.

1.04.070    Computation of time.

1.04.080    Construction of provisions.

1.04.090    Repeal shall not revive any ordinances.


1.04.010 Definitions.

The following words and phrases, whenever used in the ordinances of the city of Silverton, Oregon, shall be construed as defined in this section, unless from the context a different meaning is intended, or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases:

A. “City” and “town” each mean the city of Silverton, Oregon, or the area within the territorial limits of the city of Silverton, Oregon, and such territory outside Silverton of any constitutional or statutory provision.

B. “Council” means the common council of the city of Silverton. “All its members” or “all councilors” means the total number of councilors (including the mayor) holding office.

C. “County” means the county of Marion.

D. “Law” denotes applicable federal law, the Constitution and statutes of the state of Oregon, the ordinances of the city of Silverton and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder.

E. “May” is permissive.

F. “Month” means a calendar month.

G. “Must,” “will” and “shall” are each mandatory.

H. “Oath” means and includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the words “affirm” and “affirmed.”

I. “Owner,” applied to a building or land, means and includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety of the whole or a part of such building or land.

J. “Person” means and includes a natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them.

K. “Personal property” means and includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt.

L. “Preceding” and “following” means next before and next after, respectively.

M. “Property” means and includes real and personal property.

N. “Real property” means and includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.

O. “Sidewalk” means that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.

P. “State” means the state of Oregon.

Q. “Street” means and includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs or other public ways in the city which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state.

R. “Tenant” and “occupant,” applied to a building or land, means and includes any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.

S. “Written” means and includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed, multigraphed, or otherwise reproduced in permanent visible form.

T. “Year” means a calendar year. (Ord. 854 § 1, 1987)


1.04.020 Interpretation of language.

All words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the laws shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. (Ord. 854 § 3, 1987)


1.04.030 Grammatical interpretation.

The following grammatical rules shall apply in the ordinances of the city, unless it is apparent from the context that a different construction is intended:

A. Gender. Each gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter genders.

B. Singular and Plural. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular.

C. Tenses. Words uses in the present tense include the past and the future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. (Ord. 854 § 4, 1987)


1.04.040 Titles of office.

Use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the city. (Ord. 854 § 2, 1987)


1.04.050 Acts by agents.

When an act is required by an ordinance, the same being such that it may be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent. (Ord. 854 § 5, 1987)


1.04.060 Prohibited acts include causing and permitting.

Whenever in the ordinances of the city any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission. (Ord. 854 § 6, 1987)


1.04.070 Computation of time.

Except when otherwise provided, the time within which an act is required to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is Sunday or a holiday, in which case it shall also be excluded. (Ord. 854 § 7, 1987)


1.04.080 Construction of provisions.

The provisions of the ordinances of the city, and all proceedings under them, are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote justice. (Ord. 854 § 8, 1987)


1.04.090 Repeal shall not revive any ordinances.

The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance, or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. (Ord. 854 § 9, 1987)


Chapter 1.08 GENERAL PENALTY

Sections:

1.08.010    Penalty for violation of code provisions.


1.08.010 Penalty for violation of code provisions.

A. Except in cases where a different punishment is prescribed by any ordinance, any person convicted of violating any provision of any ordinance of the city shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $2,500.

B. Each day’s violation of a provision of the ordinances described in subsection A of this section shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 97-105, 1997; Ord. 855 § 1, 1987)


Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL 

Chapters:

2.04    City Council

2.08    Planning Commission

2.10    Transportation Advisory Committee

2.16    Disposition of Property

2.20    Urban Renewal Agency

2.24    Nondiscrimination Policy

2.28    Removal of Volunteer Officers

2.32    City-Owned Facility Rental

2.36    Administrative Search Warrants

2.40    Criminal Background Checks

2.44    Emergency Management


Chapter 2.04 CITY COUNCIL

Sections:

2.04.010    City representation authority – Limitations.

2.04.020    Regular meetings.

2.04.030    Special meetings – Authorized when.

2.04.040    Special meetings – Notice required.

2.04.050    Joint meetings.

2.04.060    Emergency meetings.

2.04.070    Conduct of meetings.

2.04.080    Order of business.

2.04.090    Executive sessions.

2.04.100    Voting requirements.

2.04.110    Meeting attendance.

2.04.120    Nonattendance of meetings grounds for removal.

2.04.130    Excused absence from meeting.


2.04.010 City representation authority – Limitations.

All business of the city shall be transacted, determined and adopted by the city council at either regular, special or emergency meetings. No council member or other city official shall at any time presume to act for and in behalf of the city, or determine its policies, without council authorization at a legal council meeting. This restriction shall not apply to the duties and powers of the city manager, as contained in the City Charter, and the city manager shall remain vested with all of the power and authority to act for and in behalf of the city as granted to this office under the City Charter. (Ord. 842 § 6, 1986)


2.04.020 Regular meetings.

Regular meetings of the city council shall be held at 7:00 p.m. on the first Monday of each month. When the first Monday of a month falls on a legal holiday, or on a day that a legal holiday is celebrated, the meeting shall be held on the second Monday of that month. Failure to officially notify council members of the date, time, place and purpose of regular council meetings shall not affect the validity of such meetings. (Ord. 93-122 § 1, 1993; Ord. 850 § 1, 1987; Ord. 842 § 1, 1986)


2.04.030 Special meetings – Authorized when.

Special meetings of the council may be called by the mayor, city manager, or at least three members of the council at any time, except Sundays or legal holidays, for the purpose of transacting city business. (Ord. 842 § 2, 1986)


2.04.040 Special meetings – Notice required.

A. Notice of a special council meeting shall be given to each councilmember by delivering, at least 48 hours prior to the time set for such meeting, a notice in writing stating the date, time, place and nature of the business to be considered by the council.

B. Notice shall also be given to the people of the city, by notification to a newspaper of general circulation, or posting at City Hall at least 24 hours in advance of the special meeting. (Ord. 842 § 3, 1986)


2.04.050 Joint meetings.

Joint meetings of the city council and planning commission, or similar body, may be called in accordance with SMC 2.04.030. (Ord. 842 § 5, 1986)


2.04.060 Emergency meetings.

Emergency meetings of the city council may be held upon such notice as is appropriate to the circumstances. (Ord. 842 § 4, 1986)


2.04.070 Conduct of meetings.

Proceedings of the council shall be conducted in conformity with the provisions of the City Charter, applicable Oregon law, this chapter, and the rules of the council. All parliamentary questions shall be governed by Robert’s Rules of Order, as revised. (Ord. 842 § 7, 1986)


2.04.080 Order of business.

The order of business for council meetings shall be substantially in the following form, and may be amended by the city manager or mayor:

A. Roll call;

B. Minutes;

C. Public comment;

D. Council discussion;

E. Action items;

F. Reports/communications;

G. Executive session;

H. Adjournment. (Ord. 842 § 8, 1986)


2.04.090 Executive sessions.

The council may adjourn to executive session during any meeting, after observing the requirements of Oregon Revised Statutes 192.660. (Ord. 842 § 10, 1986)


2.04.100 Voting requirements.

Every councilmember who is present when a vote is taken on any matter shall vote for or against, unless excused under the provisions of Oregon Conflict of Interest Laws. No councilmember shall be permitted to vote on a question unless present. (Ord. 842 § 9, 1986)


2.04.110 Meeting attendance.

Failure of any member of the city council, planning commission or other duly authorized board, committee, commission or authority, to attend three consecutive regular and/or special meetings during a calendar year without having been excused by the particular governing body or failure to attend six regular meetings in a 12-month period, whether excused or not excused, is presumed to be in nonperformance of duty. (Ord. 97-106, 1997; Ord. 93-115, 1993; Ord. 92-100 § 1, 1992)


2.04.120 Nonattendance of meetings grounds for removal.

Nonattendance by any councilmember, planning commission member or other duly authorized board, committee, commission or authority member at six meetings during a calendar year, or three consecutive nonexcused meetings shall automatically cause the position to be declared vacant and the nonattending member shall be removed. His or her remaining term shall be filled by appointment of the mayor with the approval of the council. (Ord. 97-106, 1997; Ord. 93-115, 1993; Ord. 92-100 § 1, 1992)


2.04.130 Excused absence from meeting.

Excused absences shall mean those absences from meetings that are approved by a majority vote of the particular governing body which is affected. (Ord. 92-100 § 1, 1992)


Chapter 2.08 PLANNING COMMISSION

Sections:

2.08.010    Created.

2.08.020    Membership – Qualifications – Term of office.

2.08.030    Chairman and vice-chairman.

2.08.040    Recordkeeping – Secretary – Compensation.

2.08.050    Powers and duties generally – Quorum.

2.08.060    Statutory authority.

2.08.070    Consultants, services and other expenses.

2.08.080    Recommendations to council – Requirements.

2.08.090    Recommendations to council – In writing.

2.08.100    Maps, plats and replats – Submittal requirements.

2.08.110    Maps, plats and replats – Approval.

2.08.120    Review of zoning, district and building ordinances.

2.08.130    Recommendations on location or construction of buildings.

2.08.140    Gifts and bequests.

2.08.150    Expenditure restrictions.


2.08.010 Created.

There is created a city planning commission for the city of Silverton. (Ord. 331 § 1, 1942)


2.08.020 Membership – Qualifications – Term of office.

The city planning commission shall consist of seven members. The commission members shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council. Not less than five members shall be selected from among qualified city residents and not more than two commission members may be chosen from qualified persons who reside within the urban growth boundary of the city of Silverton. Planning commission members in office upon approval of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall continue in office for the duration of current appointments. New members will be appointed for four-year terms. Vacancies in office shall be filled in the same manner as new appointments for the unexpired portion of the term. (Ord. 94-103 § 1, 1994; Ord. 845 § 1, 1986; Ord. 604 § 1, 1969; Ord. 601 § 1, 1969; Ord. 331 § 2, 1942)


2.08.030 Chairman and vice-chairman.

At its first meeting each January, the planning commission shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman, who shall serve for the ensuing year. In the absence at a meeting of the chairman, the vice-chairman shall serve as chairman. Upon resignation or removal of the chairman from office, the vice-chairman shall assume the duties of the chairman and a new vice-chairman shall be selected by the commission. (Ord. 845 § 2, 1986; Ord. 601 § 2, 1969; Ord. 331 § 3, 1942)


2.08.040 Recordkeeping – Secretary – Compensation.

A. Members of the city planning commission shall receive no compensation.

B. A city staff member shall serve as secretary and keep an accurate record of all proceedings of the commission. The record shall be bound at the end of each fiscal year and kept as a permanent record of the city. (Ord. 89-103 § 1, 1989; Ord. 331 § 4, 1942)


2.08.050 Powers and duties generally – Quorum.

Four voting members of the commission shall constitute a quorum. The commission may make and alter rules and regulations for its government and procedure, consistent with the laws of the state and with the City Charter and ordinances. It shall meet at least once a month at such time and place as may be fixed by the commission. Special meetings may be called at any time by the chairperson, or by three members, by written notice served upon each member of the commission at least 48 hours prior to the special meeting. (Ord. 845 § 3, 1986; Ord. 601 § 3, 1969; Ord. 331 § 5, 1942)


2.08.060 Statutory authority.

The city planning commission shall also have all the powers which are given to it under the general laws of the state of Oregon. (Ord. 89-103 § 2, 1989)


2.08.070 Consultants, services and other expenses.

The city planning commission shall have power and authority to employ consulting advice on municipal problems, a secretary, and such clerks as may be necessary, and to pay for their services and for such other expenses as the commission may lawfully incur, including the necessary disbursements incurred by its members in the performance of their duties as members of the commission, out of such funds as are theretofore placed at the disposal of the commission by the city council. (Ord. 331 § 6, 1942)


2.08.080 Recommendations to council – Requirements.

It shall be the duty of the city planning commission, and they shall have power, except as otherwise provided by law:

A. To recommend and make suggestions to the city council and to all other public authorities concerning the laying out, widening, extending, parking and locating of streets, sidewalks and boulevards, the establishment of setback lines, the relief of traffic congestion, the betterment of housing and sanitation conditions, and the establishment of zones and districts limiting the use, height, area and bulk of buildings and structures;

B. To recommend to the city council and all other public authorities plans for the regulation of the future growth, development and beautification of the municipality in respect to its public and private buildings and works, streets, parks, grounds and vacant lots, and plans consistent with the future growth and development of the city, in order to secure to the city and its inhabitants, sanitation, proper service of any public utilities, and transportation facilities;

C. To do and perform any and all other acts and things necessary or proper to carry out the provisions of this chapter; and

D. In general to study and to propose such measures as may be advisable for the promotion of the public interest, health, morals, safety, comfort, convenience and welfare of the city. (Ord. 603 § 5, 1970; Ord. 601 § 4, 1969; Ord. 331 § 7, 1942)


2.08.090 Recommendations to council – In writing.

All recommendations made to the council by the commission shall be in writing. (Ord. 331 § 14, 1942)


2.08.100 Maps, plats and replats – Submittal requirements.

All maps, plats and replats of land laid out in building lots, and the streets, alleys or other portions of the same intended to be dedicated for public use or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting thereon or adjacent thereto and located within the city limits, and all plans or plats for public buildings, shall first be submitted to the city planning commission by the city engineer or other proper municipal officer, and a report thereon from the commission secured in writing before approval shall be given by the said proper municipal official. (Ord. 331 § 8, 1942)


2.08.110 Maps, plats and replats – Approval.

All plans, plats or replats of land laid out in lots or plats within the city, including the streets, alleys and other portions of the same intended to be dedicated to public or private use, shall first be submitted to the planning commission and approved by it before they shall be recorded. (Ord. 603 § 6, 1970; Ord. 601 § 5, 1969; Ord. 331 § 9, 1942)


2.08.120 Review of zoning, district and building ordinances.

Copies of all proposed ordinances for the establishment of the boundaries of any zone or district provided by SMC 2.08.080, and of all proposed ordinances regulating or limiting the use, height, area, bulk and construction of buildings to be submitted to the council, shall, before the same are presented to the council, be first submitted by the city recorder to the city planning commission for recommendation, and the auditor or city clerk shall immediately so notify the council of such submission to the commission, and the commission shall make its recommendation thereon in writing to the council; provided, that the city planning commission shall first hold a public hearing at such time and place as may be directed by the council, and make a careful and appropriate investigation thereon; and hereafter, before final action shall be taken by the council, or any department of the city government, on the location or design of any public building, bridge, statue, park, parkway, boulevard, playground or public grounds, the same shall be submitted to the city planning commission for consideration and report; and provided further, that unless the city council definitely names a longer period for the return of a report specified herein, the approval of the city planning commission to any matter so referred to it in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, shall be deemed to have been given at the end of 30 days after the receipt of the same in writing by the secretary, unless the city planning commission shall submit a report thereon prior to that time. (Ord. 331 § 10, 1942)


2.08.130 Recommendations on location or construction of buildings.

The city planning commission may make recommendations to any person, copartnership, corporation or public authority with reference to the location of buildings, structures or works to be erected, constructed or altered by or for such person, copartnership, corporation or public authority; provided, however, such recommendation shall not have the force or effect of a law or ordinance, except when so prescribed by the laws of the state or by city ordinance. Any person, copartnership, corporation or public authority having charge of the construction, placing or designing of buildings, or other structures and improvements, may call upon the city planning commission for a report thereon. (Ord. 331 § 11, 1942)


2.08.140 Gifts and bequests.

The city planning commission may receive gifts, bequests or devises of property to carry out any of the purposes of this chapter, and shall have control and disposition over the same, unless the ordinance codified in this chapter should be repealed, in which case such control shall be vested in the council. (Ord. 331 § 12, 1942)


2.08.150 Expenditure restrictions.

The city planning commission shall have no authority to make any expenditures on behalf of the city, or to obligate the city for the payment of any sums of money, except as provided in this chapter, and then only after the city council shall have first authorized such expenditures for such purpose from time to time by appropriate resolution, which resolution shall provide the administrative method by which the funds shall be drawn and expended. (Ord. 331 § 15, 1942)


Chapter 2.10 TRANSPORTATION ADVISORY COMMITTEE

Sections:

2.10.010    Establishment/purpose.

2.10.020    Membership.

2.10.030    Term of office.

2.10.040    Meetings.

2.10.050    Powers and duties.


2.10.010 Establishment/purpose.

A transportation advisory committee (TAC) is hereby established for the city to review and provide recommendations to the city council on transportation-related issues. (Ord. 17-10 § 1, 2017)


2.10.020 Membership.

The TAC shall consist of seven voting members to be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council. At least one member shall be an elected member of the city council. The public works director, or designee, shall also be a member. The other five citizen members shall be residents of the city or reside within its urban growth boundary. All members of the TAC except for the public works director serve at the pleasure of the city council and may be removed by the council with or without cause at any time. Appointments to fill a vacancy for one of the citizen member positions shall be made for the remainder of the unexpired term of that member. (Ord. 17-10 § 1, 2017)


2.10.030 Term of office.

The citizen members shall be appointed for a term of three years. The initial terms of the citizen members will be staggered. (Ord. 17-10 § 1, 2017)


2.10.040 Meetings.

A majority of the members of the TAC shall constitute a quorum. The TAC will not have regularly scheduled meetings and will only meet as necessary to handle matters referred to it by the city council, the public works director, or the city manager. The council member of the TAC shall serve as the chair. At its first meeting, the TAC shall select a vice chair. Any member excluding the public works director, or designee, of the TAC is eligible to serve as the vice chair. At its first meeting after the beginning of each new calendar year, the election of a vice chair for that calendar year will be the first order of business. The chair, and in the chair’s absence the vice chair, shall preside over all meetings. All meetings of the TAC shall be held in compliance with the Oregon Public Meetings Law. (Ord. 17-10 § 1, 2017)


2.10.050 Powers and duties.

The TAC is an advisory committee and does not have any policy making authority. It shall perform the following duties when requested to do so by the city council, city manager, or public works director:

A. Review and provide recommendations on transportation-related issues.

B. Review and provide comments and recommendations on the city’s traffic and circulation elements and specific plans.

C. Review and provide recommendations for council on local, state, and federal transportation legislation affecting the city of Silverton.

D. Review and provide recommendations on the city’s bicycle and pedestrian infrastructure systems.

E. Establish an annual work plan to address transportation issues for consideration and approval by the city council by November of each calendar year for the following year. (Ord. 17-10 § 1, 2017)


Chapter 2.16 DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY

Sections:

2.16.010    Application of chapter provisions.

2.16.020    Custody of property by police department.

2.16.030    Reclaiming property – Requirements.

2.16.040    Sale of property – Procedures.

2.16.050    Sale of property – Certificate of title.

2.16.060    Surplus property.

2.16.070    Dangerous or perishable property.


2.16.010 Application of chapter provisions.

This chapter shall apply to all personal property, except motor vehicles, now or hereafter in custody of the city. (Ord. 797 § 7, 1983)


2.16.020 Custody of property by police department.

Whenever any personal property other than motor vehicles is taken into the custody of the city by reason of seizure, abandonment, or for any other reason, the personal property shall be turned over to and held by the police department at the expense and risk of the owner or person lawfully entitled to possession thereof. (Ord. 797 § 1, 1983)


2.16.030 Reclaiming property – Requirements.

Within 60 days after such property is taken into possession, except when confiscated or held as evidence, the owner or person lawfully entitled to possession may reclaim the same upon application to the police department, submission of satisfactory proof of ownership or right to possession, and any payment of charges and expenses, if any, incurred in the storage, preservation and custody of the property. (Ord. 797 § 2, 1983)


2.16.040 Sale of property – Procedures.

A. At any time after the 60-day period stated in SMC 2.16.030, the chief of police shall sell at public auction any unclaimed property and any property which has been confiscated and not ordered destroyed, except such property held as evidence in any legal or court proceeding. Notice of such sale shall be given once by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least 10 days before the date of sale, giving the time and place of sale and generally describing the property to be sold.

B. All sales of such property shall be for cash to the highest and best bidder; provided, however, that any person appearing at or prior to such sale and proving ownership or right of possession thereto shall be entitled to reclaim the property upon the payment of the charges and expenses incurred by the city in the storage, preservation and custody of the property and a proportionate share of the costs of advertising the same for sale.

C. If no bids are entered for the property, or if the highest bid entered is less than the costs incurred by the city, the chief of police may enter a bid on behalf of the city in an amount equal to such costs. If bid on by the city, the property shall become the property of the city as compensation for the costs incurred or, if no use or value to the city, shall be disposed of in such manner as the city manager directs.

D. The proceeds of a sale shall be first applied to payment of the cost of the sale and the expense incurred in the preservation, storage and custody of the property; and the balance, if any, shall be credited to the general fund of the city.

E. Such sale shall be without the right of redemption. (Ord. 797 § 3, 1983)


2.16.050 Sale of property – Certificate of title.

A. At the time of the payment of the purchase price, the chief of police shall execute a certificate of sale in duplicate, the original to be delivered to the purchaser and a copy to be kept on file in the office of the finance director or city manager, which certificate shall contain the date of sale, the consideration paid, a brief description of the property, and a stipulation that the city does not warrant the condition or guarantee title if for any reason invalid.

B. The certificate of sale shall be in substantially the following form:

This is to certify that under the provisions of Ordinance No. _____, and pursuant to due notice of time and place of sale, I did on the ____ day of ________, 20___, sell at public auction to __________ for the sum of $________ cash, he being the highest bidder, and that being the highest and best sum bid therefor, the following-described personal property, to-wit:

(Brief description of the property)

and in consideration of the payment of the said purchase price, receipt whereof is hereby acknowledged, I have this day delivered to said purchaser the foregoing property.

The City of Silverton assumes no responsibility as to the condition or the title of the above-described property. In case this sale shall for any reason be invalid, the liability of the City is limited to return of the purchase price.

Dated this ____ day of ________, 20___.

Chief of Police

City of Silverton

(Ord. 797 § 4, 1983)


2.16.060 Surplus property.

Any property now in the possession of the city, or hereafter coming into the possession of the city, that is deemed by the city manager to be surplus property, may be sold in the same manner as provided in this chapter. The proceeds received from the sale of such property shall be credited to the particular fund of the department under which it was held. (Ord. 797 § 6, 1983)


2.16.070 Dangerous or perishable property.

Any property coming into the possession of the police department which is determined to be dangerous or perishable may be disposed of immediately, without notice, in such manner as the police chief and the city manager determine to be in the public interest. (Ord. 797 § 5, 1983)


Chapter 2.20 URBAN RENEWAL AGENCY

Sections:

2.20.010    Findings.

2.20.020    Created.

2.20.030    Agency bylaws and rules.


2.20.010 Findings.

A. Existence of Blighted Areas and Need Declared. The city council finds and declares that there exist within the city “blighted areas” as that term is defined and used in ORS Chapter 457, and that a need exists for an urban renewal agency to function within the city. (Ord. 92-111 § 1(A), 1992)


2.20.020 Created.

A. The city council shall act as the governing body for the Silverton urban renewal agency. When acting as the Silverton urban renewal agency, the council shall act for the agency only and not for the city. (Ord. 05-08 § 1, 2005; Ord. 93-125 § 1, 1993; Ord. 92-111 § 1(C), 1992)


2.20.030 Agency bylaws and rules.

The urban renewal agency shall, by resolution of the agency, establish such bylaws and other rules of procedures as it deems necessary or proper to carry out its lawful duties. (Ord. 92-111 § 1(B), 1992)


Chapter 2.24 NONDISCRIMINATION POLICY

Sections:

2.24.010    Policy.


2.24.010 Policy.

It is the policy of the city that all actions be consistent with allowing diverse opportunities in housing, employment and cultural activity for all people. (Ord. 92-101 § 1, 1992)


Chapter 2.28 REMOVAL OF VOLUNTEER OFFICERS

Sections:

2.28.010    Ethics.

2.28.020    Compensation.

2.28.030    Grounds for removal, suspension or reprimand.

2.28.040    Procedure for disciplinary action.

2.28.050    Code adopted.

2.28.060    Supplementary powers.


2.28.010 Ethics.

Members of boards and commissions shall comply with the provisions of the State Code of Ethics found in ORS 244.040. (Ord. 94-127 § 1, 1994)


2.28.020 Compensation.

No member of any board or commission shall receive any compensation for services as a member of the board or commission. (Ord. 94-127 § 2, 1994)


2.28.030 Grounds for removal, suspension or reprimand.

The council may remove, suspend or reprimand a member whenever, upon proper proceedings for that purpose, it appears to the council that:

A. The member has committed an act or carried on a course of conduct of such nature that, if the member were applying for the board or commission, the application should be denied;

B. The member has been convicted in any jurisdiction of an offense which is a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or a felony under the laws of this state, or is punishable by death or imprisonment under the laws of the United States, in any of which cases the record of the conviction shall be conclusive evidence;

C. The member is guilty of willful misconduct in the board or commission;

D. The member is guilty of violation of any of the provisions of Oregon Code of Ethics;

E. The member is guilty of gross or repeated neglect of duty on the board or commission, including having three or more unexcused absences within two years; or

F. The member has violated any of the provisions of the Silverton Municipal Code pertaining to the work of the commission or board. (Ord. 94-127 § 3, 1994)


2.28.040 Procedure for disciplinary action.

A. The council shall hear formal charges against members of the city’s boards and commissions.

B. A member, formally accused of misconduct, shall be given reasonable written notice of the charges against the member, a reasonable opportunity to defend against the charges, the right to be represented by counsel, and the right to present evidence and witnesses. The member shall also have the right to appear and testify.

C. Formal rules of evidence in disciplinary proceedings shall not apply, but the mayor shall only admit such evidence as may be material to the council’s determinations.

D. The council shall have the authority to take evidence, administer oaths or affirmations, and issue rulings pertaining to the disciplinary matter before the council.

E. A witness in a disciplinary proceeding who testifies falsely shall be subject to sanction by the state offenses of false swearing.

F. The mayor or any member of the council may administer oaths or affirmations and issue any subpoena provided for in subsection A of this section.

G. The hearing before the disciplinary council shall be held within 60 days of the written notice of charges.

H. A record of all hearings shall be made and preserved by the council.

Upon the conclusion of a hearing, the council shall approve a written decision in the matter. The decision shall be effective as specified in the decision. The member shall be mailed a copy of the decision within three days of its approval. If the decision of the council finds the accused member has committed the alleged wrongdoing and determines that the accused member should be disciplined by way of reprimand or removal from the board or commission, the accused may seek reconsideration by the council. Such review shall be a matter of right upon the written request of the accused. The request must be submitted to the city within 10 days of the disciplinary action. Otherwise, the decision of the council shall be final. (Ord. 94-127 § 4, 1994)


2.28.050 Code adopted.

Sturgis Standard Code of Parliamentary Procedure is hereby adopted to govern the disciplinary proceedings of the council, its committees, and advisory boards and commissions for all procedures not expressly addressed by City Charter, ordinance, or resolution. (Ord. 94-127 § 5, 1994)


2.28.060 Supplementary powers.

In addition to the powers and duties established by this chapter, the council shall have such additional powers as authorized by state law. (Ord. 94-127 § 6, 1994)


Chapter 2.32 CITY-OWNED FACILITY RENTAL

Sections:

2.32.010    Definitions.

2.32.020    Permit required.

2.32.030    False information.

2.32.040    Violations.

2.32.050    Revocation of permit.

2.32.060    Termination of facility use permit.

2.32.070    Penalties.


2.32.010 Definitions.

For the purpose of permitting rental of city-owned facilities, the following definitions apply:

A. “City-owned facility” means any building, structure or land owned by the city of Silverton and made available for public use by the granting of a permit for temporary rental of the building, structure or land.

B. “Facility use permit” means a document completed by an applicant requesting use of a city-owned facility, following the procedures established and corresponding fees and conditions. (Ord. 99-116, 1999)


2.32.020 Permit required.

It shall be unlawful for any person, group or organization to utilize any city-owned facility for any event without first obtaining a facility use permit from the city of Silverton for use of such facility. No facility use permit shall be issued until all associated fees have been paid and all requirements have been met. (Ord. 99-116, 1999)


2.32.030 False information.

It is unlawful for any person to supply false information in connection with any application required by this chapter with intent to obtain a permit or license required in this chapter. (Ord. 99-116, 1999)


2.32.040 Violations.

The conviction of a person for violation of any provision of this chapter may not serve to relieve the person from paying the fee or penalty for which the person is liable. The payment of any fee may not bar or prevent legal prosecution of a complaint for the violation of any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 99-116, 1999)


2.32.050 Revocation of permit.

Upon determination that a permitted use of any city-owned facility within the city violates city or county ordinances or state or federal laws, or that the application contains false or misleading information, the city manager may revoke the permit in advance of the scheduled use of the facility. In such cases, the fees paid for use of the facility are non-refundable. (Ord. 99-116, 1999)


2.32.060 Termination of facility use permit.

The Silverton police department may immediately terminate a facility use permit during the event for any violation of city, county, state or federal law, or for any violation of the permit requirements and restrictions. The police department may issue a citation to the permit applicant for any such violation. Such citation shall be in addition to any other charges that may be brought for separate violations of law or ordinance. The permit applicant shall be legally responsible for any violations occurring during the event at the facility for which the applicant has a permit for use. (Ord. 99-116, 1999)


2.32.070 Penalties.

Violation of, or failure to comply with, any provision of this chapter is punishable upon conviction by a fine not to exceed $2,500, as specified in SMC 1.08.010. Such fine shall be in addition to forfeiture of permit fees and cleaning or damage deposits made for the use of the facility. (Ord. 99-116, 1999)


Chapter 2.36 ADMINISTRATIVE SEARCH WARRANTS

Sections:

2.36.010    Authorizing municipal judge.

2.36.020    Grounds for issuance.

2.36.030    Procedure for issuing search warrant.

2.36.040    Execution of search warrant.


2.36.010 Authorizing municipal judge.

The municipal judge is hereby authorized to issue administrative search warrants upon application by the city attorney, building official, code enforcement officer, or fire chief, or their duly authorized representatives, acting in the course of their official duties, whenever an inspection or investigation of any place is required or authorized by any municipal ordinance or regulation. The warrant is an order authorizing the inspection or investigation at a designated location. (Ord. 00-110, 2000)


2.36.020 Grounds for issuance.

A. A search warrant shall be issued only upon cause, supported by affidavit, particularly describing the applicant’s status in applying for the warrant hereunder, the ordinance or regulation requiring or authorizing the inspection or investigation, the location to be inspected or investigated, and the purpose for which the inspection or investigation is to be made, including the basis upon which cause exists to inspect. In addition, the affidavit shall contain either a statement that entry has been sought and refused or facts or circumstances reasonably showing that the purposes of the inspection or investigation might be frustrated if entry were sought without a warrant.

B. Cause shall be deemed to exist if reasonable legislative or administrative standards for conducting a routine, periodic or area inspection are satisfied with respect to the location or there is probable cause to believe that a condition of nonconformity with a health, public protection or safety ordinance, regulation, rule, standard or order exists with respect to the particular location, or an investigation is reasonably believed to be necessary in order to determine or verify the condition of the location. (Ord. 00-110, 2000)


2.36.030 Procedure for issuing search warrant.

A. Before issuing any search warrant, the municipal judge shall examine under oath the applicant and any other witness and shall be satisfied of the existence of grounds for granting such application.

B. If the municipal judge is satisfied that cause for the inspection or investigation exists and that the other requirements for granting the warrant are satisfied, she or he may issue the warrant, particularly describing the name and title of the person or persons authorized to execute the warrant, the place to be entered and the purpose of the inspection or investigation. The warrant shall contain a direction that it be executed on any day of the week between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., or where the municipal judge has specially determined upon a showing that it cannot be effectively executed between those hours, that it be executed at any additional or other time of the day or night. (Ord. 00-110, 2000)


2.36.040 Execution of search warrant.

A. Except as provided in subsection B of this section, in executing a search warrant, the person authorized to execute the warrant shall, before entry, make a reasonable effort to present credentials, authority and purpose to an occupant or person in possession of the location designated in the warrant and show her or him the warrant or a copy thereof upon request.

B. In executing a search warrant, the person authorized to execute the warrant need not inform anyone of his or her authority and purpose, as prescribed in subsection A of this section, but may promptly enter the designated location if it is at the time unoccupied or not in the possession of any person or at the time reasonably believed to be in such condition, but shall orally announce their credentials and authority to execute the warrant prior to entry.

C. A peace officer may be requested to assist in the execution of the warrant.

D. A warrant must be executed and returned to the municipal judge by whom it was issued within 10 days from its date, unless such municipal judge before the expiration of such time, by endorsement thereon, extends the time for five days. After the expiration of the time prescribed by this subsection, the warrant unless executed is void. (Ord. 00-110, 2000)


Chapter 2.40 CRIMINAL BACKGROUND CHECKS

Sections:

2.40.010    Purpose.

2.40.020    Criminal record check required.

2.40.030    Procedure.

2.40.040    Retention of criminal record checks.

2.40.050    Use of criminal record checks.

2.40.060    SMC 2.40.050 provisions subject to labor contracts.


2.40.010 Purpose.

A. The council finds as follows: In order for the city of Silverton government to operate effectively, persons selected for employment or as a public service volunteer with the city of Silverton must have the highest degree of citizen and public trust and confidence.

B. All city of Silverton employees and public service volunteers represent the city to its citizens. Many city employees and volunteers have responsibilities to regulate and maintain public health and safety. Most city employees and volunteers have access to public funds and property, and possess access to privileged and proprietary information submitted to the city in confidence. Additionally, city employees and volunteers may be required to operate publicly owned vehicles. 

C. The council concludes that the aforementioned considerations justify the use of a criminal background check for all prospective city employees, and some volunteer positions where it is in the public interest to do so. Volunteer positions requiring criminal background checks will be determined by the city manager, based on the duties and responsibilities of the position or public safety. (Ord. 02-116, 2002)


2.40.020 Criminal record check required.

Prospective applicants and volunteers with the city of Silverton shall be required to authorize the city to conduct a criminal offender information check through the OSP LEDS system. Additionally, applicants shall authorize the city to conduct a check of their driving record and status. The criminal history and driving record/status authorization form shall be maintained by the city manager or his designee. (Ord. 02-116, 2002)


2.40.030 Procedure.

City manager shall forward the authorization form on prospective employees and volunteers with the request that a records check be conducted to the Silverton police department. Upon receipt of the authorization form a member of the Silverton police department trained and authorized to perform criminal history and driving record/status checks through the LEDS system shall conduct the check on the prospective employee or volunteer. The police department member conducting the records check shall orally report to the city that the applicant’s record indicates “no criminal record” or “criminal record.” The Police Department member shall also orally provide driving record and status information to the city. Any “hard copy” of the records check shall then be shredded. The police department will maintain the records check authorization form. If the applicant’s record is reported as “criminal record,” the city may, under OAR 257-010-0025(1)(c), request a written criminal history report from the OSP Identification Services Section and pay the applicable fee for this service. If a written criminal history record has been obtained the city of Silverton shall make it available to the official making the selection. (Ord. 02-116, 2002)


2.40.040 Retention of criminal record checks.

The written criminal history record on persons who are not hired as an employee or a volunteer shall be retained in accordance with the requirements of OAR 166-040-0080 for a period of three years and thereafter shall be destroyed by shredding. The criminal history record of applicants and volunteers with a criminal history that are hired or appointed shall become a part of the confidential personnel file of that employee or volunteer. Access to confidential personnel files is limited to only authorized persons who have an official need to access such files that is sanctioned by law or regulation. (Ord. 02-116, 2002)


2.40.050 Use of criminal record checks.

Applicants for employment or a volunteer position who have a felony criminal conviction, or a history of conviction of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, violence or theft, shall be closely examined by selecting officials to determine if the person possesses the required degree of citizen and public trust and confidence. Each employment or volunteer selection will, however, be made on an individual, case-by-case basis, taking into account the person’s qualifications, the requirements of the particular job or volunteer post applied for, and the results of the criminal history check. Factors such as the age of an offender at the time of the offense, the type of offense and subsequent rehabilitation, and the public sensitivity of the position under consideration must be taken into account in evaluating a criminal history report. (Ord. 02-116, 2002)


2.40.060 SMC 2.40.050 provisions subject to labor contracts.

The provisions of SMC 2.40.050 are subject to city contracts with recognized unions. (Ord. 02-116, 2002)


Chapter 2.44 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT*

Sections:

2.44.010    General provisions.

2.44.020    Compliance.

2.44.030    Emergency.

2.44.040    Executive responsibility.

2.44.050    Line of succession.

2.44.060    Declaration and ratification of emergency.

2.44.070    Emergency management organization.

2.44.080    Regulation of persons and property.

2.44.090    Penalties.

2.44.100    Effective date.

*    Code reviser’s note: Ordinance 98-123 adds the provisions of this chapter as Chapter 2.28. The chapter has been editorially renumbered to prevent duplication of numbering.


2.44.010 General provisions. 

This chapter may be cited as the emergency code. 

The city of Silverton (city) hereby adopts the “City of Silverton Emergency Plan” (plan) by reference. The purpose of the plan is to coordinate and direct the city’s response to any emergency or disaster situation. The plan develops a set of guidelines to supplement and enhance the emergency management resources of the city of Silverton. All changes to the plan shall be done by resolution of the council. (Ord. 98-123 § 1, 1999)


2.44.020 Compliance. 

The plan shall be considered a component of, and shall comply with, all existing federal, state, and county legislation. The emergency management organization (EMO) shall recognize, cooperate with, and abide by federal, state, and county emergency management authorities. Also, the EMO shall recognize and cooperate with special service districts, especially as pertains to any state statute mandated authorities of those special districts during an emergency. No section of the plan shall be adopted that conflicts with emergency management regulations, codes, plans, procedures or guidelines. (Ord. 98-123 § 1, 1999)


2.44.030 Emergency. 

A state of emergency exists whenever the city or any area within the city suffers from, or is in imminent danger of suffering from a tornado, storm, flood, high water, wind-driven water, earthquake, mudslide, snowstorm, drought, fire, explosion, toxic substance, civil disorder, or other catastrophe which requires emergency assistance to save lives and protect public health and safety, or to avert or lessen the threat of a major disaster. (Ord. 98-123 § 1, 1999)


2.44.040 Executive responsibility. 

The city manager (or the designee) is responsible for implementation of the EMO basic policy, subject to advice of, and concurrence by, the city council. When a state of emergency exists, the city manager becomes the emergency management organization director (EMO director). The mayor, or council president in the absence of the mayor, shall make a declaration of a state of emergency. In the absence of the mayor or council president to consider the declaration, a declaration may be signed by three city councilors. The city council shall consider the declaration of emergency at their next meeting as their first item of business, after roll call. The council shall ratify the declaration by resolution. (Ord. 98-123 § 1, 1999)


2.44.050 Line of succession. 

If, during the emergency period, the city manager is unavailable, is fatally injured, or is so seriously disabled as to be unable to perform the duties as EMO director, the chief of police and/or the public works director (or their designee) shall serve as the designated alternates, and shall assume the role of EMO director. (Ord. 98-123 § 1, 1999)


2.44.060 Declaration and ratification of emergency. 

A. The declaration prepared by the EMO director of a state of emergency shall:

1. State the nature of the emergency;

2. Designate the geographic location of the area which is subject to the emergency controls; and 

3. State any special regulations imposed as a result of the state of emergency. 

B. The mayor, or council president in the absence of the mayor, shall make a declaration of a state of emergency, as requested by the EMO director. In the absence of the mayor or council president to consider the declaration, a declaration may be signed by three city councilors. The city council shall consider the declaration of emergency at their next meeting as their first item of business, after roll call. The council shall ratify the declaration by resolution. The declaration shall: 

1. State the duration of time during which the area so designated shall remain an emergency area. 

2. Authorize specific emergency powers for the duration of the emergency period set forth in the declaration. 

C. During the emergency period, the city manager, as EMO director, will determine the severity of the emergency incident, will activate the EMO accordingly, and will direct the overall response phase. (Ord. 98-123 § 1, 1999)


2.44.070 Emergency management organization. 

When an emergency is declared, the city hereby establishes the emergency management organization (EMO). The EMO shall be responsible for the administration of the plan, including update, review, and testing activities as defined in the plan, during the pre-emergency period. The EMO will perform all necessary emergency management functions as directed by the EMO director during the emergency period. The EMO shall also facilitate post-emergency/recovery phase activities. (Ord. 98-123 § 1, 1999)


2.44.080 Regulation of persons and property.

Whenever a state of emergency is declared to exist within the city, the EMO is empowered to order the following measures in the interest of public health, safety or welfare, in the area designated as an emergency area: 

A. Redirect city funds for emergency use and suspend standard city procurement procedures; 

B. Establish a curfew which fixes the hours during which all persons other than officially authorized personnel may not be upon the public streets or other public places; 

C. Prohibit or limit the number of persons who may gather or congregate upon any public street, public place, or any outdoor place; 

D. Barricade streets and prohibit vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or regulate the same on any public street leading to the emergency area for such distance as may be deemed necessary under the circumstances; 

E. Evacuate persons; 

F. Prohibit the sale of alcoholic beverages; 

G. Prohibit or restrict the sale of gasoline or other flammable liquids;

H. Prohibit the sale, carrying, or possession of any weapons or explosives of any kind on public streets, public places, or any outdoor place; 

I. Curtail or suspend commercial activity; 

J. Turn off water, gas, or electricity; 

K. Order such other measures as are necessary for the protection of life or property, or for the recovery from the emergency. (Ord. 98-123 § 1, 1999)


2.44.090 Penalties.

A. A violation of SMC 2.44.080 is punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,500. 

B. A violation of any other provision of this chapter is punishable by a fine of not more than $2,500. Each day’s continuing violation shall constitute a separate offense. 

C. All violations shall comply with ORS Chapter 401. (Ord. 98-123 § 1, 1999)


2.44.100 Effective date. 

This chapter shall become effective May 5, 1999. (Ord. 98-123 § 1, 1999)


Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE 

Chapters:

3.04    City Contracts

3.08    Cash Deposits

3.10    Motor Vehicle Fuel Business License Tax 

3.12    Transient Occupancy Tax

3.15    Marijuana Tax

3.16    Repealed


Chapter 3.04 CITY CONTRACTS

Sections:

3.04.010    City contracting rules and surplus personal property procedures.

3.04.020    Surplus real property procedures.


3.04.010 City contracting rules and surplus personal property procedures.

The city’s contracting rules and surplus personal property procedures are adopted, and from time to time amended, by city council resolution. A copy of the city’s current contracting rules and surplus personal property procedures is on file with the city recorder. (Ord. 15-04 § 2, 2015)


3.04.020 Surplus real property procedures.

The following procedures govern how the city may sell, transfer or otherwise dispose of real property it owns:

A. In accordance with ORS 271.310(1), the city council will declare the real property to be surplus property and not needed for public use. The council may, but need not, hold a hearing to arrive at this determination. The council may, but need not, advertise its intent to declare certain real property as surplus.

1. In accordance with ORS 271.310(3), if the property is within 100 feet of railroad right-of-way, or within 500 feet of an at-grade crossing, the city will give notice to Oregon Department of Transportation’s (ODOT) railway division at least 30 days before listing or placing the property for sale. If the city is selling or otherwise granting an easement to another party, notice to ODOT is not required.

B. The city will order an appraisal and may market the property for sale or may negotiate a purchase and sale agreement with a buyer directly.

C. Pursuant to ORS 221.725, the council will hold at least one public hearing prior to the sale of real property, or any interest in real property.

1. At least five days before the hearing, the city must publish a notice of the proposed sale and the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation. The notice must state the time and place of the hearing, a general description of the property, the proposed uses for the property if those uses are identified, and the reasons why the city considers it necessary to sell it.

2. At the hearing, the council will disclose the nature of the proposed sale and its terms, including an appraisal or other evidence of value.

D. Once these steps have occurred, as necessary, the city may lawfully relinquish its interest in the real property at issue. (Ord. 15-04 § 2, 2015)


Chapter 3.08 CASH DEPOSITS

Sections:

3.08.010    Cash deposits required when – Amount.

3.08.020    Use of deposit – Refunds.


3.08.010 Cash deposits required when – Amount.

Before the city shall furnish any labor, materials or things of monetary value to any person, firm or corporation for private use, or which is chargeable to the recipient, a cash deposit shall be made with the city in such an amount as the city manager may deem sufficient to cover the cost thereof. (Ord. 410 § 1, 1952)


3.08.020 Use of deposit – Refunds.

After the charges of the city for such service, material or other thing of monetary value have been completely determined, then sufficient of the deposit shall be applied thereon to pay the charges, and the surplus remaining shall be refunded to the depositor. (Ord. 410 § 2, 1952)


Chapter 3.10 MOTOR VEHICLE FUEL BUSINESS LICENSE TAX

Sections:

3.10.010    Definitions.

3.10.020    Tax imposed.

3.10.030    Amount and payment.

3.10.040    License requirements.

3.10.050    License applications and issuance.

3.10.060    Failure to secure license.

3.10.070    Cancellation of license.

3.10.080    Payment of tax and delinquency penalties.

3.10.090    Failure to file monthly statement.

3.10.100    Exemption of export fuel.

3.10.110    Sales to armed forces exempted.

3.10.120    Fuel in vehicles coming into city not taxed.

3.10.130    Fuel sold or delivered to dealers.

3.10.140    Examinations and investigations.

3.10.150    Limitation on credit for or refund of overpayment and on assessment of additional tax.

3.10.160    Examining books and accounts of carrier of motor vehicle fuel.

3.10.170    Confidentiality.

3.10.180    Records to be kept by dealers.

3.10.190    Use of tax revenues.

3.10.200    Enforcement.

3.10.210    Violation – Penalty.

    Code reviser’s note: Section 2 of Ord. 17-09 provides, “The tax imposed by this chapter shall take effect on the date specified in a resolution of the City Council, but in no event earlier than January 1, 2018.”


3.10.010 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise:

A. “City” means the city of Silverton, Oregon.

B. “Dealer” means any person who:

Imports or causes to be imported motor vehicle fuel for sale, use, or distribution in the city, but “dealer” does not include a person importing motor vehicle fuel into the city in quantities of 500 gallons or less purchased from a dealer licensed under this chapter if said dealer assumes liability for payment of the license tax to the city. 

C. “Distribution” means, in addition to its ordinary meaning, the delivery of motor vehicle fuel by a dealer to any service station or into any tank, storage facility or series of tanks or storage facilities connected by pipelines, from which motor vehicle fuel is withdrawn directly for sale or delivery into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles whether or not the service station, tank or storage facility is owned, operated or controlled by the dealer.

D. “Motor vehicle” means all vehicles, engines or machines, movable or immovable, operated or propelled by the use of motor vehicle fuel.

E. “Motor vehicle fuel” means and includes gasoline, diesel, and any other flammable or combustible gas or liquid by whatever name such gas or liquid is known or sold, usable as fuel for the operation of motor vehicles, except gas or liquid for purposes other than the propulsion of motor vehicles.

F. “Person” includes every natural person, association, firm, partnership or corporation.

G. “Service station” means and includes any place operated for the purpose of retailing and delivering motor vehicle fuel into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles.

H. “Street” means every way, thoroughfare and place of whatever nature which is open for public use for vehicular travel under city jurisdiction and/or authority, including the motor vehicle traveling lanes of all rights-of-way in the city as well as curbs, sidewalks and planting strips adjacent thereto. (Ord. 17-09 § 1, 2017)


3.10.020 Tax imposed.

A business license tax is imposed on every dealer in the city, which business license tax is in addition to the general business license fee required under Chapter 5.12 SMC. The tax imposed shall be paid monthly to the city or its duly authorized agent. The city may delegate to any entity or department of the city enforcement of any portion or all of this chapter. (Ord. 17-09 § 1, 2017)


3.10.030 Amount and payment.

A. Every dealer in the city, whether in the dealer’s name, the name of another or the name of the dealer’s representative or agent, is required to do the following:

1. Provide a statement (not later than the twenty-fifth of each month) to the city of all motor vehicle fuel sold, used, or distributed by the dealer in the city as well as all such fuel sold, used, or distributed in the city by a purchaser for which sale, use, or distribution the dealer has assumed liability for the license tax during the preceding month.

2. Pay a license tax of $0.02 per gallon of such motor vehicle fuel so sold, used, or distributed as shown by such statement and do so in the manner and within the time provided by this chapter.

B. In lieu of claiming the refund of the tax provided in SMC 3.10.150 or for any prior erroneous payment to the city of said tax by the dealer, the dealer may use said payment as a credit on the monthly statement and payment of the license tax. (Ord. 17-09 § 1, 2017)


3.10.040 License requirements.

No dealer may sell, use or distribute any motor vehicle fuel until the dealer has secured a dealer’s license from the city and do so in the manner as required by this chapter. (Ord. 17-09 § 1, 2017)


3.10.050 License applications and issuance.

A. Every person becoming or remaining a dealer in the city must first obtain a license authorizing said person to engage in business as a dealer.

B. Applications for the license must be made on forms prescribed, prepared and furnished by the city, which forms shall include at a minimum the following:

1. The business name under which the applicant is to transact business;

2. The address of applicant’s principal place of business and location(s) of distributing stations in the city;

3. The name and address of the managing agent, the names and addresses of the persons constituting the firm or partnership or, if a corporation, the name under which the corporation is authorized to transact business and the names and addresses of its principal officers and registered agent.

C. Once the application is complete and accepted for filing, the city will issue the person a dealer’s license to transact business in the city, which license is not assignable and is valid only for the dealer in whose name it is issued.

D. The city will retain all completed applications together with a record of all licensed dealers for a minimum of five years. (Ord. 17-09 § 1, 2017)


3.10.060 Failure to secure license.

A. If a person fails to secure a license prior to becoming or remaining a dealer in the city, the tax imposed by the terms of SMC 3.10.020 on all motor vehicle fuel sold, distributed or used by that person is immediately due and payable to the city.

B. The city will determine (from as many reliable and available sources as it deems reasonable) the amount of any license tax due and assess the person for said amount together with a civil penalty of 25 percent of said tax amount. In the event of an action by the city to collect the tax or penalty or both, the assessment is prima facie evidence the person is indebted to the city in the amount of the tax and penalty stated. (Ord. 17-09 § 1, 2017)


3.10.070 Cancellation of license.

A. The city may, upon written request of a dealer, cancel a license issued that dealer. Upon approving the dealer’s request for cancellation, the city will set a date not later than 30 days after receipt of said request canceling the license.

B. The city may, after 30 days’ notice has been mailed to the last known address of the dealer, cancel the dealer’s license upon finding by the city manager that the dealer is no longer engaged in the business. (Ord. 17-09 § 1, 2017)


3.10.080 Payment of tax and delinquency penalties.

A. The license tax imposed by this chapter must be paid on or before the twenty-fifth day of each month.

B. Except as provided in subsections (C) and (D) of this section, if payment of the tax is not timely paid, a penalty of 10 percent of the license tax may be assessed by the city, which penalty and license tax shall then be immediately due and payable.

C. Except as provided in subsection (D) of this section, if payment of the tax and penalty (if any) is not made on or before the first day of the next month following that month in which payment was due, the city may impose a further penalty of 25 percent, which penalty will be in addition to the penalty provided for in subsection (B) of this section and immediately due and payable.

D. Penalties imposed by this section do not apply if a penalty is assessed under SMC 3.10.060.

E. The city manager may waive any penalties assessed under this section. (Ord. 17-09 § 1, 2017)


3.10.090 Failure to file monthly statement.

If a dealer fails to file the statement required by SMC 3.10.030, the city will determine (from as many available sources as the city determines reasonable) the amount of motor vehicle fuel sold, distributed, or used by that dealer for the unreported period and such determination shall be deemed presumptive prima facie evidence of the amount of fuel sold, distributed, or used. The city will immediately assess the dealer for the license tax upon the amount determined and a penalty of 10 percent thereof. (Ord. 17-09 § 1, 2017)


3.10.100 Exemption of export fuel.

A. The license tax imposed by SMC 3.10.020 will not be imposed on motor vehicle fuel:

1. Exported from the city by a dealer; or

2. Sold by a dealer in individual quantities of 500 gallons or more for export by the purchaser to an area or areas outside the city in containers other than the fuel tank of a motor vehicle, but every dealer is required to report such exports and sales to the city.

B. Any motor vehicle fuel carried from the city in the fuel tank of a motor vehicle will not be considered as exported from the city.

C. In support of any exemption from taxes on account of sales of motor vehicle fuel in individual quantities of 500 gallons or more for export by the purchaser, the dealer must retain in the dealer’s files for at least two years an export certificate executed by the purchaser in such form and containing such information as required by the city. This certificate is prima facie evidence of the exportation of the motor vehicle fuel to which it applies only if accepted by the dealer in good faith. (Ord. 17-09 § 1, 2017)


3.10.110 Sales to armed forces exempted.

The license tax imposed by SMC 3.10.020 and 3.10.030 is exempted on any motor vehicle fuel sold to the armed forces of the United States, but every dealer is required to report such sales to the city. A certificate by an authorized armed forces officer may be accepted by the dealer as proof that the sale is exempt from the license tax. (Ord. 17-09 § 1, 2017)


3.10.120 Fuel in vehicles coming into city not taxed.

Any person coming into the city in a motor vehicle may transport in the vehicle fuel tank or five-gallon or less container motor vehicle fuel for the person’s own use for operating that motor vehicle without securing a license or paying the tax imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 17-09 § 1, 2017)


3.10.130 Fuel sold or delivered to dealers.

A. A dealer selling or delivering motor vehicle fuel to dealers in the city is not required to pay a license tax unless the selling dealer has assumed liability for the payment of the license tax to the city.

B. The dealer in making monthly statements to the city as required by SMC 3.10.030 must show separately the number of gallons of motor vehicle fuel sold. (Ord. 17-09 § 1, 2017)


3.10.140 Examinations and investigations.

The city or its authorized agents may make an examination of accounts, records, stocks, facilities and equipment of dealers, service stations and other persons engaged in storing, selling or distributing motor vehicle fuel within the city. The city may make other investigations it considers necessary in carrying out the provisions of this chapter. If the examination discloses that reports of dealers or other persons have shown incorrectly the amount of motor vehicle fuel distributed or the tax accruing, the city may make changes in subsequent reports and payments of such dealers or others or may make adjustments as necessary to correct the errors disclosed subject to the limitations found in SMC 3.10.150. (Ord. 17-09 § 1, 2017)


3.10.150 Limitation on credit for or refund of overpayment and on assessment of additional tax.

A. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any credit for a dealer’s overpayment of the license tax taken on a subsequent return or any claim for refund of tax erroneously overpaid must be taken or filed by the dealer within three years of the date on which the overpayment was received by the city.

B. Except in the case of a fraudulent report or failure to make a report, every notice of additional tax proposed to be assessed under this chapter will be served on a dealer subject to this chapter within three years of the date such additional license taxes became due and include the penalty provided in SMC 3.10.080. (Ord. 17-09 § 1, 2017)


3.10.160 Examining books and accounts of carrier of motor vehicle fuel.

The city or its authorized agents may examine at any time during normal business hours the books and accounts of any carrier of motor vehicle fuel operating within the city for enforcing the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 17-09 § 1, 2017)


3.10.170 Confidentiality.

The city shall protect the confidential business operations or similar information obtained to implement this chapter; provided, that nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent:

A. The disclosure to, or the examination of records and equipment by, another city official, employee or agent for collection of license taxes for the sole purpose of administering or enforcing any provisions of this chapter, or collecting license tax imposed under this chapter.

B. The disclosure of information as to any paid license tax, any unpaid license tax or amount of license tax required to be collected, or interest, and penalties; provided, however, that the city approves each such disclosure and that the city may refuse to make any disclosure referred to in this subsection when the public interest would suffer thereby.

C. The disclosure of the names and addresses of any dealer.

D. The disclosure of general statistics regarding license taxes collected or business done in the city.

E. The disclosure of information in accordance with the public records law. (Ord. 17-09 § 1, 2017)


3.10.180 Records to be kept by dealers.

Every dealer must keep a record in such manner required by the city of all purchases, invoices, bills of lading, receipts, sales and distribution of motor vehicle fuel for not less than three years. The records must include copies of all invoices or bills of all such sales. All records described in this section are subject to inspection by the city or its authorized agents during the dealer’s normal business hours. (Ord. 17-09 § 1, 2017)


3.10.190 Use of tax revenues.

A. The city manager or their designee is responsible for the disposition of the revenue from the tax and penalties imposed by this chapter.

B. For the purpose of this section, “net revenue” is revenue remaining from the tax and penalties imposed by this chapter after providing for the cost of administration and such refunds and credits authorized by this chapter.

C. The net revenue must be used for the planning, financing, design, construction, maintenance, repair, operation and the use of city streets. (Ord. 17-09 § 1, 2017)


3.10.200 Enforcement.

In the event any person subject to the terms of this chapter fails, refuses or neglects to comply with the terms thereof, the city may, in addition to the imposition of the license tax, assessments, and penalties provided herein, seek such legal or equitable relief in a court of competent jurisdiction to effect compliance with the terms of this chapter and shall, in the event it is the prevailing party, be awarded its costs, disbursements, and attorneys’ and other expert fees. (Ord. 17-09 § 1, 2017)


3.10.210 Violation – Penalty.

Any dealer who fails or refuses to furnish any information required in this chapter or by the city, or, with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due under this chapter, shall make, render, sign or verify any false or fraudulent statement, commits an offense which constitutes a violation of this chapter punishable in accordance with the general penalty provisions of SMC 1.08.010. (Ord. 17-09 § 1, 2017)


Chapter 3.12 TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX

Sections:

3.12.010    Title.

3.12.020    Definitions.

3.12.030    Tax imposed.

3.12.040    Exemptions.

3.12.050    Tax collected by operator – Enforcement.

3.12.060    Operator – Duties and responsibilities.

3.12.070    Payment – Returns – Due date.

3.12.080    Delinquent returns – Penalties and interest.

3.12.090    Fraud.

3.12.100    Failure to report.

3.12.110    Penalties merged with tax.

3.12.120    Petition for waiver.

3.12.130    Deficiency determinations – Notification procedures.

3.12.140    Failure to collect tax.

3.12.150    Operator delay.

3.12.160    Petition for redetermination and refund.

3.12.170    Security for collection.

3.12.180    Refund procedures.

3.12.190    Recordkeeping.

3.12.200    Examination of records.

3.12.210    Confidentiality.

3.12.220    Appeals to council.

3.12.230    Violation – Penalty.


3.12.010 Title.

This chapter shall be known as the transient occupancy tax ordinance of the city of Silverton. (Ord. 18-06 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 08-05 § 1, 2008)


3.12.020 Definitions.

Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this chapter:

A. “Accrual accounting” means the operator enters the rent due from a transient on the records when the rent is earned, whether or not it is paid.

B. “Cash accounting” means the operator does not enter the rent due from a transient on the records until rent is paid.

C. “Council” means the city council.

D. “Executive apartment” means a dwelling unit in an apartment complex that is typically rented to corporate executives, company employees or guests for 30 days or less.

E. “Hotel” means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied, intended or designed for temporary use for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, regardless of whether it is used temporarily or permanently, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, lodginghouse, roominghouse, executive apartment, public or private dormitory, fraternity, sorority, public or private club, space in a recreational vehicle park, or similar structure or space or portions thereof so occupied.

F. “Occupancy” means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any hotel for lodging or sleeping purposes.

G. “Operator” means the person who is proprietor of the hotel in any capacity. Where the operator performs the functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as the principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall be considered to be compliance by both.

H. “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, fraternity, sorority, public or private dormitory, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

I. “Rent” means the consideration charged, whether or not received by the operator, for the occupancy of space in a hotel, valued in money, goods, labor, credits, property or other consideration valued in money, without any deduction.

J. “Rent package plan” means the consideration charged for both food and rent where a single rate is made for the total of both. The amount applicable to rent for determination of transient occupancy tax under this chapter shall be the same charge made for rent when not a part of a package plan.

K. “Tax” means either the tax payable by the transient or the aggregate amount of taxes due from an operator during the period for which the transient is required to report the collections.

L. “Tax administrator” means the finance director of the city.

M. “Transient” means any individual who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy in a hotel. (Ord. 18-06 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 08-05 § 2, 2008)


3.12.030 Tax imposed.

A. For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel in the city, each transient shall pay a tax in the amount of nine percent of the rent charged by the operator. The tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city, which is extinguished only by payment by the operator to the city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. The operator shall enter the tax on its records when rent is collected if the operator keeps its records on the cash accounting basis and when earned if the operator keeps its records on the accrual accounting basis. If rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid by the transient to the operator with each installment. In all cases, the rent paid or charged for occupancy shall exclude the sale of any goods, services and commodities.

B. The city shall dedicate net revenue from the transient occupancy tax per the provisions of ORS 320.350(6).

C. The council shall establish a process to award grants related to the promotion of tourism and to support tourism-related facilities in the city of Silverton. (Ord. 18-06 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 08-05 § 3, 2008)


3.12.040 Exemptions.

No tax imposed under this chapter shall be imposed upon:

A. Any occupant of a dwelling unit leased or otherwise occupied by the same person for more than 30 consecutive calendar days with respect to any rent imposed for the period commencing after the first 30 days of such consecutive occupancy;

B. Any occupant whose rent is of a value less than $2.00 per day;

C. Any occupant whose rent is paid for a hospital room or to a medical clinic, convalescent home or home for aged people, or to a public institution owned and operated by a unit of the government. (Ord. 18-06 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 08-05 § 4, 2008)


3.12.050 Tax collected by operator – Enforcement.

A. Every operator renting rooms or space for lodging or sleeping purposes in the city, the occupancy of which is not exempted under the terms of this chapter, shall collect a tax from the occupant. The tax collected or accrued by the operator constitutes a debt owing by the operator to the city.

B. In all cases of credit or deferred payment of rent, the payment of tax to the operator may be deferred until the rent is paid, and the operator shall not be liable for the tax until credits are paid or deferred payments are made. Adjustments may be made for uncollectibles.

C. The tax administrator shall enforce provisions of this chapter and shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter as may be necessary to aid in the enforcement.

D. For rent collected on portions of a dollar, fractions of a penny of tax shall not be remitted.

E. The operator shall be permitted to deduct as a personal collection expense five percent of the amount of taxes collected. (Ord. 18-06 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 08-05 § 5, 2008)


3.12.060 Operator – Duties and responsibilities.

Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated upon the operator’s records, and any receipt rendered by the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise that the tax or any part of the tax will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, when added, any part will be refunded, except in the manner provided by this chapter. (Ord. 18-06 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 08-05 § 6, 2008)


3.12.070 Payment – Returns – Due date.

A. The tax imposed by this chapter shall be paid by the transient to the operator at the time rent is paid. All amounts of such taxes collected by any operator are due and payable to the tax administrator on a no later than quarterly basis on the fifteenth day of the following month for the preceding month(s), and are delinquent on the last day of the month in which they are due. The tax administrator has authority to classify and/or district the operators for determination of applicable tax periods, and shall notify each operator of the due and delinquent dates for the operator’s returns. The initial return under this chapter may be for less than the three months preceding the due date; thereafter, returns shall be made for the applicable monthly or quarterly period.

B. On or before the fifteenth day of the month following each collection period, a return for the preceding month’s or quarter’s tax collections shall be filed with the tax administrator. The return shall be filed in such form as the tax administrator may prescribe by every operator liable for payment of tax.

C. Returns shall show the amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period. The tax administrator may require returns to show the total rentals upon which tax was collected or otherwise due, gross receipts of operator for such period and an explanation in detail of any discrepancy between such amounts, and the amount of rents exempt, if any.

D. The person required to file the return shall deliver the return, together with the remittance of the amount of the tax due, to the tax administrator, either by personal delivery or by mail. If the return is mailed, the postmark shall be considered the date of delivery for determining delinquencies.

E. For good cause, the tax administrator may extend for not to exceed one month the time for making any return or payment of tax. No further extension shall be granted, except by the council. Any operator to whom an extension is granted shall pay interest at the rate of one percent per month on the amount of tax due without proration for a fraction of a month. If a return is not filed, and the tax and interest due are not paid by the end of the extension granted, then the interest shall become a part of the tax for computation of penalties described elsewhere in this chapter.

F. The tax administrator, if deemed necessary in order to ensure payment or facilitate collection by the city of the amount of taxes in any individual case, may require returns and payment of the amount of taxes for other than quarterly periods. (Ord. 18-06 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 08-05 § 7, 2008)


3.12.080 Delinquent returns – Penalties and interest.

A. Original Delinquency. Any operator who has not been granted an extension of time for remittance of tax due and who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter prior to the delinquency shall pay a penalty of 10 percent of the amount of the tax due in addition to the amount of the tax.

B. Continued Delinquency. Any operator who has not been granted an extension of time for remittance of tax due and who failed to pay any delinquent remittance on or before a period of 30 days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of 15 percent of the amount of the tax due plus the amount of the tax and the 10 percent penalty first imposed. (Ord. 18-06 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 08-05 § 8, 2008)


3.12.090 Fraud.

If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud or intent to evade the provisions thereof, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in SMC 3.12.080. (Ord. 18-06 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 08-05 § 9, 2008)


3.12.100 Failure to report.

In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month or fraction thereof without proration for portions of a month, on the amount of the tax due, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid. (Ord. 18-06 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 08-05 § 10, 2008)


3.12.110 Penalties merged with tax.

Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section and SMC 3.12.080, 3.12.090, 3.12.100 and 3.12.120 shall be merged with and become a part of the tax required to be paid by this chapter. (Ord. 18-06 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 08-05 § 11, 2008)


3.12.120 Petition for waiver.

Any operator who fails to remit the tax levied in this chapter within the time stated in this chapter shall pay the penalties stated in this chapter; provided, however, the operator may petition the council for waiver and refund of the penalty or any portion thereof and the council may, if a good and sufficient reason is shown, waive and direct a refund of the penalty or any portion thereof. (Ord. 18-06 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 08-05 § 12, 2008)


3.12.130 Deficiency determinations – Notification procedures.

If the tax administrator determines that the returns are incorrect, the tax administrator may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of the facts contained in the return or returns, or upon the basis of any information within the tax administrator’s possession or that may come into the tax administrator’s possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one, or more than one, period, and the amount so determined shall be due and payable immediately upon service of notice as provided in this chapter after which the amount determined is delinquent. Penalties on deficiencies shall be applied as set forth in SMC 3.12.080 through 3.12.120.

A. In making a determination the tax administrator may offset overpayments, if any, which may have been previously made for a period or periods, against any underpayment for a subsequent period or periods, or against penalties and interest on the underpayments. The interest on underpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in SMC 3.12.080 through 3.12.120.

B. The tax administrator shall give to the operator or occupant a written notice of determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail. If by mail, the notice shall be addressed to the operator at the address as it appears on the records of the tax administrator. In case of service by mail or any notice required by this chapter, the service is complete at the time of deposit in the United States Post Office.

C. Except in the case of fraud or intent to evade this chapter or authorized rules and regulations, every deficiency determination shall be made and notice thereof mailed within three years after the last day of the month following the close of the quarterly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period expires later.

D. Any determination shall become due and payable immediately upon receipt of notice and shall become final within 10 days after the tax administrator has given notice thereof; provided, however, the operator may petition redemption and refund if the petition is filed before the determination becomes final as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 18-06 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 08-05 § 13, 2008)


3.12.140 Failure to collect tax.

If any operator fails or refuses to collect the tax or to make within the time provided in this chapter any report and remittance of the tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, or makes a fraudulent return or otherwise willfully attempts to evade this chapter, the tax administrator shall proceed in such manner as deemed best to obtain facts and information on which to base an estimate of the tax due. As soon as the tax administrator has determined the tax due that is imposed by this chapter from any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to report and remit the tax, the tax administrator shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the tax administrator shall give a notice in the manner aforesaid of the amount so assessed. Such determination and notice shall be made and mailed within three years after discovery by the tax administrator of any fraud, intent to evade or failure or refusal to collect the tax, or failure to file return. Any determination shall become due and payable immediately upon receipt of notice and shall become final within 10 days after the administrator has given notice thereof; provided, however, the operator may petition for redemption and refund if the petition is filed before the determination becomes final as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 18-06 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 08-05 § 14, 2008)


3.12.150 Operator delay.

If the tax administrator believes that the collection of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected and paid to the city will be jeopardized by delay, or if any determination will be jeopardized by delay, the tax administrator shall thereupon make a determination of the tax or amount of tax required to be collected, noting the fact upon the determination. The amount so determined as provided in this chapter shall be immediately due and payable, and the operator shall immediately pay such determination to the tax administrator after service of notice thereof; provided, however, the operator may petition, after payment has been made, for redemption and refund of such determination, if the petition is filed within 10 days from the date of service of notice by the tax administrator. (Ord. 18-06 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 08-05 § 14, 2008)


3.12.160 Petition for redetermination and refund.

A. Any person against whom a determination is made under SMC 3.12.130, 3.12.140 or 3.12.150, or any person directly interested, may petition for a redetermination of redemption and refund within the time required in SMC 3.12.130, 3.12.140 or 3.12.150. If a petition for redetermination and refund is not filed within the time required in SMC 3.12.130, 3.12.140 or 3.12.150, the determination becomes final at the expiration of the allowable time.

B. If a petition for redetermination and refund is filed within the allowable period, the tax administrator shall reconsider the determination, and, if the person has so requested in the petition, shall grant the person an oral hearing and shall give 10 days’ notice of the time and place of the hearing. The tax administrator may continue the hearing from time to time as may be necessary.

C. The tax administrator may decrease or increase the amount of the determination as a result of the hearing, and if an increase is determined such increase shall be payable immediately after the hearing.

D. The order or decision of the tax administrator upon a petition for redetermination of redemption and refund becomes final 10 days after service upon the petitioner of notice thereof, unless appeal of such order or decision is filed with the council within 10 days after service of such notice.

E. No petition for redetermination of redemption and refund or appeal therefrom shall be effective for any purpose unless the operator has first complied with the payment provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 18-06 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 08-05 § 15, 2008)


3.12.170 Security for collection.

A. The tax administrator, whenever deemed necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter, may require any operator subject thereto to deposit security in the form of cash, bond or other security as the tax administrator may determine. The amount of the security shall be fixed by the tax administrator but shall not be greater than twice the operator’s estimated average quarterly liability for the period for which a return is filed, determined in such manner as the tax administrator deems proper, or $5,000, whichever amount is the lesser. The amount of the security may be increased or decreased by the tax administrator subject to the limitations provided in this chapter.

B. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable or at any time within three years after any determination becomes final, the tax administrator may bring an action in the courts of the state, or any other state, or of the United States, in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalties and interest. (Ord. 18-06 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 08-05 § 16, 2008)


3.12.180 Refund procedures.

A. Refunds by City to Operator. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax administrator under this chapter, it may be refunded, provided a verified claim in writing thereof, stating the specific reason upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the tax administrator within three years from the date of payment. The claim shall be made on forms provided by the tax administrator. If the claim is approved by the tax administrator, the excess amount collected or paid may be refunded or may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the operator from whom it was collected or by whom paid, and the balance may be refunded to such operator or the operator’s administrators, executors or assignees.

B. Refunds by City to Transient. Whenever the tax required by this chapter has been collected by the operator, and deposited by the operator with the tax administrator, and it is later determined that the tax was erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax administrator, it may be refunded by the tax administrator to the transient, provided a verified claim in writing thereof, stating the specific reason on which the claim is founded, is filed with the tax administrator within three years from the date of payment. (Ord. 18-06 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 08-05 § 17, 2008)


3.12.190 Recordkeeping.

Every operator shall keep guest records of room sales and accounting books and records of the room sales at the location of the hotel in the city. All records shall be retained by the operator for a period of three years and six months after they come into being. (Ord. 18-06 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 08-05 § 18, 2008)


3.12.200 Examination of records.

The tax administrator, or any person authorized in writing by the tax administrator, may examine during normal business hours the books, papers and accounting records relating to room sales of any operator, after notification to the operator liable for the tax, and may investigate the business of the operator in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. Examination of the records shall take place at the hotel location. (Ord. 18-06 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 08-05 § 19, 2008)


3.12.210 Confidentiality.

The tax administrator or any person having an administrative or clerical duty under the provisions of this chapter shall protect the confidential business operations or similar information obtained to implement this chapter; provided, that nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent:

A. The disclosure to, or the examination of records and equipment by, another city official, employee or agent for collection of taxes for the sole purpose of administering or enforcing any provisions of this chapter, or collecting taxes imposed under this chapter.

B. The disclosure, after the filing of a written request to that effect, to the taxpayer, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees and guarantors, if directly interested, of information as to any paid tax, any unpaid tax or amount of tax required to be collected, or interest, and penalties; provided, however, that the tax administrator approves each such disclosure and that the tax administrator may refuse to make any disclosure referred to in this subsection when the public interest would suffer thereby.

C. The disclosure of the names and addresses of any person owning/operating a transient lodging facility.

D. The disclosure of general statistics regarding taxes collected or business done in the city.

E. The disclosure of information in accordance with the public records law. (Ord. 18-06 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 08-05 § 20, 2008)


3.12.220 Appeals to council.

Any person aggrieved by any decision of the tax administrator may appeal to the council, by filing a notice of appeal with the tax administrator within 10 days of the serving or the mailing of the notice of the decision given by the tax administrator. The tax administrator shall transmit the notice of appeal, together with the file of such appealed matter, to the city manager, who shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal from the decision of the tax administrator. The city manager shall give the appellant not less than 10 days’ written notice of the time and place of hearing of such appealed matter. Action by the council on appeals shall be decided by a majority of the members present at the meeting where such appeal is considered. (Ord. 18-06 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 08-05 § 21, 2008)


3.12.230 Violation – Penalty.

Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to furnish any return, supplemental return or other data required in this chapter or by the tax administrator, or, with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due under this chapter, shall make, render, sign or verify any false or fraudulent report, commits an offense which constitutes a violation of this chapter punishable in accordance with the general penalty provisions of SMC 1.08.010. (Ord. 18-06 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 08-05 § 22, 2008)


Chapter 3.15 MARIJUANA TAX

Sections:

3.15.010    Purpose.

3.15.020    Definitions.

3.15.030    Levy of tax.

3.15.040    Repealed.

3.15.050    Repealed.

3.15.060    Penalties and interest.

3.15.070    Repealed.

3.15.080    Repealed.

3.15.090    Repealed.

3.15.100    Repealed.

3.15.110    Repealed.

3.15.120    Repealed.

3.15.130    Repealed.

3.15.140    Repealed.


3.15.010 Purpose.

For the purposes of this chapter, every person who sells marijuana items in the city of Silverton is exercising a taxable privilege. The purpose of this chapter is to impose a tax upon the retail sale of marijuana items. (Ord. 17-06 § 1, 2017; Ord. 17-04 § 1, 2017; Ord. 16-06 § 1, 2016)


3.15.020 Definitions.

When not otherwise clearly indicated by the context, the following words and phrases as used in this chapter have the following meanings:

A. “Marijuana items” means cannabinoid concentrates, cannabinoid extracts, cannabinoid products and marijuana.

B. “Marijuana retailer” means a facility licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission to sell marijuana to a consumer.

C. “Person” means natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or any group or combination acting as a unit, including the United States of America, the state of Oregon and any political subdivision thereof, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them.

D. “Retail sale” means the transfer of goods or services in exchange for any valuable consideration and does not include the transfer or exchange of goods or services between a grower or processor and a marijuana retailer.

E. “Retail sale price” means the price paid for a marijuana item, excluding tax, to a marijuana retailer by or on behalf of a consumer of the marijuana item.

F. “Tax” means either the tax payable by the marijuana retailer or the aggregate amount of taxes due from a marijuana retailer during the period for which the marijuana retailer is required to report collections under this chapter.

G. “Tax administrator” means any person designated by the city council to collect the tax and enforce this chapter.

H. “Taxpayer” means any person obligated to account to the tax administrator for taxes collected or to be collected, or from whom a tax is due, under the terms of this chapter. (Ord. 17-06 § 1, 2017; Ord. 17-04 § 1, 2017; Ord. 16-06 § 1, 2016)


3.15.030 Levy of tax.

The city of Silverton hereby imposes a tax of three percent on the retail sale price of marijuana items by a marijuana retailer in the area subject to the jurisdiction of the city. (Ord. 17-06 § 1, 2017; Ord. 17-04 § 1, 2017; Ord. 16-06 § 1, 2016)


3.15.040 Deductions.

Repealed by Ord. 17-06. (Ord. 17-04 § 1, 2017; Ord. 16-06 § 1, 2016)


3.15.050 Marijuana retailer responsible for payment of tax.

Repealed by Ord. 17-06. (Ord. 17-04 § 1, 2017; Ord. 16-06 § 1, 2016)


3.15.060 Penalties and interest.

A. Interest shall be added to the overall tax amount due at the same rate established under ORS 305.220 for each month, or fraction of a month, from the time the return was originally required to be filed by the marijuana retailer to the time of payment.

B. If a marijuana retailer fails to file a return with the tax administrator or pay the tax as required, a penalty shall be imposed upon the marijuana retailer in the same manner and amount provided under ORS 314.400.

C. Every penalty imposed, and any interest that accrues, becomes a part of the financial obligation required to be paid by the marijuana retailer and remitted to the tax administrator.

D. If at any time a marijuana retailer fails to remit any amount owed in taxes, interest or penalties, the tax administrator is authorized to enforce collection on behalf of the city of the owed amount in accordance with ORS 475B.700 to 475B.755, any agreement between the Oregon Department of Revenue and city of Silverton under ORS 305.620 and any applicable administrative rules adopted by the Oregon Department of Revenue. (Ord. 17-06 § 1, 2017; Ord. 17-04 § 1, 2017; Ord. 16-06 § 1, 2016)


3.15.070 Failure to report and remit tax – Determination of tax by tax administrator.

Repealed by Ord. 17-06. (Ord. 17-04 § 1, 2017; Ord. 16-06 § 1, 2016)


3.15.080 Appeal.

Repealed by Ord. 17-06. (Ord. 17-04 § 1, 2017; Ord. 16-06 § 1, 2016)


3.15.090 Refunds.

Repealed by Ord. 17-06. (Ord. 17-04 § 1, 2017; Ord. 16-06 § 1, 2016)


3.15.100 Actions to collect.

Repealed by Ord. 17-06. (Ord. 17-04 § 1, 2017; Ord. 16-06 § 1, 2016)


3.15.110 Violation infractions.

Repealed by Ord. 17-06. (Ord. 17-04 § 1, 2017; Ord. 16-06 § 1, 2016)


3.15.120 Confidentiality.

Repealed by Ord. 17-06. (Ord. 17-04 § 1, 2017; Ord. 16-06 § 1, 2016)


3.15.130 Audit of books, records or persons.

Repealed by Ord. 17-06. (Ord. 17-04 § 1, 2017; Ord. 16-06 § 1, 2016)


3.15.140 Forms and regulations.

Repealed by Ord. 17-06. (Ord. 17-04 § 1, 2017; Ord. 16-06 § 1, 2016)


Chapter 3.16 AUTHORITY TO IMPOSE FEES

(Repealed by Ord. 14-06)


Title 4 (RESERVED)


Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS

Chapters:

5.04    Alcoholic Beverages

5.08    Franchises

5.12    Business Licenses

5.14    Repealed

5.16    Regulation of Tobacco and Electronic Smoking Device Products

5.20    Regulation of Tobacco and Electronic Smoking Device Stores

5.24    Repealed

5.28    Regulation of Payday Lending

5.30    Social Games

5.34    Marijuana Facilities

5.40    Regulation of Transient Business

5.45    Plastic Carryout Bags

5.50    Polystyrene Food Service Product Regulation


Chapter 5.04 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES

Sections:

5.04.005    Violation.

5.04.010    Consumption or sale – Permit requirements.


5.04.005 Violation.

It is unlawful to drink or consume any alcoholic liquor in or upon any public street, alley, park, school grounds or other public grounds in the city. The penalty for violating the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be under the general penalty provisions of Chapter 1.08 SMC. (Ord. 89-108 § 1, 1989)


5.04.010 Consumption or sale – Permit requirements.

The city manager, upon good reason being sworn, may grant a permit to consume and/or sell alcoholic beverages to a qualified applicant. An applicant must apply for such permit and state the reasons why such is needed, and agree to comply with all city and state laws pertaining to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages. (Ord. 853 § 1, 1987; Ord. 261 § 8A, 1934)


Chapter 5.08 FRANCHISES

Sections:

5.08.010    Chapter applicability.

5.08.020    Chapter as part of franchise agreement.

5.08.030    Written report required – Contents.

5.08.040    Amounts paid subject to audit.

5.08.050    Audit cost.


5.08.010 Chapter applicability.

All franchises hereinafter granted and entered into by the city shall be subject to this chapter. (Ord. 92-106, 1992)


5.08.020 Chapter as part of franchise agreement.

The requirements of this chapter shall be construed to be a part of any franchise agreement entered into hereinafter. (Ord. 92-106, 1992)


5.08.030 Written report required – Contents.

Not later than September 1st of each year during the term of any franchise, the franchisee shall submit a written report to the city which shall include the following:

Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. Financial statements shall be attested to by a responsible corporate officer of the franchisee verifying that the information provided is accurate. The statements shall include income statements, balance sheets and statements of changes in financial position, together with notes and disclosures describing allocation methodology and other information needed to allow proper interpretation of the statements by an independent auditor. (Ord. 92-106, 1992)


5.08.040 Amounts paid subject to audit.

All amounts paid by the franchisee to the city shall be subject to audit and recomputation by the city based upon the financial statements provided above or any additional information requested by the city. (Ord. 92-106, 1992)


5.08.050 Audit cost.

The cost of an independent audit shall be paid as follows:

A. In the event that the audit discloses that the payment made was 99 percent accurate, the city shall pay the cost of such audit.

B. If the audit discloses that the grantee has paid more than 95 percent but less than 99 percent of the franchise fee owing for the period at issue, the city and the franchisee shall share equally in the cost of such audit.

C. If the audit discloses that the grantee has paid 95 percent or less of the franchise fee owing, then the franchisee shall pay for the cost of the audit. (Ord. 92-106, 1992)


Chapter 5.12 BUSINESS LICENSES

Sections:

5.12.010    Purpose.

5.12.020    Definitions.

5.12.030    Business license required.

5.12.040    One act constitutes doing business.

5.12.050    Presumption of engaging in business.

5.12.060    Exemptions.

5.12.062    License applications.

5.12.065    Repealed.

5.12.068    License – Approval process.

5.12.070    License – Renewal.

5.12.080    License – Display.

5.12.090    License – Nontransferable.

5.12.100    Two or more businesses on the same premises.

5.12.110    Two or more business premises.

5.12.120    Violation does not exempt payment of fee – Penalty.


5.12.010 Purpose.

A. This chapter is designed to collect information about businesses operating in the city and provide revenue for municipal purposes. This chapter is not for any regulatory purpose whatsoever and the issuance of a license by the city pursuant to the terms hereof is not to be construed nor is it permission or license to engage in any business activity or occupation. The fees, penalties and other charges required or imposed by this chapter are in addition to any other regulatory or nonregulatory certificate, license or permit fees that may be required by any federal, state or local jurisdiction, including the city. 

B. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to apply to any person transacting and carrying on any business within the city which is exempt from taxation or regulation by the city by virtue of the Constitution of the United States or that of the state of Oregon or applicable federal or state law. (Ord. 15-08 § 1 (Exh. A), 2015; Ord. 09-10, 2009; Ord. 08-08 § 1, 2008)


5.12.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, except where the context otherwise indicates, the following definitions apply:

A. “Business” means any occupation, profession, or commercial activity engaged in for profit or livelihood in the city. This definition includes but is not limited to transient merchants and home occupations.

B. “City” means the city of Silverton.

C. “City manager” means the city manager of the city of Silverton or his/her designee.

D. “Council” means the city council of the city of Silverton.

E. “Garage sale” means a commercial activity open to the public, conducted at a private residence where personal property is sold to others; provided, that no more than three garage sales per residence per year shall occur and that no garage sale shall exceed three days in duration.

F. “Home occupation” means an occupation carried on within a dwelling, provided the residential character of the building is maintained and the occupation is conducted in such a manner as not to give an outward appearance nor manifest any characteristics of a business in the ordinary meaning of the term, nor infringe upon the right of neighboring residents to enjoy the peaceful occupancy of their homes.

G. “License” means the document issued upon full compliance with the business license law for the tax year in question. 

H. “Licensee” means a person who has a valid license issued pursuant to this chapter.

I. “Merchandise” means goods or commodities that may be bought or sold. Nothing in this chapter is intended to limit or restrict sales of books or newspapers based on the content of the material.

J. “Owner” means any person having proprietary interest in residential property, to include but not limited to a renter, tenant, or authorized agent of such person.

K. “Nonprofit” means any business or organization which holds a certificate of exemption from taxes from the Internal Revenue Service. In the instances where a nonprofit business or organization serves as sponsor of an event they may coordinate the licensing of individual permits under the sponsoring organization.

L. “Person” means every natural person, corporation, partnership, association or any other group acting as a unit.

M. “Posted” means the placing of a clearly readable sign or placard in English stating “No Solicitors” or “No Solicitation” readily visible to any person attempting to enter the property from the nearest street or public sidewalk.

N. “Principal” means a person who would be directly involved in the management or operation of the business.

O. “Sales” means the act of selling involving the transfer of money.

P. “Solicitation” means any oral or written request to purchase or trade any product or thing; to contribute or donate money or property for any purpose or cause; to render opinions or answer surveys on any subject or to endorse or support by petition any product, candidate, or cause.

Q. “Valid license” means a license issued pursuant to this chapter, and which license’s effective period has not expired. (Ord. 15-08 § 1 (Exh. A), 2015; Ord. 09-10, 2009; Ord. 08-08 § 1, 2008)


5.12.030 Business license required.

It shall be unlawful for any persons, for themselves or as agent or employee of another, to transact and carry on any business, trade, profession, calling, or occupation within the city of Silverton, Oregon, unless:

A. Such business activity has been duly licensed as herein provided; and

B. The license is valid at the time of the transaction. (Ord. 15-08 § 1 (Exh. A), 2015; Ord. 09-10, 2009; Ord. 08-08 § 1, 2008)


5.12.040 One act constitutes doing business.

For the purpose of this chapter, any persons shall be deemed to be engaging in business or engaging in nonprofit enterprise, and thus subject to the requirement of SMC 5.12.030, when undertaking one of the following acts:

A. Selling any goods or service;

B. Soliciting business or offering goods or services for sale or hire; and/or

C. Acquiring or using any vehicle or any premises in the city for business purposes. (Ord. 15-08 § 1 (Exh. A), 2015; Ord. 09-10, 2009; Ord. 08-08 § 1, 2008)


5.12.050 Presumption of engaging in business.

Any person that advertises or otherwise holds himself out to the public as engaged in any business, profession, trade or calling for which a license is required shall be presumed to be so engaged and shall pay such license fee as is required by this chapter. (Ord. 15-08 § 1 (Exh. A), 2015; Ord. 09-10, 2009; Ord. 08-08 § 1, 2008)


5.12.060 Exemptions.

The requirements contained in this chapter shall not apply to:

A. Garage sales;

B. An individual performing babysitting, nursery or child-care activities on a part-time basis;

C. An individual employed by a business which has obtained a license;

D. An individual hired or employed on an intermittent or casual basis by a household, business or other employer to supply only services;

E. A person whose primary activity consists of delivering goods inside the city for a business located outside the city;

F. A person who leases two or fewer units of residential real estate within the city;

G. Self-employed minors engaged in intermittent or casual economic activity;

H. Federally tax-exempt organizations and nonprofit religious organizations;

I. City-sponsored activities and businesses operating under a city franchise. (Ord. 15-08 § 1 (Exh. A), 2015; Ord. 09-10, 2009; Ord. 08-08 § 1, 2008)


5.12.062 License applications.

A. Applications for business licenses shall be submitted on forms to be provided by the city of Silverton. Every such application shall be signed by the owner or a duly authorized agent and shall contain the following information, as applicable:

1. Name of person or persons owning the business; if a corporation, the name of an authorized officer.

2. Assumed business name, business phone number, and alternative phone number.

3. Address of business premises, business mailing address, and owner mailing address.

4. Nature of the business.

5. Number of employees.

6. Emergency contact name and phone number.

B. A person shall apply for a license in the following manner:

1. Application for a license shall be made to the city of Silverton on or before January 1st of each year for which a license is required; or

2. If the business goes into operation after January 1st, application shall be made at least 10 days before conducting business in the city.

C. A license shall expire on the last day of the calendar year for which the license was issued, or in the case of a transient merchant, within 90 days of the date the license was issued.

D. Where the business includes activities classifiable in two or more categories, the primary or predominant activity should be designated.

E. Payment of the appropriate fee as established by resolution of the council.

F. License fees shall be computed on the basis of information contained in the application. No license shall be issued unless the applicant pays a license fee to the city in the amount set by resolution of the council.

G. Any other information determined appropriate by the city manager as necessary to review the application and establish that person(s) is authorized to be engaged in the transaction of the business within the city.

H. It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to sign or submit a business license application containing false information. (Ord. 15-08 § 1 (Exh. A), 2015; Ord. 09-10, 2009; Ord. 08-08 § 1, 2008)


5.12.065 Transient business regulations.

Repealed by Ord. 15-08. (Ord. 09-10, 2009; Ord. 08-08 § 1, 2008)


5.12.068 License – Approval process.

A. The city manager shall refer each application to the appropriate departments for review.

B. If the license is approved the city manager shall issue a license to the applicant. (Ord. 15-08 § 1 (Exh. A), 2015; Ord. 09-10, 2009; Ord. 08-08 § 1, 2008)


5.12.070 License – Renewal.

A. An application for renewal of a license shall be made and processed in the same manner as an initial application, pursuant to SMC 5.12.062 through 5.12.068.

B. All license renewal fees shall be deemed delinquent if not paid on or before 30 days after the due date. Whenever any license renewal fee is not paid within 30 days of the due date, a late fee shall be imposed and the license will be invalid until payment is made. (Ord. 15-08 § 1 (Exh. A), 2015; Ord. 09-10, 2009; Ord. 08-08 § 1, 2008)


5.12.080 License – Display.

At all times after the issuance of the business license, the licensee shall cause it to be posted in a conspicuous place upon the business premises, available for inspection by the public and by employees and prospective employees of the business. In the case of the transient business or if the licensee has no office, business premises or other established place of business within the city, copies of licenses and state or federal issued photo identification shall be clearly displayed on all representatives of the business present within the city at all times during which business is being conducted by an employee or representative within the city. (Ord. 15-08 § 1 (Exh. A), 2015; Ord. 09-10, 2009; Ord. 08-08 § 1, 2008)


5.12.090 License – Nontransferable.

A license issued pursuant to this chapter is a personal privilege and is not transferable. (Ord. 15-08 § 1 (Exh. A), 2015; Ord. 09-10, 2009; Ord. 08-08 § 1, 2008)


5.12.100 Two or more businesses on the same premises.

If two or more differently classified but related businesses are carried on in the same premises by the same owners, one license issued in the name of the business to which the premises are primarily appropriated, and based upon the total number of employees or other units on the whole premises, shall be sufficient for all such activities. Any business activity leased, under concession to, or owned wholly or in part by a different person or persons on the same premises must be separately licensed. (Ord. 15-08 § 1 (Exh. A), 2015; Ord. 09-10, 2009; Ord. 08-08 § 1, 2008)


5.12.110 Two or more business premises.

The conducting of a business or businesses at two or more separate locations shall, for the purposes hereof, be deemed to be separate businesses, and each shall be subject to the license tax herein provided for, except that rental properties, warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a business licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to be separate places of business, or branch establishments, or separate types of businesses. (Ord. 15-08 § 1 (Exh. A), 2015; Ord. 09-10, 2009; Ord. 08-08 § 1, 2008)


5.12.120 Violation does not exempt payment of fee – Penalty.

Violation of any provision of this chapter does not operate to relieve a business of liability for paying any fee or penalty for which such person be liable nor shall payment of any such fee or penalty be a bar to or prevent any judicial proceedings being brought by the city for violations of this chapter. 

Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is subject to the general penalties provision of SMC 1.08.010. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day a violation occurs. (Ord. 15-08 § 1 (Exh. A), 2015; Ord. 09-10, 2009; Ord. 08-08 § 1, 2008. Formerly 5.12.160)


Chapter 5.14 TRANSIENT MERCHANTS

(Repealed by Ord. 08-08)


Chapter 5.16 REGULATION OF TOBACCO AND ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE PRODUCTS

Sections:

5.16.010    Definitions.

5.16.020    Tobacco and electronic smoking devices self service prohibited.

5.16.030    Unlawful display.

5.16.040    Sale to minors prohibited – Identification required.

5.16.045    Retailing requirements and prohibitions.

5.16.050    Use and possession of electronic smoking devices by minors.

5.16.060    Penalty.


5.16.010 Definitions.

“Electronic smoking device” means an electronic and/or battery-operated device that delivers nicotine or other substances, which may simulate smoking. “Electronic smoking device” includes any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an electronic cigarette, an electronic cigar or cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic hookah or any other product name or descriptor. “Electronic smoking device” does not include any product specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for the purpose of tobacco cessation.

“Electronic smoking device paraphernalia” means cartridges, cartomizers, e-liquid, smoke juice, tips, atomizers, electronic smoking device batteries, electronic smoking device chargers, and any other item specifically designed for the preparation, charging, or use of electronic smoking devices.

“Minor” means any person under the age of 18 years old.

“Nonsale distribution” means to give, furnish, or cause, or allow to be given or furnished, wholly or for sampling, within the city of Silverton, an electronic smoking device to a person who is not a retailer. This would not apply to city of Silverton licensed tobacco stores, or electronic smoking device stores, if such licensed premises are posted to prevent any minors from accessing or entering the premises.

“Persons” means any natural person, business, employer, nonprofit entity, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, partnerships of every kind, joint ventures, societies, individuals or any other legal entity including a government agency transacting and carrying on tobacco stores or electronic smoking device stores within the city limits.

“Retailer” means any person who sells, offers for sale, or does or offers to exchange, for any form of consideration, tobacco, electronic smoking devices or electronic smoking device paraphernalia. “Retailing” means the doing of any of these things. This definition is without regard to the quantity of the tobacco, electronic smoking devices or electronic smoking device paraphernalia sold, offered for sale, exchanged, or offered for exchange.

“Self-service display” means the open display or storage of electronic smoking devices or electronic smoking device paraphernalia in a manner that is physically accessible in any way to the general public without the assistance of the retailer or employee of the retailer and a direct person-to-person transfer between the purchaser and the retailer or employee of the retailer. A vending machine is a form of self-service display.

“Smoking” means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted, heated, or ignited cigar, cigarette, cigarillo, pipe, hookah, electronic smoking device, or any plant product intended for human inhalation to include but not limited to tobacco or marijuana.

“Use of electronic smoking device” means to inhale, exhale, consume or ingest any product, including the use of any electronic smoking device that is on or producing vapor or other substances.

“Vendor-assisted sales” means the sale of tobacco product(s) or electronic smoking devices dispensed from locked storage or display areas, or sales of tobacco product(s) or electronic smoking devices from unlocked areas which are not accessible to customers by virtue of fixed counters or permanent barriers that render the tobacco products accessible solely to store sales clerks. As used herein “permanent barriers” do not include movable barriers. (Ord. 15-02, 2015; Ord. 00-114 § 1, 2000)


5.16.020 Tobacco and electronic smoking devices self service prohibited.

A. It is unlawful for any person, business, tobacco retailer, vape shop or other establishment subject to this chapter to sell, permit to be sold, or offer for sale any tobacco products, electronic smoking devices or electronic smoking device paraphernalia by means of self-service displays or by means other than vendor-assisted sales.

B. This chapter does not apply to any business, retailer or other establishment who is presently licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission for a dispensing license, and city of Silverton licensed tobacco stores, or electronic smoking device stores, if such licensed premises are posted to prevent any minors from accessing or entering the premises. (Ord. 15-02, 2015; Ord. 00-126 § 1, 2000)


5.16.030 Unlawful display.

A. It is unlawful for any person, business, tobacco retailer, electronic smoking device retailer or other establishment subject to this chapter to display for sale any tobacco product(s) or electronic smoking device(s) or electronic smoking device paraphernalia that may be accessed by customers without the direct assistance of the store sales clerks.

B. Tobacco products or electronic smoking devices may not be displayed for sale in areas through which customers would reasonably walk to access any emergency exit, unless such products are displayed under lock and key. (Ord. 15-02, 2015; Ord. 00-114 § 2, 2000)


5.16.040 Sale to minors prohibited – Identification required.

A. It is a violation of this chapter to sell, give or furnish, or cause to be sold, given or furnished, any tobacco or tobacco product, an electronic smoking device or electronic smoking device paraphernalia to a minor in any place within the city of Silverton, Oregon.

B. Positive Identification Required. No retailer may sell, give or furnish an electronic smoking device or electronic smoking device paraphernalia to a person who appears to be under the age of 27 years without first examining government-issued identification that contains a photo of the person to confirm that the recipient is at least 18 years of age. (Ord. 15-02, 2015)


5.16.045 Retailing requirements and prohibitions.

A. Self-service displays of tobacco or electronic smoking devices are prohibited.

B. Nonsale Distribution Prohibited. A person is prohibited from the nonsale distribution of any tobacco, electronic smoking device or electronic smoking device paraphernalia to a person who is not a retailer unless the business is posted “no one under 18 allowed.” (Ord. 15-02, 2015)


5.16.050 Use and possession of electronic smoking devices by minors.

A. No minor may purchase, possess, consume or use any electronic smoking device or electronic smoking device paraphernalia, unless the minor is in a private residence accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian and with the consent of the minor’s parent or guardian.

B. A minor may not purchase or attempt to purchase or acquire any electronic smoking device or electronic smoking device paraphernalia unless acting under the supervision of an adult for the purpose of testing compliance with federal, state or local law. (Ord. 15-02, 2015)


5.16.060 Penalty.

In addition to any other remedy available to the city, any person that violates any provision of this chapter is subject to a civil penalty. The general penalty provision of SMC 1.08.010 applies. Each day that a violation occurs is deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 15-02, 2015; Ord. 97-116, 1997; Ord. 97-113, 1997. Formerly 5.16.040)


Chapter 5.20 REGULATION OF TOBACCO AND ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE STORES

Sections:

5.20.010    Definitions.

5.20.020    Purpose.

5.20.030    Permit required.

5.20.040    Duration of permit.

5.20.050    Permit application.

5.20.060    Fee amounts.

5.20.070    False information.

5.20.080    Violations.

5.20.090    Revocation of permit.

5.20.100    Suspension of permit.

5.20.110    Appeal.


5.20.010 Definitions.

For the purpose of permitting businesses in the city of Silverton, Oregon, the following definitions apply:

A. “Persons” means any natural person, business, employer, nonprofit entity, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, partnerships of every kind, joint ventures, societies, individuals or any other legal entity including a government agency transacting and carrying on tobacco stores or electronic smoking device stores within the city limits.

B. “Tobacco store” means any establishment whose sales of tobacco products or electronic smoking devices, electronic smoking device paraphernalia or products meet or exceed 90 percent of the gross receipts of the establishment, and whose premises are not open to persons under 18 years of age. (Ord. 15-03 § 1, 2015; Ord. 00-127 § 1, 2000)


5.20.020 Purpose.

This chapter is enacted to require all tobacco stores to obtain a permit from the city prior to commencing business within the city limits. (Ord. 15-03 § 1, 2015; Ord. 00-127 § 1, 2000)


5.20.030 Permit required.

It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any tobacco store without having first obtained a permit from the city and the fee to be paid as established by resolution of the council.

Any tobacco store existing within the corporate boundaries of the city shall have 30 days in which to obtain a license. (Ord. 15-03 § 1, 2015; Ord. 00-127 § 1, 2000)


5.20.040 Duration of permit.

All tobacco store permits under this chapter are annual and shall expire on June 30th. The required application and permit fee are due on July 1st of each year for the fiscal year commencing with that date and are delinquent on August 1st. (Ord. 15-03 § 1, 2015; Ord. 00-127 § 1, 2000)


5.20.050 Permit application.

A. All tobacco store permits required under this chapter or any other chapter shall be issued by the city manager. The application for any permit shall contain the following information:

1. The description of the tobacco store activities carried on within the city.

2. The name of the applicant, with a statement of all persons having an interest in the business, either as proprietors or owners of the business.

3. The location in which the business is conducted.

4. The date of application.

5. The amount of money tendered with the application.

6. A statement whether the tobacco store premises will be open to minors.

B. The city manager shall refer each application to the appropriate departments for review. Review of the application shall be based on consideration of all available evidence as to whether the proposed tobacco store will meet the requirements of the City Charter and ordinances. The permit may not be granted if:

1. The activity to be permitted would not comply with city ordinances or state or federal laws.

2. The applicant fails to supply the information required, or submits misleading or false information, or submitted misleading or false information on a previous application.

C. Upon a favorable recommendation from each department, the city manager shall issue the permit. If it is determined that the application is denied, the city manager shall notify the applicant of the denial and the reason for denial. (Ord. 15-03 § 1, 2015; Ord. 00-127 § 1, 2000)


5.20.060 Fee amounts.

The initial license fee shall be $50.00. Nothing contained in this chapter may be construed as vesting any right in a permit or a contract obligation on the part of the city as to the amount of the fee. Other taxes or fees and the fees provided by council resolution may be increased, decreased, or created by the city. Any tobacco store may be reclassified at any time and other fees or taxes may be levied. No person who has received a permit and has paid the fee required under this chapter shall be entitled to any refund. (Ord. 15-03 § 1, 2015; Ord. 00-127 § 1, 2000)


5.20.070 False information.

It is unlawful for any person to supply false information in connection with any application required by this chapter with intent to obtain a permit or license required in this chapter. (Ord. 15-03 § 1, 2015; Ord. 00-127 § 1, 2000)


5.20.080 Violations.

The conviction of a person for violation of any provision of this chapter may not serve to relieve the person from paying the fee or penalty for which the person is liable. The payment of any fee may not bar or prevent legal prosecution of a complaint for the violation of any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 15-03 § 1, 2015; Ord. 00-127 § 1, 2000)


5.20.090 Revocation of permit.

Upon determination that a permitted tobacco store within the city violates city or county ordinances or state or federal laws, or that the application contains false or misleading information, the city manager may revoke the permit upon 10 days’ notice in writing to the permittee. The notice shall state the reasons for the revocation. (Ord. 15-03 § 1, 2015; Ord. 00-127 § 1, 2000)


5.20.100 Suspension of permit.

Upon determining that a permitted tobacco store presents an immediate danger to persons or property, the city manager may suspend the permit. The suspension takes effect upon the permittee’s receipt of the suspension notice, or upon delivery of the notice to the establishment of the permittee’s business address. The notice shall state the reason for the suspension. The city manager may continue a suspension as long as the reason for the suspension exists, or until a determination to an appeal regarding the suspension is made. (Ord. 15-03 § 1, 2015; Ord. 00-127 § 1, 2000)


5.20.110 Appeal.

A. Any person whose application for a permit has been denied, or whose permit has been denied renewal, has been suspended or has been revoked, may, within 30 days after the notice of denial, suspension, or revocation is mailed, appeal in writing to the city council. The appeal shall state:

1. The name and address of the appellant.

2. The nature of the determination being appealed.

3. The reason the determination is incorrect.

4. What the correct determination of the appeal should be.

B. An appellant who fails to file a statement within the time permitted waives all objections, and relinquishes all rights to appeal. If a notice of revocation is appealed, the revocation does not take effect until final determination of the appeal. At the hearing, the appellant may present testimony and oral argument. The decision of the council is final. (Ord. 15-03 § 1, 2015; Ord. 00-127 § 1, 2000)


Chapter 5.24 BUSINESS LICENSES1

(Repealed by Ord. 08-08)1

Editor’s note: For provisions on business licenses, please see Chapter 5.12 SMC. 


Chapter 5.28 REGULATION OF PAYDAY LENDING

Sections:

5.28.010    Purpose.

5.28.020    Definitions.

5.28.030    Permits.

5.28.040    Administrative authority.

5.28.050    Payment of principal prior to payday loan renewal.

5.28.060    Cancellation of payday loan.

5.28.070    Payment plan for a payday loan.

5.28.080    Remedies.

5.28.090    Appeals.

5.28.100    Complaints.

5.28.110    Severability.


5.28.010 Purpose.

The city finds that, in order to minimize the detrimental effects that certain payday lending practices have on individuals and families, payday lenders should require payment of a portion of the original loan amount prior to the renewal of a payday loan, borrowers should be able to cancel a payday loan, and borrowers should be able to convert a payday loan into a payment plan. This chapter shall be construed in conformity with the laws and regulations of the state of Oregon. (Ord. 06-10 § 1, 2006)


5.28.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter unless the context requires otherwise:

“Borrower” means a natural person who receives a payday loan.

“Cancel” means to annul the payday loan agreement and, with respect to the payday loan agreement, return the borrower and the payday lender to their financial condition prior to the origination date of the payday loan.

“Manager” means the city manager or designee.

“Payday lender” means a lender in the business of making payday loans as defined by ORS 725.600.

“Payday loan” means a payday loan as defined by state law.

“Principal” means the original loan proceeds advanced for the benefit of the borrower in a payday loan excluding any fee or interest charge. (Ord. 06-10 § 1, 2006)


5.28.030 Permits.

Within 60 days of the effective date of the ordinance enacting this chapter, any payday lender operating in the city of Silverton shall apply for and obtain a permit to operate as a payday lender. Permits shall be required for each location a lender operates in the city of Silverton and shall be renewed annually. The application shall be in a form to be determined by the manager. The manager shall require the payday lender to report its fee schedule in the payday lender’s permit application. No person shall operate a payday lending business or loan any funds as a payday loan without a current permit to do business issued by the city of Silverton. The annual cost for the permit shall be set by council resolution; this permit is in addition to the city of Silverton’s business license required by Chapter 5.24 SMC. (Ord. 06-10 § 1, 2006)


5.28.040 Administrative authority.

A. The manager is authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of this chapter. The manager shall have the power to investigate any and all complaints regarding alleged violations of this chapter. The manager may delegate any or all authority granted under this section to a designee.

B. The manager is authorized to adopt and enforce administrative rules interpreting and applying this chapter. The manager or designee shall make written findings of fact and conclusions of law to support all decisions.

C. Prior to adoption of a new administrative rule, the manager shall give notice to all interested parties of the terms of the proposed rule, and shall conduct a public hearing to consider public comment. Public notice shall be given when administrative rules have been adopted.

1. At the public hearing, the manager or designee shall hear oral and written testimony concerning the proposed rule. The manager shall have the power to establish and limit the matters to be considered at the hearing, to prescribe procedures for the conduct of the hearings, to hear evidence, and to preserve order.

2. The manager shall adopt, modify or reject the proposed rule after considering testimony received during the public hearing.

3. Unless otherwise stated, all rules shall be effective upon adoption by the manager. All rules adopted by the manager shall be filed in the office of city manager of the city of Silverton. Copies of all current rules shall be available to the public upon request.

4. Notwithstanding subsections (A) and (B) of this section, the manager may adopt an interim rule without prior public notice upon a finding that failure to act promptly may result in serious prejudice to the public interest or the interest of the affected parties. Such interim rules shall detail the specific reasons for such prejudice. Any interim rule adopted pursuant to this subsection shall be effective for a period not to exceed 180 days.

D. Inspection of Records. The city of Silverton reserves the right to review and/or copy the records of any payday lender for purposes of auditing or complaint resolution. Such records shall be made available for inspection during normal business hours within 24 hours of written notice by the manager or his/her designee. (Ord. 06-10 § 1, 2006)


5.28.050 Payment of principal prior to payday loan renewal.

A payday lender may not renew a payday loan unless the borrower has paid an amount equal to at least 25 percent of the principal of the original payday loan, plus interest on the remaining balance of the payday loan. The payday lender shall disclose this requirement to the borrower in a minimum of bold 12-point type. (Ord. 06-10 § 1, 2006)


5.28.060 Cancellation of payday loan.

A. A payday lender shall cancel a payday loan without any charge to the borrower, if prior to the close of the business day following the day on which the payday loan originated, the borrower:

1. Informs the payday lender in writing that the borrower wishes to cancel the payday loan and any future payment obligations; and

2. Returns to the payday lender the uncashed check or proceeds given to the borrower by the payday lender or cash in an amount equal to the principal amount of the payday loan.

B. A payday lender shall conspicuously disclose to each borrower that the right to cancel a payday loan as described in this section is available to the borrower. The payday lender shall disclose this requirement to the borrower in a minimum of bold 12-point type. (Ord. 06-10 § 1, 2006)


5.28.070 Payment plan for a payday loan.

A. A payday lender and a borrower may agree to a payment plan for a payday loan at any time.

B. A payday lender shall disclose to each borrower that a payment plan described in this section is available to the borrower after the maximum amount of renewals allowed by state law. The payday lender shall disclose this requirement to the borrower in a minimum of bold 12-point type.

C. After a payday loan has been renewed to the maximum amount allowed by state law, and prior to default on the payday loan, a payday lender shall allow a borrower to convert the borrower’s payday loan into a payment plan. Each payment plan shall be in writing and acknowledged by both the payday lender and the borrower.

D. The payday lender shall not assess any fee, interest charge or other charge to the borrower as a result of converting the payday loan into a payment plan.

E. The payment plan shall provide for the payment of the total of payments due on the payday loan over a period of no fewer than 60 days in three or more payments. The borrower may pay the total of payments due on the payment plan at any time. The payday lender may not assess any penalty, fee or other charge to the borrower for prepayment of the payment plan.

F. A payday lender’s violation of the terms of a payment plan entered into with a borrower under this section constitutes a violation of this chapter. If a payday lender enters into a payment plan with a borrower through a third party that is representing the borrower, the payday lender’s failure to comply with the terms of that payment plan constitutes a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 06-10 § 1, 2006)


5.28.080 Remedies.

A. Failure to comply with any part of this chapter or the administrative rules may be punishable by civil penalties. The manager may impose a civil penalty of up to $2,500 for a substantial violation of the chapter or the administrative rules. A substantial violation is a violation having an impact on the public that informal compliance methods fail to resolve. Each substantial violation may be assessed a separate civil penalty.

B. Civil Remedies. Nothing in this section is intended to prevent any person from pursuing any available legal remedies.

C. No civil penalties shall be assessed within 60 days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 06-10 § 1, 2006)


5.28.090 Appeals.

Any person upon whom a civil penalty has been imposed, or who has been directed by the manager to resolve a complaint, may appeal by filing a notice of appeal with the manager, and following all procedures for appeals provided in SMC 5.24.200 and 5.24.210. (Ord. 06-10 § 1, 2006)


5.28.100 Complaints.

The manager shall have the authority to investigate any and all complaints alleging violation of this chapter or administrative rules.

A. The manager (or designee) may receive complaints from borrowers by telephone or in writing. Within a reasonable time, the manager shall forward the complaint by telephone or in writing to the payday lender it concerns for investigation.

B. The payday lender shall investigate the allegations of the complaint and report the results of the investigation and the proposed resolution of the complaint to the manager by telephone or in writing within two business days from initial contact by the manager.

C. If the proposed resolution is satisfactory to the manager, the payday lender shall proceed to resolve the complaint directly with the borrower according to the resolution proposed to the manager.

D. If the proposed resolution is not satisfactory to the manager, the manager shall conduct an independent investigation of the alleged complaint and propose an alternative resolution of the complaint. If the payday lender accepts the proposed alternative resolution and offers it to the borrower, the complaint shall be final. If the payday lender refuses to accept and implement the proposed alternative resolution it shall be subject to remedies as provided in SMC 5.28.080. In the event of imposition of remedies, the payday lender may appeal as provided by SMC 5.28.090. (Ord. 06-10 § 1, 2006)


5.28.110 Severability.

If any provision of this chapter, or its application to any person or circumstance, is declared invalid or unenforceable, the remainder of the chapter and its application to other persons and circumstances, other than that which has been held invalid or unenforceable, shall not be affected, and the affected provision of this chapter shall be severed. (Ord. 06-10 § 1, 2006)


Chapter 5.30 SOCIAL GAMES

Sections:

5.30.010    Definitions.

5.30.020    Social games – Authorization and conditions.

5.30.030    Responsibilities of owner and person in charge.

5.30.040    Inspection of social games premises.

5.30.050    Notice of social games required.

5.30.060    Civil penalties.


5.30.010 Definitions.

As used in this chapter:

“Social game” means a game, other than a lottery, between players in a private business, private club or place of public accommodation where no house player, house bank or house odds exist and there is no house income from the operation of the social game.

“Chief of police” or “chief” means the chief of the city police department or his or her designee. (Ord. 12-01 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012)


5.30.020 Social games – Authorization and conditions.

Social games as defined in SMC 5.30.010 are authorized only when each of the following conditions is met:

A. No house player, house bank, or house odds exist; 

B. There is no house income from the operation of a social game;

C. The social game cannot be observed from a public right-of-way;

D. The room or enclosure where the social game takes place is open to free and immediate access by any police officer. Doors leading into the social game room must remain unlocked during all hours of operation; 

E. No owner or principal managing employee, as described in more detail below, shall participate in any social game on the premises;

F. A charge for a consumer good sold on the premises to an individual playing a social game must not be higher or lower than the price charged to a nonparticipant in the social game;

G. No owner or principal managing employee may accept any payment, fee, service or gratuity from a social game participant as consideration for participation in the social game on the premises; 

H. No owner or principal managing employee may charge a rental or lease fee for the use of the social game;

I. At no point in time may a social game be conducted without an owner or principal managing employee present; 

J. No membership fee or cover fee may be charged for participation in the social game; and

K. All social gaming activities and the business where social gaming is permitted must comply with applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations. (Ord. 12-01 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012)


5.30.030 Responsibilities of owner and person in charge.

An owner or person in charge of a business where social gaming is permitted shall: 

A. Clearly designate the areas set aside for social gaming. 

B. Designate an agent or employee to act as person in charge of a social gaming premises whenever social games are being played. An owner shall be strictly liable for any violation of this chapter which occurs when no person in charge is present at the social gaming premises. 

C. Be strictly liable for any violation of the provisions of this chapter by a person in charge, agent, and employee or designate.

D. Not allow social gaming activities on the premises unless the private business, private club or place of public accommodation meets all applicable requirements of the SMC and has been legally established and in existence for at least six months. (Ord. 12-01 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012)


5.30.040 Inspection of social games premises.

All persons who authorize social games on premises owned or managed pursuant to this chapter shall permit entry to premises to any member of the police department, upon presentation of official identification, for the limited purpose of inspecting the premises and any activities, records, or devices involved in such games to ensure compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 12-01 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012)


5.30.050 Notice of social games required.

Where social games are conducted, each owner or person in charge of the premises shall continuously and conspicuously post notice that is clearly readable and in letters at least one inch high that such games must be conducted in accordance with the conditions set forth in SMC 5.30.020, which shall be listed in their entirety. (Ord. 12-01 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012)


5.30.060 Civil penalties.

The chief may assess civil penalties for any violation of the provisions of this chapter in an amount of $1,000 per violation. Each day shall constitute a separate violation for purposes of this section. (Ord. 12-01 § 1 (Exh. A), 2012)


Chapter 5.34 MARIJUANA FACILITIES

Sections:

5.34.010    Definitions.

5.34.020    Marijuana producers and medical marijuana grow sites.

5.34.030    Marijuana processors.

5.34.040    Medical marijuana dispensaries, marijuana retailers, and marijuana wholesalers.

5.34.050    Violations and enforcement.


5.34.010 Definitions.

Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used in this chapter are as follows:

A. “Cannabinoid” means any of the chemical compounds that are the active constituents of marijuana.

B. “Cannabinoid concentrate” means a substance obtained by separating cannabinoids from marijuana by: (1) a mechanical extraction process; (2) a chemical extraction process using a nonhydrocarbon-based or other solvent, such as water, vegetable glycerin, vegetable oils, animal fats, isopropyl alcohol or ethanol; (3) a chemical extraction process using the hydrocarbon-based solvent carbon dioxide; provided, that the process does not involve the use of high heat or pressure; or (4) any other process identified by the Oregon Health Authority or the Oregon Liquor Control Commission.

C. “Cannabinoid edible” means food or potable liquid into which a cannabinoid concentrate, cannabinoid extract or dried marijuana leaves or flowers have been incorporated.

D. “Cannabinoid extract” means a substance obtained by separating cannabinoids from marijuana by: (1) a chemical extraction process using a hydrocarbon-based solvent, such as butane, hexane or propane; (2) a chemical extraction process using the hydrocarbon-based solvent carbon dioxide, if the process uses high heat or pressure; or (3) any other process identified by the Oregon Health Authority or the Oregon Liquor Control Commission.

E. “Cannabinoid product” means a cannabinoid edible and any other product intended for human consumption or use, including a product intended to be applied to the skin or hair, that contains cannabinoids or dried marijuana leaves or flowers. It does not include: (1) usable marijuana by itself; (2) a cannabinoid concentrate by itself; (3) a cannabinoid extract by itself; or (4) industrial hemp.

F. “Marijuana facilities” means recreational marijuana producers, recreational marijuana processors, recreational marijuana retailers, recreational marijuana wholesalers and medical marijuana dispensaries, medical marijuana grow sites, and medical marijuana processors.

G. “Marijuana processor” means a facility licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission or registered by the Oregon Health Authority to process, compound or convert marijuana into cannabinoid products, cannabinoid concentrates or cannabinoid extract.

H. “Marijuana producer” means a facility that is licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission to manufacture, plant, cultivate, grow or harvest marijuana.

I. “Marijuana retailer” means a facility licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission to sell marijuana to a consumer.

J. “Marijuana wholesaler” means a facility licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission to purchase marijuana items in Oregon for resale to a person other than a consumer.

K. “Medical marijuana dispensary” means a facility registered with the Oregon Health Authority or for which an application has been submitted to the Oregon Health Authority that transfers usable marijuana, immature marijuana plants, seeds, and cannabinoid products, concentrates and extracts to registrants and primary caregivers. Dispensaries also receive transfers of cannabinoid products, concentrates and extracts from marijuana processing facilities. Dispensaries receive transfers of usable marijuana, immature marijuana plants and seeds from registrants and primary caregivers.

L. “Medical marijuana grow site” means specific location registered by the OHA used by a medical marijuana grower to manufacture, plant, cultivate, grow, or harvest marijuana or dry marijuana leaves or flowers for medical use by a specific patient. (Ord. 18-08 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 15-07 § 1 (Exh. A), 2015)


5.34.020 Marijuana producers and medical marijuana grow sites.

All marijuana producers and grow sites within the city shall be located entirely indoors within a permanent enclosed structure with a roof and shall:

A. Use an air filtration and ventilation system which, to the greatest extent feasible, contains all marijuana related odors within the facility rather than allowing such odor to escape outside. Sufficient measures and means of preventing odor, debris, fluids and other substances from escaping the facility must be in effect at all times.

B. Provide for secure disposal of cannabinoid remnants or by-products; such remnants or by-products shall not be placed within the facilities’ exterior refuse containers. Outdoor storage of cannabinoid merchandise, raw materials, or other cannabinoid materials associated with the production of marijuana is prohibited.

C. Comply with all applicable state regulations.

D. Comply with applicable city design standards with security bars or grates prohibited unless integrated into the design. (Ord. 18-08 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 15-07 § 1 (Exh. A), 2015)


5.34.030 Marijuana processors.

All marijuana processors within the city shall be located entirely indoors within a permanent enclosed structure with a roof and shall:

A. Use an air filtration and ventilation system which, to the greatest extent feasible, contains all marijuana related odors within the facility rather than allowing such odor to escape outside. Sufficient measures and means of preventing odor, debris, fluids and other substances from escaping the facility must be in effect at all times.

B. Provide for secure disposal of cannabinoid remnants or by-products; such remnants or by-products shall not be placed within the facilities’ exterior refuse containers. Outdoor storage of cannabinoid merchandise, raw materials, or other cannabinoid materials associated with the production of marijuana is prohibited.

C. Comply with all applicable state regulations.

D. Comply with city design standards with security bars or grates prohibited unless integrated into the design. (Ord. 18-08 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 15-07 § 1 (Exh. A), 2015)


5.34.040 Medical marijuana dispensaries, marijuana retailers, and marijuana wholesalers.

A. Facilities under this section may be open to the public between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.

B. Facilities under this section may not locate in a trailer, cargo container or motor vehicle and shall not offer drive-through or delivery services, except delivery service of medical marijuana products. Outdoor storage of merchandise, raw materials or other materials associated with the facility is prohibited. Facilities under this section must be a permanent structure on a foundation with a permanent address which can be registered with the state of Oregon.

C. No marijuana or paraphernalia shall be displayed or kept in a facility under this section so as to be visible from the outside of the licensed premises. Marijuana and tobacco products must not be inhaled (smoked or vaporized), ingested (orally, sublingually or rectally), topically applied or otherwise consumed in any manner that creates pharmaceutical effect or chemical influences on a person while on the premises.

D. Facilities under this section must use an air filtration and ventilation system which, to the greatest extent feasible, contains all marijuana related odors within the facility rather than allowing such odor to escape outside. Sufficient measures and means of preventing odor, debris, fluids and other substances from escaping the facility must be in effect at all times.

E. Facilities under this section must provide for secure disposal of cannabinoid remnants or by-products; such remnants or by-products shall not be placed within the facilities’ exterior refuse containers.

F. Facilities under this section must comply with all applicable state regulations.

G. Facilities under this section must take steps to ensure that all products and paraphernalia must be enclosed in an opaque bag or container upon exiting the facility.

H. Entrances and off-street parking areas of facilities under this section shall be well lit and not visually obscured from public view and rights-of-way.

I. Site or building exterior of facilities under this section must comply with city design standards with security bars or grates prohibited unless integrated into the design.

J. New marijuana retailers shall be no closer than 1,000 feet of another marijuana retailer. The distance between the retailers shall be computed by direct measurement of the nearest portion of the building in which one marijuana retailer is located to the nearest portion of the building in which the other marijuana retailer is located.

K. The owner or operator of a medical marijuana dispensary or marijuana retailer must request Silverton police department to conduct a criminal records check for each employee of a medical marijuana dispensary or marijuana retailer before the individual begins employment with the facility.

1. An individual convicted of the manufacture or delivery of the controlled substance in Schedule 1 or Schedule 2 may not be an employee of the medical marijuana dispensary for two years from the date the individual was convicted.

2. An individual convicted more than once for the manufacture or delivery of a controlled substance in Schedule 1 or Schedule 2 may not be an employee of a medical marijuana dispensary. (Ord. 18-08 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 15-07 § 1 (Exh. A), 2015)


5.34.050 Violations and enforcement. 

A. The establishment, maintenance or operation of a marijuana facility by a person, business or any other entity within the city in violation of the requirements of this chapter will be subject to any and all enforcement remedies available to the city under law and/or the Silverton Municipal Code including but not limited to enforcement pursuant to Chapters 1.08 and 8.07 SMC and/or the filing of an appropriate action and pursuit of an appropriate remedy in a court of competent jurisdiction.

B. The establishment, maintenance or operation of a marijuana facility by a person, business or any other entity within the city in violation of the requirements of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance. The city may abate a nuisance under this chapter either pursuant to Chapter 8.04 SMC or it may pursue any other remedies available to it, including but not limited to an action seeking declaratory relief and/or injunctive relief.

C. If the city brings an action in either law or equity in any of the courts of this state (including the U.S. District Court for the District of Oregon) other than its municipal court for the enforcement of this chapter, the city shall be entitled to the award of its reasonable attorney fees in the event it is the prevailing party. (Ord. 18-08 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 15-07 § 1 (Exh. A), 2015)


Chapter 5.40 REGULATION OF TRANSIENT BUSINESS

Sections:

5.40.010    Purpose.

5.40.020    Definitions.

5.40.030    Transient business license applications.

5.40.040    General provisions.

5.40.050    License – Approval process.

5.40.060    License – Renewal.

5.40.070    License – Nontransferable.

5.40.080    Grounds for revocation.

5.40.090    Appeal.

5.40.100    Appeal – Hearing.

5.40.120    License – Reissuance.

5.40.130    Violation – Penalty.


5.40.010 Purpose. 

The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards to protect the health, safety, welfare and economic development of the city and its residents, as well as that of the patrons and employees of transient businesses. (Ord. 15-08 § 2 (Exh. B), 2015)


5.40.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, except where the context otherwise indicates, the following definitions apply:

A. “City” means the city of Silverton.

B. “City manager” means the Silverton city manager or his/her designee.

C. “Council” means the Silverton city council.

D. “License” means the city’s permission granted to engage in a transient business regulated by this chapter.

E. “Licensee” means a person who has a valid license issued pursuant to this chapter.

F. “Person” means every natural person, corporation, partnership, association or any other group acting as a unit.

G. “Posted” means the placing of a clearly readable sign or placard in English stating “No Solicitors” or “No Solicitation” readily visible to any person attempting to enter the property from the nearest street or public sidewalk.

H. “Principal” means a person who would be directly involved in the management or operation of the transient business.

I. “Sales” means the act of selling involving the transfer of money.

J. “Transient business” means any person selling goods, wares, services or merchandise at a fixed temporary location or door-to-door on public or private property or otherwise conducts business for a fixed temporary period of time regardless of whether they associate temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer or by conducting such temporary business in connection with or as a part of or in the name of any local dealer, trader, merchant, or auctioneer.

K. “Valid license” means a license issued pursuant to this chapter, and which license’s effective period has not expired. (Ord. 15-08 § 2 (Exh. B), 2015)


5.40.030 Transient business license applications.

A. Applications for transient business licenses shall be submitted on forms provided by the city. Every application shall be signed by the owner or authorized agent and shall contain the following information, as applicable:

1. Name of person or persons owning the business; if a corporation, the name of an authorized officer.

2. Assumed business name, business phone number and alternative phone number.

3. Business mailing address and owner mailing address.

4. Nature of the business.

5. Number of employees.

6. Emergency contact name and phone number.

7. Name of all persons conducting business within the city.

8. Photo identification of each person conducting business within the city.

9. Proof of the applicant’s possession of all permits, certificates or registrations required by city, county, state or federal laws to conduct the type of business listed on the application.

10. For transient businesses conducting door-to-door business, a signed authorization to conduct a criminal background check for each person conducting business within the city.

11. For transient businesses located at a fixed location, the following information shall be provided:

a. Site plan of the area where the business and/or structure will be located clearly showing impacted parking spaces, necessary driving lanes, utility pole locations, nearby buildings and sidewalks.

b. Proof of compliance with all applicable building and fire codes.

c. If food or beverages are to be sold applicant shall provide a copy of the applicable food handler’s license from Marion County.

d. If on private property, a letter of authorization from the property owner or copy of lease agreement.

e. Manner in which public water will be provided.

f. Provisions or arrangements for bathroom facilities for employees. Approval of a transient business will be exempt from SMC 13.12.010.

g. Consistency with the underlying zone designation.

h. If the transient business has the potential to impact publicly owned lands or facilities (e.g., street, sidewalk, park, water, sewer, drainage, etc.), a $5,000 bond or other financial security shall be required to ensure clean-up, restoration, and/or replacement of said public land or facility. The city manager may increase the amount of the bond or financial security based on the application information.

B. A person shall apply for a transient business license at least 10 days before conducting business in the city.

C. A transient business license shall expire no later than 90 days of the date the license was issued.

D. Where the business includes activities classifiable in two or more categories, the primary or predominant activity should be designated. (Ord. 15-08 § 2 (Exh. B), 2015)


5.40.040 General provisions.

A. Transient merchants conducting business by going door-to-door may do so only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.

B. A person who enters private property with a posted and clearly visible “No Solicitation,” “No Trespassing,” or similar sign is subject to prosecution for criminal trespass, regardless of whether the purpose for entry was to engage in business or otherwise and regardless of the hour at which the solicitation took place.

C. The general penalty provisions of Chapter 1.08 SMC shall apply for any violations of this chapter.

D. All transient business employees shall display a copy of the city-issued business license with photo identification while conducting business within the city limits.

E. All transient business license holders shall provide proof of the applicant’s possession of any permits, certificates, or registrations that are required by city, county, state or federal laws to conduct the type of business listed on the application.

F. Transient business licenses shall be limited to the business and employees specified within the license application and valid only to permit the specified employees to undertake the activities for which the license was issued. 

G. Transient businesses must obtain a business license and pay the related fees. (Ord. 15-08 § 2 (Exh. B), 2015)


5.40.050 License – Approval process.

A. The city manager shall refer each application to the appropriate departments for review. Review of the application shall be based on consideration of all available evidence as to whether the proposed business will meet the requirements of the city code. The license may not be granted if:

1. The activity to be licensed would not comply with city ordinances or state or federal laws.

2. The licensed activity would endanger property or the public’s health or safety. Sale of illegal items, firearms, or other concealed weapons is not regulated by this chapter.

3. The applicant’s violation of law or ordinance represents a reasonable doubt about the applicant’s ability to perform the licensed activity without endangering property or the public’s health or safety.

4. The applicant fails to supply the information required, or submits misleading or false information, or submitted misleading or false information on a previous application.

B. Upon a favorable recommendation from each department, the city manager shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application. Action on an application shall be based upon the consideration of all available information. If it is determined that the application is denied, the city manager shall notify the applicant of the denial and the reason for denial.

C. An application may be denied on any of the following grounds:

1. Failure to provide requested information or any false, misleading or incomplete material statement made on the application form; however, if the statement is the result of excusable neglect, the applicant may resubmit an application with appropriate corrections;

2. The applicant, a principal or the business activity fails to meet the requirements of this code or is doing business in violation of this code or applicable state or federal law, including the building, health, mechanical, electrical, plumbing, and development codes of the city;

3. The applicant, a principal or the business activity would violate, or has violated, any ordinance or the charter of the city, any state or federal criminal statute, or any other law, unless the applicant proves that the violation has no bearing on the applicant’s fitness or the ability of the business to undertake the licensed activity without endangering persons or property or the public health, safety or welfare;

4. The business activity would endanger, or has endangered, persons or property, such that the business activity is a menace to the health, safety and general welfare of the city.

D. The city manager shall notify the applicant in writing of a decision to deny an application made under subsection (A) of this section. The written notice shall state the reason for the decision and explain that the decision is final unless either the applicant or council files a notice of appeal pursuant to SMC 5.40.100. The written notice shall also be provided to the council.

E. If the license is approved or approved with conditions, the city manager shall issue a license to the applicant.

F. Upon issuance of a business license, the license shall be valid only to permit the activities for which the license was issued. (Ord. 15-08 § 2 (Exh. B), 2015)


5.40.060 License – Renewal.

A. An application for renewal of a license shall be made and processed in the same manner as an initial application.

B. License renewal fees shall be deemed delinquent if not paid on or before 30 days after the due date. Whenever a license renewal fee is not paid within 30 days of the due date, a late fee shall be imposed and the license will be invalid until full payment is received by the city. (Ord. 15-08 § 2 (Exh. B), 2015)


5.40.070 License – Nontransferable.

A license issued pursuant to this chapter is a personal privilege and is not transferable. (Ord. 15-08 § 2 (Exh. B), 2015)


5.40.080 Grounds for revocation.

A. The city manager may revoke a license if he/she determines that a licensee is conducting or has conducted an activity which endangers the public health, safety, or welfare of the city.

B. The notice of revocation shall be sent to the licensee at least 30 days before the effective date of the revocation. The notice of revocation shall state the grounds for revocation and inform the licensee of the provisions for appeal. (Ord. 15-08 § 2 (Exh. B), 2015)


5.40.090 Appeal.

A. An applicant whose application has been conditioned or denied or a licensee receiving a notice of revocation may file a written notice of appeal with the city manager. The notice of appeal must be filed within 10 calendar days after the notice of denial, revocation or conditional approval is mailed or delivered, whichever is earlier. The notice of appeal shall include:

1. The name and address of the appellant, and the business owner if different than the appellant;

2. The nature of the determination from which an appeal is taken and a copy of the determination;

3. The reason or reasons why the determination is alleged to be incorrect;

4. What the correct determination should be; and

5. An appeal fee in the amount set by resolution of the council.

B. The council, on its own motion, may review a city manager decision of denial, conditions, approval or revocation. The council shall direct the filing of a notice of appeal which notice shall be filed no later than 10 days after the city manager’s decision was mailed. The notice of appeal shall be sent to the applicant, and state the time and place at which the council will review the decision and the reason or reasons for review.

C. The council shall designate a time to hear the appeal and appellant shall be given notice of the time, date and place at least 20 days in advance of the hearing.

D. Failure of the applicant or licensee to file an appeal with the city manager within the time provided constitutes a waiver of objections to the notice of suspension, revocation, denial or approval with conditions.

E. Filing a notice of appeal stays the effective date of revocation until a final determination is made by the council. (Ord. 15-08 § 2 (Exh. B), 2015)


5.40.100 Appeal – Hearing.

A. A hearing on appeal to the council pursuant to SMC 5.40.090 affords the licensee or applicant, the city manager and other interested parties the opportunity to give testimony and written materials to the council.

B. The council may affirm, modify, remand or reverse the city manager’s decision. The council shall provide the licensee or applicant with written notice of its decision. (Ord. 15-08 § 2 (Exh. B), 2015)


5.40.120 License – Reissuance.

When a license has been revoked and the licensee or principal of the licensee reapplies for a license, a bond in the penal sum deemed necessary under the circumstances (not to exceed $10,000) shall be filed with the city recorder. This bond shall be required for the term of the license and shall be forfeited to the city if the licensee is convicted of any violation of federal, state or city laws or ordinances for which such license may be revoked. (Ord. 15-08 § 2 (Exh. B), 2015)


5.40.130 Violation – Penalty.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is subject to the general penalties provision of SMC 1.08.010. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day a violation occurs. (Ord. 15-08 § 2 (Exh. B), 2015)


Chapter 5.45 PLASTIC CARRYOUT BAGS

Sections:

5.45.010    Purpose.

5.45.020    Definitions.

5.45.030    Supervision by city manager.

5.45.040    Plastic carryout bag regulation.

5.45.050    Enforcement and penalties.


5.45.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit retail establishments from distributing plastic carryout bags to their customers and to encourage the distribution and use of reusable/recyclable options in order to avoid the negative environmental consequences found with the use of plastic carryout bags. (Ord. 18-26 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019)


5.45.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, except where the context otherwise indicates, the following definitions apply:

A. “ASTM standard” means the current American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) International D6400.

B. “Carryout bag” means a bag that is provided by a retail establishment at the check stand, cash register, point of sale or other point of departure to a customer for the purpose of transporting food or merchandise out of the establishment. Carryout bags do not include:

1. Bags used by customers inside stores to package bulk items such as fruit, vegetables, nuts, grains, candy, greeting cards, or small hardware items, such as nails and bolts, or to contain or wrap frozen foods, meat or fish, whether prepackaged or not, or to contain or wrap flowers or potted plants, or other items where dampness may be a problem, or to contain unwrapped prepared foods or bakery goods, or to contain prescription drugs, or to safeguard public health and safety during the transportation of prepared take-out foods and prepared liquids intended for consumption away from the retail establishment; or

2. Newspaper bags, door-hanger bags, laundry-dry cleaning bags, or bags sold in packages containing multiple bags intended for use as garbage, pet waste, or yard waste bags.

C. “Pass-through charge” means a charge to be collected by retailers from their customers when providing recyclable paper bags, and retained by retailers to offset the cost of bags and other costs related to the pass-through charge.

D. “Plastic carryout bag” means a plastic bag made from synthetic or natural organic materials less than 2.25 mils thick that is provided by a retail establishment to a customer at the point of sale for use to transport or carry away purchases from the retail establishment.

E. “Recyclable paper bag” means a paper bag that meets all of the following requirements:

1. Is 100 percent recyclable and contains a minimum of 40 percent post-consumer recycled content; and

2. Is capable of composting consistent with the timeline and specifications of the ASTM standard.

F. “Retail establishment” means any person, corporation, partnership, business venture, public sports or entertainment facilities, government agency, street vendor or vendor at public events or festivals or organizations that sell or provide merchandise, goods or materials, including, without limitation, clothing, food, beverages, household goods, or personal items of any kind, directly to a customer. Examples include but are not limited to department stores, clothing stores, jewelry stores, grocery stores, pharmacies, home improvement stores, liquor stores, convenience stores, gas stations, restaurants, food vending trucks, farmers markets and temporary vendors of food and merchandise at street fairs and festivals. Food banks and other food assistance programs are not considered to be retail establishments for the purposes of this section.

G. “Reusable bag” means a bag with handles that is either:

1. Made of cloth or other machine-washable material; or

2. Made of woven synthetic fiber; or

3. Made of woven and nonwoven polypropylene; or

4. Made of durable plastic that is at least 2.25 mils thick.

H. “Undue hardship” means circumstances or situations unique to the particular retail establishment that result in no reasonable alternatives to the use of plastic carryout bags or which result in the inability to collect a recyclable paper bag pass-through charge. (Ord. 18-26 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019)


5.45.030 Supervision by city manager.

The regulation of plastic carryout bags in the city under the provisions herein shall be under the supervision of the city manager. (Ord. 18-26 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019)


5.45.040 Plastic carryout bag regulation.

A. No retail establishment shall provide or make available plastic carryout bags or nonrecyclable paper bags.

B. When a retail establishment makes a bag available to a customer at the point of sale, the bag shall meet the definition of a recyclable paper bag or reusable bag.

C. The retail establishment shall collect a pass-through charge from customers of no less than $0.05 for each recyclable paper carryout bag.

D. A retail establishment that accepts WIC, EBT, and SNAP will provide those customers with a reusable bag or recyclable paper bag at no cost at the point of sale. (Ord. 18-26 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019)


5.45.050 Enforcement and penalties.

A. A person is guilty of a violation of this chapter if that person is the one who provides or makes available a plastic carryout bag to customers and/or is a person who is in charge or in control of a retail establishment or who exercises authority over a retail establishment that provides or makes available a plastic carryout bag to customers.

B. Each plastic carryout bag or nonrecyclable paper bag provided or made available to a customer is a violation of this chapter and separate offense.

C. Each recyclable paper bag provided or made available to customers without charging a minimum of $0.05 each is a violation of this chapter and a separate offense.

D. It shall be a violation of this section for any retail establishment to pay or otherwise reimburse a customer for any portion of the pass-through charge.

E. A violation of this chapter is punishable in accordance with the general penalty provisions of SMC 1.08.010.

F. Enforcement of this chapter shall begin July 1, 2019, for all retail establishments.

G. The city manager may exempt a retail establishment from the enforcement deadline for a period of not more than six months upon the retail establishment showing, in writing, that timely imposition of the provisions of this chapter would create an undue hardship. The city manager shall make a written final decision to grant or deny the exemption request, which shall be the city’s final decision on the application.

H. If any provision, paragraph, word, section, or article of this chapter is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions, paragraphs, words, sections and chapters shall not be affected and shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 18-26 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019)


Chapter 5.50 POLYSTYRENE FOOD SERVICE PRODUCT REGULATION

Sections:

5.50.010    Purpose.

5.50.020    Definitions.

5.50.030    Supervision by city manager.

5.50.040    Polystyrene food service product regulation.

5.50.050    Exemptions.

5.50.060    Enforcement and penalties.


5.50.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit the use of polystyrene food service products. (Ord. 19-02 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019)


5.50.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, except where the context otherwise indicates, the following definitions apply:

A. “Polystyrene” means blown polystyrene and expanded and extruded foams which are thermoplastic petrochemical materials utilizing a styrene monomer and processed by any number of techniques including, but not limited to, fusion of polymer spheres (expandable bead polystyrene), injection molding, foam molding, and extrusion-blow molding (extruded foam polystyrene). Polystyrene does not include clear or solid polystyrene (oriented polystyrene).

B. “Polystyrene food service product” means food containers, plates, “clamshells,” hot and cold beverage cups, meat and vegetable trays, egg cartons, and other products made of polystyrene and used for selling or providing food by a food service business for consumption on or off the premises.

C. “Food processing business” means any business or commercial operation that manufactures, packages, produces, labels, or stores food items that are designed for human consumption and do not provide food directly to a customer.

D. “Food service business” means full-service restaurants, fast food restaurants, cafes, delicatessens, coffee shops, grocery stores, vending trucks or carts, business or institutional cafeterias, or other businesses, entities, or nonprofits selling or providing food directly to customers within the city of Silverton for consumption on or off the premises. Food service business does not include food processing businesses.

E. “Undue hardship” means there is significant difficulty or expense incurred by a food service business which directly impacts the conduct of business. This could include but is not limited to a situation where overstocked supplies cannot be returned or used at another location outside the city.

F. “Unique packaging hardship” means no allowed alternative to a polystyrene food service product is available for reasons which are unique to that food service business. For example, if a food service business utilizes specific branding, and such business can demonstrate that no allowed branded polystyrene food service product alternative is available, a unique packaging hardship exists. (Ord. 19-02 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019)


5.50.030 Supervision by city manager.

The regulation of polystyrene food service products in the city of Silverton under the provisions herein shall be under the supervision of the city manager. (Ord. 19-02 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019)


5.50.040 Polystyrene food service product regulation.

Food service businesses shall be prohibited from selling or providing food, for consumption on or off the premises, in polystyrene food service products, except as otherwise provided under SMC 5.50.050. (Ord. 19-02 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019)


5.50.050 Exemptions.

A. Prepackaged soups and other foods that a food service business sells or provides to their customers in polystyrene food service products that have been filled and sealed prior to receipt by the food service business shall be exempt from the prohibition.

B. The prohibition on a food service business selling or providing raw meat or raw seafood, for consumption on or off the premises, in polystyrene food service products shall take effect on January 1, 2020.

C. A food service business may submit a written request to the city manager or his/her designee for an annual unique packaging or undue hardship exemption. (Ord. 19-02 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019)


5.50.060 Enforcement and penalties.

A. The city manager, upon determination that a violation of this chapter has occurred, shall issue a written notice to the food service business by certified mail stating the specific violation and appropriate penalty.

B. A violation of this chapter is punishable in accordance with the general penalty provisions of SMC 1.08.010.

C. Except as set forth in SMC 5.50.050, enforcement of this chapter shall begin July 1, 2019, for all food service businesses.

D. If any provision, paragraph, word, section, or article of this chapter is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions, paragraphs, words, sections and chapters shall not be affected and shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 19-02 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019)


Title 6 ANIMALS

Chapters:

6.04    Nuisance – Dogs

6.08    Intentional Feeding of Deer


Chapter 6.04 NUISANCE – DOGS

Sections:

6.04.010    Definitions.

6.04.020    Control required.

6.04.030    Vicious dogs – Control required.

6.04.040    Dog – Control required when in car or truck.

6.04.050    Leash required.

6.04.060    Removal of dog waste.

6.04.070    Dogs – Noise.

6.04.080    Penalties for violation.


6.04.010 Definitions.

“Vicious dog” means a dog which has bitten any person or other domestic animals or which has a known propensity to attack or bite human beings or other domestic animals. (Ord. 17-13 § 1 (Exh. A), 2017; Ord. 02-114 § 1, 2002. Formerly 8.05.010)


6.04.020 Control required.

All dogs must be confined by fence, leash, or obedience training to the property of the person owning, harboring or having the charge, care, control, custody or possession of such dog; however, it shall be permissible for a dog to be confined by fence, leash or obedience training to the property of another if such other person has given express permission; provided, however, that the city council may, in its discretion, designate certain areas within the city where dogs may be permitted to run free while under the owner’s or keeper’s control. (Ord. 17-13 § 1 (Exh. A), 2017; Ord. 02-114 § 1, 2002. Formerly 8.05.020)


6.04.030 Vicious dogs – Control required.

Any dog that is vicious or dangerous to the safety of persons must be confined by enclosure or a leash to property of its owner or keeper. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit a dog to injure or kill a pet or domestic animal as defined in ORS 167.310(2). (Ord. 17-13 § 1 (Exh. A), 2017; Ord. 02-114 § 1, 2002. Formerly 8.05.030)


6.04.040 Dog – Control required when in car or truck.

It is permissible for a dog to be confined to a car or truck, which is owned by its owner or keeper, and such confinement may be either by physical means or by obedience training. (Ord. 17-13 § 1 (Exh. A), 2017; Ord. 02-114 § 1, 2002. Formerly 8.05.040)


6.04.050 Leash required.

Any dog not confined to property as set forth in this chapter and which is on either public or private property must be on a leash not longer than six feet in length. (Ord. 17-13 § 1 (Exh. A), 2017; Ord. 02-114 § 1, 2002. Formerly 8.05.050)


6.04.060 Removal of dog waste.

Any person, with the exception of a sightless person, responsible for any dog, shall be in possession of tools for the removal of, and shall remove, excrement deposited by the dog:

A. In any public area not designed to receive those wastes, including but not limited to streets, sidewalks, parking strips, city parks and trails or roads paralleling ditches, swales, culverts, canals and similar facilities owned or operated by the city of Silverton; or

B. On any private property. It is an affirmative defense to a prosecution on any charge under this subsection that the property owner or person in charge of the property consented to such use of the property. (Ord. 17-13 § 1 (Exh. A), 2017; Ord. 02-114 § 1, 2002. Formerly 8.05.060)


6.04.070 Dogs – Noise.

It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any animal to cause unreasonable annoyance, alarm or noise disturbance at any time of the day or night by repeated barking, whining, screeching, howling, braying or other like sounds which may be heard beyond the boundary of the keeper’s property. (Ord. 17-13 § 1 (Exh. A), 2017; Ord. 02-114 § 1, 2002. Formerly 8.05.070)


6.04.080 Penalties for violation.

Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be punished as set forth in SMC 1.08.010. (Ord. 17-13 § 1 (Exh. A), 2017; Ord. 02-114 § 1, 2002. Formerly 8.05.080)


Chapter 6.08 INTENTIONAL FEEDING OF DEER

Sections:

6.08.010    Definitions.

6.08.020    Community education.

6.08.030    Feeding of deer prohibited.

6.08.040    Affirmative defense.

6.08.050    Enforcement.

6.08.060    Penalty.


6.08.010 Definitions.

“Food” means corn, fruit, oats, hay, nuts, wheat, alfalfa, salt blocks, grain, vegetables, and commercially sold wildlife feed, birdseed or livestock feed, but excludes shrubs, live crops, plants, flowers, vegetation, gardens, trees, and fruit or nuts that have fallen on the ground from trees. (Ord. 17-13 § 1 (Exh. A), 2017)


6.08.020 Community education.

The city manager shall establish and implement a program to educate the community about the dangers of overpopulation of deer in urban and suburban areas. (Ord. 17-13 § 1 (Exh. A), 2017)


6.08.030 Feeding of deer prohibited.

A. Except as provided in subsection (C) of this section, a person commits an offense if the person intentionally feeds deer or makes food available for consumption by deer on private or public property within the limits of the city.

B. A person shall be presumed to have intentionally fed deer, or made food available for consumption by deer, if the person places food, or causes food to be placed, on the ground outdoors or on any outdoor platform that stands fewer than five feet above the ground.

C. This section does not apply to an animal control officer, veterinarian, peace officer, city employee, federal or state wildlife official, or property owner who is authorized by a local, state, or federal government to treat, manage, capture, trap, hunt, or remove deer and who is acting within the scope of the person's authority. (Ord. 17-13 § 1 (Exh. A), 2017)


6.08.040 Affirmative defense.

It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this chapter if a person places food, in good faith, for the purpose of feeding domestic livestock or pets located on the property. (Ord. 17-13 § 1 (Exh. A), 2017)


6.08.050 Enforcement.

A. A person may report a violation of this chapter to the police department or code enforcement officer.

B. The city will enforce this chapter and may seek injunctive relief.

C. The city manager may authorize a city employee conducting an inspection under any provision of the city code to also inspect for compliance with this chapter and issue a citation for violation of this chapter. (Ord. 17-13 § 1 (Exh. A), 2017)


6.08.060 Penalty.

A person who violates this chapter commits a violation of city code. A violation under this chapter is punishable under the general penalty provisions of SMC 1.08.010. (Ord. 17-13 § 1 (Exh. A), 2017)


Title 7 (RESERVED)


Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY

Chapters:

8.04    Nuisances and Nuisance Abatement

8.05    Recodified

8.06    Chronic Nuisance Property

8.07    Municipal Court Procedures for Certain Code Enforcement Matters

8.08    Environmental Management Committee

8.12    Prohibited Solicitation

8.15    Prohibited Public Acts


Chapter 8.04 NUISANCES AND NUISANCE ABATEMENT

Sections:

8.04.010    Title.

8.04.030    Definitions.

8.04.040    Administration.

8.04.050    Specific nuisances prohibited.

8.04.055    Noise disturbances.

8.04.057    Vehicle storage and repair in residential neighborhoods.

8.04.060    Routine and emergency inspection – Authority.

8.04.070    Abatement – General procedures.

8.04.080    Abatement – Emergency situations.

8.04.090    Appeal and hearing procedures – General requirements.

8.04.100    Appeal and hearing procedures – Review of decision.

8.04.110    Persons responsible – Joint liability.

8.04.120    Abatement by owner – Required.

8.04.130    Abatement by city – Assessment.

8.04.140    Waiver of assessments.

8.04.150    Liens against property.

8.04.160    Summary abatement.

8.04.170    Violation.


8.04.010 Title.

This chapter shall be known as “Silverton nuisance code” or SNC and may be so pleaded and referred to as such. (Ord. 13-11 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013)


8.04.030 Definitions.

As used in the Silverton nuisance code (unless the context requires otherwise) the following terms are defined as follows:

A. “Camping” is the maintenance of a temporary place to sleep or live regardless whether such place incorporates the use of any tent, shack or other structure or vehicle.

B. “City manager” or “manager” means the Silverton city manager or an authorized designee.

C. “Council” means the Silverton city council.

D. “Discarded vehicle” means any vehicle on private property having at least two of the following conditions:

1. Appears inoperative, wrecked or in obvious disrepair;

2. Has no current vehicle registration plates displayed; or

3. Is totally or partially dismantled.

E. “Explosive” means a chemical compound, mixture or device used or intended for producing a chemical reaction resulting in a substantially instantaneous release of gas and heat, including but not limited to dynamite, blasting powder, nitroglycerin, blasting caps and nitrojelly (but excluding fireworks as defined by state law), black powder, smokeless powder, small arms ammunition and small arms ammunition primers.

F. “Graffiti” means any inscription, word, figure or design marked, etched, scratched, drawn or painted on any surface not authorized by the owner thereof.

G. “Intersection” means the area within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines or lateral boundary lines of two or more streets or highways joining one another at an angle, regardless whether they cross.

H. “Liquid waste” means waste oil, septic tank pumping, liquid industrial wastes or other similar material.

I. “Municipal court judge” means a judge of the Silverton municipal court.

J. “Noxious vegetation” means either:

1. Any vegetation that is or is likely to become:

a. A health hazard;

b. A fire hazard; or

c. A traffic hazard because it impairs the view of the public thoroughfare, or otherwise makes use of the thoroughfare hazardous; or

2. The following:

a. Poison oak (Toxicodendron diversiloba);

b. Poison ivy (Toxicodendron radicans);

c. Blackberry bushes that extend into a public way, a pathway frequented by children, cross a property line, or that are used for a habitation by trespassers;

d. Grass or weeds more than 10 inches high;

e. Scotch broom (Cytisus scoparius), English ivy (Hedera helix), hogwood (Heracleum mantegazzianum), knotweed (Polygonum cuspidatum) and purple loosestrife (Lythrum salicaria); and

f. All other vegetation included in the State Department of Agriculture “Oregon Department of Agriculture Noxious Weed Control Policy and Classification System.”

K. “Nuisance” means any item, condition or practice capable of causing a threat to the public health, safety and welfare, including anything defined as a nuisance by this chapter.

L. “Owner” means any person having a legal or equitable interest in real or personal property or a person in possession or control thereof excluding person(s) whose interest is for security only.

M. “Person” means any natural person, association, trust, partnership, firm or corporation or other entity.

N. “Radioactive substance” means a substance which emits radiation in the form of gamma rays, x-rays, alpha particles, beta particles, neutrons, protons, high-speed electrons or other nuclear particles, but radiation does not include sound waves, radio waves, visible light, infrared light or ultraviolet light.

O. “Rodent” means a mouse, rat, or any other rodentia.

P. “Rubbish” means glass, metal, paper, wood, plastics or other nonputrescible solid waste.

Q. “Sidewalk” means that portion of the public right-of-way set apart by curbs, barriers, markings or other delineation generally used for pedestrian travel.

R. “Solid waste” means all putrescible and nonputrescible wastes, whether in solid or liquid form, (except wastes produced by the human body, liquid-carried industrial waste or sewage hauled as an incidental part of septic tank or cesspool cleaning service) and includes garbage, rubbish, ashes, fill dirt, sewage, street refuse, industrial wastes, swill, demolition and used construction materials, abandoned vehicles or parts thereof, discarded home or industrial appliances, manure, vegetable or animal solids and semisolid waste, dead animals and other discarded solid materials.

S. “Vector” means any insect organism, including but not limited to flies, fleas, lice, ticks, fly maggots and mosquito larvae, capable of bearing or carrying a disease transmittable to human beings.

T. “Vehicle” means any motorized device designed or used for transporting people, goods or property upon a street or other roadway not including a device propelled by human power, such as a bicycle, or operated exclusively upon fixed rails or tracks. (Ord. 13-11 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013)


8.04.040 Administration.

A. Enforcement. The manager is responsible for the administration and enforcement of the Silverton nuisance code and an action to enforce the terms thereof may be brought before the Silverton municipal court consistent with the procedures set out in Chapter 8.07 SMC.

B. Rules and Regulations. The city manager may adopt rules necessary for the administration and enforcement of the SNC.

C. Notice Procedure. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, all notices shall be in writing and may be hand delivered or by mail. If mailed, the notice shall be postpaid, return receipt requested, to the addressee’s last known address. A mailed notice shall be deemed received on the second mail delivery day after mailing. (Ord. 13-11 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013)


8.04.050 Specific nuisances prohibited.

A. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, suffer or permit the following things, practices or conditions on any private property (or within the public right-of-way adjacent thereto):

1. A pond or pool of stagnant water emitting a noxious odor or is a source of vector breeding or otherwise presents a threat to the public health and safety;

2. Cesspools or septic tanks which are in an unsanitary, unsafe or malfunctioning condition, or which cause an offensive odor;

3. Premises in a state or condition causing offensive malodor or which is in an unsanitary condition;

4. An animal carcass not buried, destroyed or otherwise lawfully disposed of within 24 hours after death;

5. Accumulation, collection or storage of solid waste, debris, rubbish, manure, tires or other refuse, creating an odor or fire hazard, detracting from the cleanliness or safety of the property or likely to cause injury to a person, animal or vehicle traveling upon a public way, unless the person is licensed thereby to operate a business specifically for those purposes or obtains prior approval of lawful authority;

6. An abandoned, discarded or unattended container with a compartment of more than one and one-half cubic feet capacity with a door or lid which locks or fastens automatically when closed and which cannot be opened from the inside;

7. Any vacant or improved property with accumulation of material which may attract or harbor vectors or rodents;

8. Any accumulation of dirt, sand, gravel, pieces or chunks of concrete or other similar inorganic material which detracts from the cleanliness or safety of the property, unless the owner is licensed to operate a business specifically for those purposes or otherwise obtains prior approval from a lawful authority;

9. Graffiti on private property that is not removed within 48 hours of discovery;

10. An open pit, excavation or hole with a depth of four feet or more and a top width of 12 inches or more without safeguards or barriers to prevent them from being accessible to the public;

11. Dead or decaying trees and tree limbs presenting a hazard to the public or abutting property owners;

12. Any vehicle or other personal property such as, but not limited to, a trailer, boat or recreational vehicle parked or stored to obstruct the public sidewalk;

13. Man-made or natural obstructions at or near intersections hindering the view necessary for safe operation of vehicles, pedestrians and bicycles;

14. Obstruction of the public right-of-way by trees, bushes, roots, other natural growth, soil or solid waste;

15. Failure to maintain sidewalks in good repair, or to timely remove ice and snow, rock, sand, bark dust, compost, lumber, yard trimmings, leaves or other debris so as to eliminate hazardous conditions resulting therefrom;

16. Any excavation endangering the lateral support of public rights-of-way or other public property;

17. Any structure (either vacant or under construction) not locked or otherwise secured to prevent access by the public at large;

18. Signs placed illegally within the public right-of-way;

19. Noxious vegetation excepting growth on public land or designated private conservation areas specifically for providing native wildlife habitat;

20. Any structure contaminated by toxic chemicals or in a condition rendering it unsafe. Where a governmental agency authorized by law to make the determination that a structure is unfit for use there is thereby created a rebuttable presumption that the structure is a nuisance;

21. Maintaining an occupied travel trailer, motor home, camper, or vehicle or trailer modified for sleeping at any location other than a licensed recreational vehicle park, except travel trailers and motor homes used by visitors for a period not to exceed 14 days in any consecutive six-month period;

22. Connection of any electric, water, sewer, gas or telephone line to a motor home, travel trailer, camper or utility trailer if any portion of such line extends over, across or under any public right-of-way or portion thereof;

23. Depositing of oil or chemicals on to public streets or storm drains;

24. Construction or maintenance of a barbed-wire or razor fence along a sidewalk or public way, except where such wire is installed around an industrial or commercial use, or is placed above the top of other fencing not less than six feet, six inches high;

25. Construction, maintenance or operation of an electric fence along a sidewalk or public way, or along the adjoining property line of another person;

26. Camping or sleeping on public rights-of-way, other publicly owned places or under bridges unless specifically permitted by the city;

27. Allowing or causing flooding to occur on private property that is likely to or does result in damage to persons or property.

B. The enumeration of nuisances in subsection (A) of this section does not limit the power of the city manager to investigate or declare any other condition a nuisance.

C. Except for notices posted by the city, state or federal government, no person may attach or cause to be attached any bill, placard, poster or sign upon real or personal property, whether public or private, without first securing permission from the owner thereof. This section shall not be construed as an amendment to or a repeal of any city development code regulation of the use and location of signs. (Ord. 13-11 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013)


8.04.055 Noise disturbances.

A. For the purposes of this section:

1. “Noise disturbance” means any sound which is plainly audible and:

a. Injures or endangers the safety or health of a human;

b. Annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivity; or

c. Endangers or injures personal or real property.

2. “Plainly audible” means where the listener clearly can hear the contents of the sound produced by the noise source. Sounds which may be plainly audible include, but are not limited to, musical rhythms, spoken words, vocal sounds, and engine noises.

B. It is unlawful for any person to create or continue any noise disturbance.

C. Exceptions:

1. Sounds caused by the performance of emergency work, vehicles and/or equipment;

2. Aircraft operations in compliance with applicable federal law or regulations;

3. Sounds created by refuse pickup operations;

4. Sounds created by domestic power tools during the period of 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., provided sound-dissipating devices on tools so equipped are maintained in good repair;

5. Sounds made by emergency warning devices operating continuously for five minutes or less;

6. Sounds caused by business operations in the commercial and industrial zones, provided such sounds result from lawful commercial business activity or manufacturing operations. Noise levels created within industrial zones shall at all times be in compliance with Chapter 2.4 SDC;

7. Commercial construction activities during the period of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Monday through Friday and 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Saturday and Sunday, provided equipment is maintained in good repair and equipped with sound-dissipating devices in good working order;

8. Sounds caused by city maintenance equipment.

D. Whenever the city manager believes that a noise disturbance exists, the city manager shall give written notice to the party(ies) responsible for causing the noise disturbance and demand abatement. Except for the 10-day abatement period specified in SMC 8.04.070(B), all other abatement procedures in this chapter apply.

E. The city manager may issue a permit authorizing activities otherwise prohibited by this section if he/she determines the public health, safety and welfare will not be unreasonably impaired by the activities and a substantial loss or inconvenience would result unless the activities were allowed. The city manager may impose reasonable conditions on the permit including temporal and bonding requirements. (Ord. 13-11 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013)


8.04.057 Vehicle storage and repair in residential neighborhoods.

Every person shall maintain the following things, practices or conditions on any property used as a residence unless the practice or condition occurs as part of a lawfully established nonconforming use:

A. Driveway surfaces must be constructed of concrete, asphalt or some other comparable hard material. “Driveway” means the private vehicular drive connecting a house, garage, carport or other building with the street.

B. Parking areas, other than driveways, must be surfaced with concrete, asphalt of not less than six inches of three-quarter-inch-minus or greater crushed stone. “Parking area” means any portion of the property (other than a driveway) used to park vehicles.

C. No commercial vehicle exceeding 8,000 pounds gross weight, 21 feet in length or eight feet in height shall be parked in a driveway or parking area unless the vehicle is routinely on standby and necessary for use in emergencies.

D. Service, repair or storage of vehicles not owned and registered to a resident of the property is prohibited. Vehicle(s) registered to a resident of the site may be serviced and repaired, including tune-ups, replacement and servicing of oil and other fluids and replacement and adjustment of tires, hoses, belts, filters, fuses, and similar items.

E. No discarded vehicle may be stored on property for a period greater than 72 hours unless such vehicle is fully enclosed in a building, fenced, or screened enclosure makes it hidden from view from the right-of-way and adjoining properties.

F. The city manager may issue a permit authorizing activities otherwise prohibited by this section if he/she determines the public health, safety and welfare will not be unreasonably impaired by the activities and a substantial loss or inconvenience would result unless the activities were allowed. The city manager may impose reasonable conditions on the permit. (Ord. 13-11 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013)


8.04.060 Routine and emergency inspection – Authority.

The city manager may enter any property or building at any reasonable time for the purpose of inspection or enforcing this chapter, except when the city manager has reasonable cause to believe that a nuisance constitutes an immediate and imminent danger to the public health, safety or welfare. The city manager shall obtain the consent of the owner or a warrant before entering private property or building. (Ord. 13-11 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013)


8.04.070 Abatement – General procedures.

A. An investigation may be conducted whenever the city manager receives a complaint that a nuisance exists.

B. Whenever the city manager reasonably believes a nuisance exists, he/she shall give written notice to the property owner and demand abatement thereof within 10 days from the date of the notice or such lesser time as he/she believes appropriate to protect the public health, safety and welfare. The manager shall cause a notice to be posted on the premises or at the site of the nuisance, directing the person responsible to abate the nuisance. The written notice shall contain:

1. A description of the property by street address or otherwise where the nuisance exists;

2. A description of the nuisance;

3. The action necessary to abate the nuisance;

4. The time within which the nuisance is to be abated;

5. A statement that unless the nuisance is timely abated, the city may abate it with the cost thereof being a lien on the property;

6. A statement that the city may file an action in Silverton municipal court seeking an order of abatement if the owner fails to abate the nuisance voluntarily; and

7. A statement that the owner may request a hearing before the Silverton municipal court upon written request to the city manager within 10 days of the date of the notice.

C. An error in the name or address of the person responsible shall not void the notice and in such case the posted notice shall be sufficient.

D. Nothing stated within requires the city or manager to take any action unless it is in the city’s interest to do so.

E. If the property owner fails to abate the nuisance or request a hearing before the Silverton municipal court in 10 days in accordance with subsection (B) of this section, the city manager may, in his or her sole discretion, authorize city abatement of the nuisance, consistent with SMC 8.04.130. (Ord. 13-11 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013)


8.04.080 Abatement – Emergency situations.

If, as a result of an imminent threat to the public health or safety, the city manager believes immediate abatement of the nuisance is appropriate, then he/she may proceed therewith in as expeditious a fashion as is consistent with protection of the public interest. The manager shall then send written notice of reasons for the abatement to the owner. (Ord. 13-11 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013)


8.04.090 Appeal and hearing procedures – General requirements.

A. Any person receiving notice under either SMC 8.04.070(B) or 8.04.080 may make a written request for a hearing to the city manager within seven days of the date of the notice.

B. The manager shall, upon receipt of the hearing request, notify the municipal court and shall, consistent with the provisions of Chapter 8.07 SMC, notify the requestor as to the hearing’s time and place.

C. After the hearing, the court shall issue a copy of the court’s determination providing it to all interested parties.

D. If the court finds a nuisance, the determination shall set a date for abatement by the owner.

E. If the court determines that anything removed under SMC 8.04.070(B) no longer constitutes a nuisance or can be released upon such condition as the municipal court judge may prescribe that will eliminate the nuisance, the person entitled thereto may claim it upon paying the expense incurred in its removal and storage as the case may be.

F. If the municipal court determines that there was a wrongful abatement under SMC 8.04.070(B), the judge may order the city manager to make reasonable restitution. (Ord. 13-11 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013)


8.04.100 Appeal and hearing procedures – Review of decision.

Judicial review of the municipal court shall be taken by way of writ of review (ORS 34.010 et seq. (2013)). (Ord. 13-11 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013)


8.04.110 Persons responsible – Joint liability.

Persons responsible for violation under this chapter shall be jointly and severally liable for any costs incurred by the city in achieving compliance with the code. (Ord. 13-11 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013)


8.04.120 Abatement by owner – Required.

Failure of an owner to abate a nuisance consistent with either this chapter or at the court’s order is an additional violation. (Ord. 13-11 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013)


8.04.130 Abatement by city – Assessment.

A. If an owner fails to abate a nuisance as required under this chapter, the city manager shall, prior to abating anything made a nuisance under this chapter, file an action against the owner pursuant to Chapter 8.07 SMC and obtain an order therefrom authorizing the abatement.

B. If the city abates the nuisance, an accurate record of the abatement costs shall be kept and shall include a surcharge of 40 percent of the cost of the abatement for administrative overhead and the costs associated with bringing the action under Chapter 8.07 SMC. A billing for the amount of the costs shall be forwarded by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to the owner. Payment shall be due to the city within 15 days from the date of the billing. (Ord. 13-11 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013)


8.04.140 Waiver of assessments.

A. Conditions. The city’s abatement costs may be waived if, upon timely application, it appears to the city manager that the following conditions exist:

1. The owner is disabled or over 65 years of age and, if single, had an income during the preceding calendar year from all sources of less than $7,500 or if the head of a family had an income during the preceding calendar year from all sources of less than $10,000; and

2. The owner is living on the property from which the nuisance is to be abated.

B. Waiver of Assessments – Application Procedures. The written waiver application shall be filed with the manager within 10 days of the date of the notice as to the abatement cost amount. The manager may require the owner to supply information as evidence that the applicant qualifies for waiver. A waiver application must be submitted for each abatement cost notice sent the applicant. (Ord. 13-11 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013)


8.04.150 Liens against property.

A. The city manager shall cause an assessment lien to be filed against the concerned property if payment is not made as provided in SMC 8.04.130 or waived under SMC 8.04.140.

B. The lien provided for in subsection (A) of this section shall be given priority over all liens except those for taxes and assessments and shall include interest at the legal rate accruing from the date billing is sent to the owner of the property.

C. The lien provided for in subsection (A) of this section shall be foreclosed in the manner prescribed by state law for the enforcement of liens and collection of assessments. (Ord. 13-11 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013)


8.04.160 Summary abatement.

The procedures provided by this chapter are not exclusive and the city manager may use such other remedies as he/she deems appropriate under the circumstances. (Ord. 13-11 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013)


8.04.170 Violation.

A. The abatement of a nuisance is a remedy and each day a nuisance condition exists is deemed a separate violation of the SNC.

B. Any owner or person found in violation of the SNC may be assessed a civil penalty of no more than $1,000 for each violation which penalties are in addition to and not in lieu of any other remedy available.

C. Any person found in violation of this chapter two times for the same violation within 12 months shall be considered on the third violation a “habitual offender” and shall be fined no less than $1,000 on the third and every subsequent conviction. (Ord. 13-11 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013)


Chapter 8.05 NUISANCE – DOGS

(Recodified to Chapter 6.04 SMC by Ord. 17-13)


Chapter 8.06 CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY

Sections:

8.06.010    Definitions.

8.06.012    Administration.

8.06.015    Chronic nuisance property prohibited.

8.06.020    Procedure.

8.06.025    Remedy.

8.06.030    Commencement of actions – Burden of proof – Defenses – Mitigation of civil penalty.

8.06.035    Closure during pendency of action.

8.06.040    Enforcement of closure order – Costs – Civil penalty.

8.06.045    Assessment lien created.

Prior legislation: Ord. 93-118.


8.06.010 Definitions.

A. “City” means the city of Silverton.

B. “City manager” or “manager” means the Silverton city manager or authorized designee thereof.

C. “Chronic nuisance property” means real property where three or more incidents involving the following conduct occurred during any 30-day period which conduct was investigated and substantiated by a law enforcement agency during that 30-day period or later:

1. Harassment defined in ORS 166.065 (2012);

2. Intimidation defined in ORS 166.155 and 166.165 (2012);

3. Disorderly conduct defined in ORS 166.023 and 166.025 (2012);

4. Discharge of a weapon defined in SMC 9.16.010;

5. Offenses related to controlled substances as defined in ORS 167.203 through 167.262, ORS 475.005 through 475.285 and ORS 475.940 through 475.980 (2012);

6. Prostitution and related offenses as defined in ORS 167.002 through 167.027 (2012);

7. Gambling offenses as defined in ORS 167.108 through 167.167 (2012);

8. Liquor violations defined in Chapter 5.04 SMC and ORS 471.403 through 471.501 (2012);

9. Assault or menacing as defined in ORS 163.160 through 163.185 and ORS 163.190 (2012);

10. Sexual abuse, contributing to the delinquency of a minor or sexual misconduct as defined in state law as defined in ORS 163.415 through 163.445 (2012);

11. Public indecency as defined in ORS 163.465 (2012);

12. Prohibited noise under SMC 8.04.055;

13. Endangering the welfare of a minor as defined in ORS 163.575 (2012); and

14. Reckless endangerment as defined in ORS 163.195 (2012).

D. “Owner” means any person(s) having a legal interest in real property or possession or control of same excluding those persons whose interest is for security only.

E. “Person” means any natural person, association, trust, partnership, corporation or other entity capable of owning or using property.

F. “Permit” means to knowingly suffer, allow or acquiesce by any failure, refusal or neglect to abate.

G. “Person in charge” means an owner-occupant, tenant, lessee or person other than an owner who has possession and/or control of the chronic nuisance property.

H. “Property” means real property located in Silverton improved with a structure designed, intended or used for commercial, industrial or residential purposes (occupied or not) including parking lots, yards, grounds, walks, driveways, porches or steps.

I. “SMC” means Silverton Municipal Code. (Ord. 13-11 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013)


8.06.012 Administration.

The city manager is responsible for the administration and enforcement of this chapter and may adopt rules necessary for the administration and enforcement thereof. (Ord. 13-11 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013)


8.06.015 Chronic nuisance property prohibited.

Any property becoming chronic nuisance property and/or any owner or person in charge thereof who permits property to become or remain chronic nuisance property is in violation of this chapter and subject to the civil penalties and/or closure consistent with the provisions thereof. (Ord. 13-11 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013)


8.06.020 Procedure.

A. When the manager determines property is chronic nuisance property, he/she shall thereupon cause a notice to be prominently posted on the property of that determination and mailed by first-class mail, return receipt requested to the person in charge and/or the owner, if different. If the person in charge is not the owner, a copy of the notice shall be sent by first-class mail return receipt requested to the owner as the same is listed on Marion County’s tax records. Along with the mailed notice, the manager shall include copies of relevant police reports and such other information the city manager relied on to support the determination. Notice may also be sent, at the manager’s option, to other persons who the manager believes may have an interest in the city’s determination.

B. The notice described above shall contain, at a minimum, the following:

1. A description of the real property by street address or otherwise sufficient to identify the same; and

2. A statement that the city manager has determined the property to be chronic nuisance property with a concise description of the condition(s) leading thereto.

C. The manager shall cause a statement setting out the date of notice’s posting and mailing to be prepared. The failure of any person(s) to receive actual notice of the city manager’s determination shall not invalidate or otherwise affect proceedings under this chapter.

D. The manager may authorize the city attorney to commence either an in rem or in personam proceeding seeking a declaration from the court that the property is chronic nuisance property and request that the city be given any remedy allowed by law or equity including any identified in SMC 8.06.025. (Ord. 13-11 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013)


8.06.025 Remedy.

In the event the city commences and successfully prosecutes an action pursuant to the terms of this chapter, the court may order any or all of the following:

A. That the property be closed and secured against all use and occupancy for a period of not less than 30 but not more than 180 days;

B. Impose civil penalties upon the owner and/or person in charge in an amount up to $1,000 per day for each day the person permitted the property to be or remain chronic nuisance property; and

C. Any other remedy deemed by the court to be appropriate under the circumstances. (Ord. 13-11 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013)


8.06.030 Commencement of actions – Burden of proof – Defenses – Mitigation of civil penalty.

A. In any action seeking closure of chronic nuisance property, the city shall have the initial burden of proof to show by a preponderance of evidence that the property is chronic nuisance property.

B. It is a defense that the owner or person in charge at the time in question could not, in the exercise of reasonable care and diligence, determine the property to be chronic nuisance property or could not, in spite of the exercise of reasonable care and diligence, control the conduct. A person raising said defense shall have the burden of proof to show same by a preponderance of the evidence.

C. In establishing the amount of any civil penalty requested, the court may consider any of the following factors:

1. The actions taken by the owner(s) or person(s) in charge to mitigate or correct the conditions at the property;

2. The financial condition of the owner(s) or person(s) in charge;

3. Whether the conditions at the property were repeated or continuous;

4. The magnitude or gravity of the conditions giving rise to the property being determined to be chronic nuisance property;

5. Whether the owner or person in charge cooperated with the city in attempting to abate the conditions;

6. The cost to the city of investigating, correcting or attempting to correct the condition(s); and

7. Any other factor deemed by the court to be relevant. (Ord. 13-11 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013)


8.06.035 Closure during pendency of action.

If the manager determines a chronic nuisance property presents an imminent threat to the public’s health, safety and welfare such that immediate closure thereof is necessary, the city may immediately apply to the court for relief to alleviate that threat in advance of the notification described in SMC 8.06.020. (Ord. 13-11 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013)


8.06.040 Enforcement of closure order – Costs – Civil penalty.

If a court finds property to be chronic nuisance property, it may authorize the city to physically secure the property against use or occupancy in the event the owner(s) or person(s) in charge fail to do so within the time specified by the court. In the event the city is authorized to secure the property, all costs actually incurred by the city for physically securing it shall become an assessment lien thereon and entered in the city’s lien docket. (Ord. 13-11 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013)


8.06.045 Assessment lien created.

A. Liens imposed by this chapter shall be collected as provided under state law for street improvement liens and bear interest at the legal rate thereof from and after 10 days after entry in the city’s lien docket.

B. Any person assessed the costs of closure and/or a civil penalty by the court shall be personally liable for the payment thereof. (Ord. 13-11 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013)


Chapter 8.07 MUNICIPAL COURT PROCEDURES FOR CERTAIN CODE ENFORCEMENT MATTERS

Sections:

8.07.010    Purpose.

8.07.020    Jurisdiction – Limitation.

8.07.030    Definitions.

8.07.040    Authority of the municipal court.

8.07.050    Initiation of code enforcement proceedings.

8.07.060    Setting of hearing.

8.07.070    Notice of hearing.

8.07.080    Notice – Rights – Procedure.

8.07.090    Depositions.

8.07.100    Subpoenas.

8.07.110    Discovery.

8.07.120    Evidence.

8.07.130    Proposed and final orders.

8.07.140    Orders.

8.07.150    Assessments.

8.07.160    Judicial review.

8.07.170    Enforcement.


8.07.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the prompt, effective, and efficient enforcement and adjudication of the Silverton Municipal Code so as to carry out the policies of the city as those policies are embodied elsewhere in this code. (Ord. 13-11 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013)


8.07.020 Jurisdiction – Limitation.

A. The municipal court shall have jurisdiction over all cases submitted in accordance with the procedures and conditions set forth in this chapter; however, the municipal court shall not use the procedures and conditions set out herein for:

1. Any offense(s) both treated by the city and described as “violations” by the terms of ORS 153.008 (2011);

2. Traffic crimes, offenses or violations as defined by ORS 801.545, 801.555, and 801.557 (2011); or

3. Parking offenses.

B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city reserves to itself the right to exercise the authority granted to it pursuant to ORS 30.310 and 30.315 (2011) in situations deemed by the city council, city manager and/or city attorney to be appropriate. (Ord. 13-11 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013)


8.07.030 Definitions.

A. “Council” means the Silverton city council.

B. “Municipal court” means the Silverton municipal court (including judge(s) sitting therein) and/or any other person designated and appointed by the council to act in a judicial or quasi-judicial capacity in a particular proceeding(s) in the municipal court.

C. “Party” means:

1. The city of Silverton;

2. Any person named by the city as a respondent in the complaint; and

3. Any person requesting participation in a hearing as a party or a limited party which the municipal court determines has an interest in the result of the proceeding.

D. “Respondent” means the party(ies) whom the city alleges in the complaint to have committed a violation of city code or to be responsible for such violation. (Ord. 13-11 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013)


8.07.040 Authority of the municipal court.

A. In addition to any procedures set forth elsewhere in the code, code enforcement proceedings shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter.

B. The municipal court may promulgate rules not inconsistent with this chapter concerning procedure and the conduct of hearings under this chapter, and the municipal court is authorized to adopt rules, procedures and forms to implement the provisions of this chapter.

C. The municipal court may order a party found in violation of the city code to comply with the provisions of the code or the applicable rule or regulation within such time as the municipal court may by order allow. The order may require such party to do any and all of the following:

1. Make any and all necessary repairs, modifications, and/or improvements to the structure, real property, or equipment involved;

2. Abate or remove any nuisance;

3. Change the use of the building, structure, or real property involved;

4. Install any equipment necessary to achieve compliance;

5. Pay the city a civil penalty of up to $1,000 per day; or

6. Undertake any other action reasonably necessary to correct the violation or mitigate the effects thereof.

D. In the event any party fails to comply with any provision of an order of the municipal court (except a provision requiring payment of a civil penalty only), the municipal court may authorize the city to undertake such actions as the municipal court may determine are reasonably necessary to correct the violation and/or eliminate or mitigate the effects thereof. The city’s reasonable costs of such actions may be made a lien against the affected real property. (Ord. 13-11 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013)


8.07.050 Initiation of code enforcement proceedings.

A. A proceeding before the municipal court using the procedures set out in this chapter may be initiated only as specifically authorized elsewhere in the code, except for enforcement of violations of SMC Title 18 for which enforcement in municipal court shall be done consistent with this chapter.

B. A proceeding before the municipal court shall be initiated only by the city filing a complaint with the municipal court. A complaint shall contain:

1. The name(s) of the respondent(s);

2. The address or location at which the violation is alleged to have occurred;

3. A short and plain statement of the alleged violations, including a reference to the particular city code provision(s), resolution(s), rule(s) or regulation(s) involved;

4. The nature of the relief sought by the city;

5. The city department(s) initiating the proceeding;

6. The name, title, and signature of the person initiating the proceeding on behalf of the city; and

7. Such other information as the municipal court may require. (Ord. 13-11 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013)


8.07.060 Setting of hearing.

A. Upon filing of a complaint, the municipal court shall specify a time, date and place for a hearing on the complaint and the matters alleged therein.

B. The date set for the hearing shall be not less than 14 nor more than 30 days after the date the complaint is first filed, except:

1. That the municipal court may specify a date for hearing less than 14 days after the complaint is filed where it reasonably appears the alleged violation poses an immediate and serious hazard to the public health, safety, or welfare or to the life, health, safety, welfare, or property of any person; or

2. By agreement of the parties.

C. The municipal court may postpone, continue, set over or reschedule any hearing:

1. With the consent of all parties;

2. On the motion of any party for good cause shown; or

3. On the court’s own motion in the interest of justice. (Ord. 13-11 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013)


8.07.070 Notice of hearing.

A. The city shall give notice of the hearing (together with a copy of the complaint) to the respondent(s) and all other parties not less than five calendar days prior to the date set for hearing except:

1. The municipal court may set a shorter period when it reasonably appears the alleged violation poses an immediate and serious hazard to the public health, safety or welfare or the life, health, safety, welfare or property of any person; or

2. By written agreement of all parties.

B. The notice of hearing shall specify the time, date and place for the hearing.

C. Notice may be given by any method or combination of methods which, under the circumstances, is reasonably likely to apprise the parties of the hearing. Notice may be given by:

1. Personally delivering the notice to the party(ies);

2. Mailing the notice by United States mail, postage prepaid, and addressed to the residence or business address of the party(ies); or

3. Any method authorized by the Oregon Rules of Civil Procedure for service of a summons.

D. If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed given and received three days (Sundays and holidays not included) after the notice is deposited in the United States mail.

E. Notice of the hearing and a copy of the complaint shall also be given to:

1. The tenants, residents and lessees of any building, property, or structure if the city has requested in the complaint the vacation, closure or demolition of the building, property or structure or if the municipal court determines such vacation, closure or demolition is a reasonably possible outcome.

2. Any other person who reasonably appears to have an interest in the property or who reasonably appears may be adversely affected by any determination, decision or order of the municipal court.

3. Any person who has requested such notification.

F. The failure of any person to receive actual notice of the proceeding shall not invalidate the hearing or any determination, decision or order of the municipal court. (Ord. 13-11 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013)


8.07.080 Notice – Rights – Procedure.

A. Prior to the commencement of any contested hearing, the municipal court shall inform each party to the hearing of the following:

1. A general description of the hearing procedure including:

a. The order of presentation of evidence;

b. What kinds of evidence are admissible;

c. Whether any objections may be made to the introduction of evidence and what kind of objections may be made; and

d. An explanation of the burdens of proof or burdens going forward with the evidence.

2. That a record will be made of the proceedings and the manner of making the record and its availability to the parties.

3. The function of the record-keeping with respect to the perpetuation of the testimony and evidence and with respect to any appeal from the determination or the order of the municipal court.

4. Whether an attorney will represent the city in the matters to be heard and whether the parties ordinarily and customarily are represented by attorneys.

5. The function of the municipal court including the effect and authority of the municipal court’s determination.

6. In the event a party is not represented by an attorney, whether the party may, during the course of proceedings, request a recess if at that point the party determines that representation by an attorney is necessary to the protection of the party’s rights.

7. Whether there exists an opportunity for an adjournment at the end if the party then determines that additional evidence should be brought to the attention of the municipal court and the hearing is reopened.

8. Whether there exists an opportunity after the hearing and prior to the final determination or order of the municipal court to review and object to any proposed findings of fact, conclusions of law, summary of evidence, or order of the municipal court.

9. A description of the judicial review process from the determination or order of the municipal court.

B. The information required to be given under subsection (A) of this section may be given in writing or orally prior to commencement of the hearing. The failure to give said notice (or of any item specified) shall not invalidate any determination or order of the municipal court unless on appeal from or review of the determination or order a reviewing court finds that the failure affects the substantive rights of the complaining party. In the event of such a finding, the reviewing court shall remand the matter to the municipal court for a reopening of the hearing, directing the municipal court as to what steps shall be taken to remedy the prejudice to the rights of the complaining party. (Ord. 13-11 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013)


8.07.090 Depositions.

On petition of any party, the municipal court may order that the testimony of any material witness be taken by deposition in the manner prescribed by law for depositions in civil actions. Depositions may also be taken via audio or audio-visual recordings. The petition shall set forth the name and address of the witness whose testimony is desired, a showing of the materiality of the witness’s testimony and a request for an order that the testimony of such witness be taken before an officer named in the petition for that purpose. If the witness resides in this state and is unwilling to appear, the municipal court may issue a subpoena to require the witness to appear for deposition. (Ord. 13-11 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013)


8.07.100 Subpoenas.

A. The municipal court shall issue subpoenas to any party upon showing of general relevance and reasonable scope of the evidence sought. Witnesses appearing pursuant to subpoena, other than the parties or officers or employees of the city, shall receive fees and mileage as prescribed by Oregon law for witnesses in civil actions.

B. If any person fails to comply with any subpoena so issued or any party or witness refuses to testify on any matters on which he may be lawfully interrogated, a judge of the circuit court upon the application of the municipal court (or of a designated representative of the municipal court or of the party requesting the issuance of the subpoena) shall compel obedience by proceedings for contempt as in the case of disobedience of the requirements of subpoena issued from such court or a refusal to testify therein. (Ord. 13-11 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013)


8.07.110 Discovery.

A. On petition of any party and a showing of the general relevance of the documents or things sought, the municipal court may enter an order directing any party to produce and make available to the petitioning party to inspect and copy any documents or to inspect and copy, test, or sample any things which are in the possession of a party.

B. The order directing a party to produce and make available documents or things may require the petitioning party to pay the party producing documents and things that party’s reasonable costs associated with such production.

C. The municipal court shall not enter an order requiring a party to produce any document or thing which is privileged under the rules of privilege recognized by law or which is exempt from disclosure under the Oregon Public Records Law. (Ord. 13-11 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013)


8.07.120 Evidence.

A. Irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. Erroneous rulings on evidence shall not preclude action by the municipal court on the record unless shown to have substantially prejudiced the rights of a party. All other evidence of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their serious affairs shall be admissible. The municipal court shall give effect to the rules of privilege recognized by law.

B. Objections to evidence may be received in written form.

C. All evidence shall be offered and made a part of the record in the case and except for matters stipulated to and, except as provided in subsection (D) of this section, no other factual information or evidence shall be considered in the determination of the case. Documentary evidence may be received in the form of copies of excerpts or by incorporation by reference. The burden of presenting evidence to support a fact or position in a contested case rests on the proponent of the fact or position.

D. Every party shall have the right of cross-examination of witnesses who testify and shall have the right to submit rebuttal evidence.

E. The municipal court may take notice of judicially recognizable facts and the municipal court may take official notice of general, technical or scientific facts within the specialized knowledge of city employees. Parties shall be notified at any time during the proceeding (but, in any event, prior to the final decision) of material officially noticed, and they shall be afforded an opportunity to contest the facts so noticed.

F. No sanction shall be imposed or final order issued except upon consideration of the whole record as supported by, and in accordance with, reliable, probative and substantial evidence. (Ord. 13-11 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013)


8.07.130 Proposed and final orders.

The municipal court shall prepare and mail to all parties a proposed order including findings of fact and conclusions of law. The proposed order shall become final on the date specified in the order, which date shall not be less than 14 days after such mailing, unless the municipal court finds that an existing violation is imminently dangerous to the health, safety or property of any person or of the public, in which case the order may specify an earlier date. (Ord. 13-11 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013)


8.07.140 Orders.

A. Every order adverse to a party to the proceeding shall be in writing or stated in the record and may be accompanied by an opinion.

B. Unless otherwise stipulated, a final order shall be accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions of law. The findings of fact shall consist of a concise statement of the underlying facts supporting the findings as to each contested issue of fact and as to each ultimate fact required to support the municipal court’s order. The findings of fact and conclusions of law may be orally stated on the record by the municipal court and those findings and conclusions incorporated in the written order by reference.

C. The municipal court shall notify the parties to a proceeding of a final order by delivering or mailing a copy of the order and any accompanying findings and conclusions to each party or, if applicable, the party’s attorney of record.

D. Every final order shall include a reference to the fact that the order may only be judicially reviewed pursuant to ORS 34.010 to 34.102 (2011). (Ord. 13-11 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013)


8.07.150 Assessments.

A. Costs incurred by the city for any action(s) authorized by the municipal court shall be an assessment lien upon the property subject to the order.

B. The city shall furnish a statement of such costs on the owner, in person or by United States mail, postage prepaid and addressed to the owner(s) at the owner(s’) residence or place of business, and shall file a copy of such statement with the municipal court with proof of service attached.

1. If no objection to such statement is filed with the municipal court within 15 days from the date of service or mailing, the municipal court shall certify such statement and forward the same to the finance director who shall forthwith enter the same in the city lien docket.

2. If an objection to the statement is received within the 15-day period, the municipal court shall schedule and hold a hearing to consider the objections, and, after the hearing, if the objection is denied, the municipal court shall certify such statement (or so much of it as he determines is correct and proper) and forward it to the finance director who shall enter it into the city lien docket.

C. The municipal court shall certify to the finance director the amount of any civil penalty imposed under any order of the municipal court, and the finance director shall enter it into the city’s lien docket. The lien imposed for the civil penalty shall be in addition to any lien imposed for costs actually incurred by the city.

D. In addition to the lien imposed under this section, any person found by the municipal court to be in violation of the city code shall be personally liable for costs incurred by the city and for any civil penalty imposed by order of the municipal court. (Ord. 13-11 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013)


8.07.160 Judicial review.

Review of the final order of the municipal court by any aggrieved party (including the city) shall be by writ of review as provided in ORS 34.010 through 34.102 (2011) and not otherwise. (Ord. 13-11 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013)


8.07.170 Enforcement.

A. The city may institute appropriate suit or legal action (in law or equity) in any court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of any order of the municipal court, including, but not limited to, a suit or action to obtain judgment for any civil penalty imposed by an order of the municipal court and/or any assessment for costs or penalties.

B. Unless authorized by the municipal court, it is unlawful for any person to knowingly enter or remain in any building or structure that the municipal court has ordered vacated. (Ord. 13-11 § 1 (Exh. A), 2013)


Chapter 8.08 ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE

Sections:

8.08.010    Establishment.

8.08.030    Membership.

8.08.050    Term of office.

8.08.070    Meetings.

8.08.090    Duties.


8.08.010 Establishment.

An environmental management committee (EMC) is hereby established for the city. (Ord. 19-07 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 17-05 § 1, 2017; Ord. 15-09 § 1, 2015)


8.08.030 Membership.

The EMC shall consist of seven voting members to be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. At least one member shall be an elected member of the city council. Five citizen members shall be residents of the city and one citizen member may reside outside city limits. The council and citizen members serve at the pleasure of the city council and may be removed by the council with or without cause. Appointments to fill a vacancy for one of the citizen member positions shall be made for the remainder of the unexpired term of that member. The person or firm granted an exclusive franchise by the solid waste ordinance for providing solid waste services in the city (the hauler) and the public works director shall serve as ex officio (nonvoting) members of the EMC and shall receive notice of meetings. (Ord. 19-07 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 17-05 § 1, 2017; Ord. 15-09 § 1, 2015)


8.08.050 Term of office.

The citizen members shall be appointed for a term of three years. The initial terms of any citizen member will be staggered. (Ord. 19-07 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 17-05 § 1, 2017; Ord. 15-09 § 1, 2015)


8.08.070 Meetings.

A majority of the members of the EMC shall constitute a quorum. The EMC will not have regularly scheduled meetings and will only meet as necessary to handle matters referred to it by the city council, the public works director, or the city manager. At its first meeting, the EMC shall select a chair and a vice chair. Any member of the committee is eligible to serve as either the chair or the vice chair. At its first meeting after the beginning of each new calendar year, the election of a chair and vice chair for that calendar year will be the first order of business. The chair, and in the chair’s absence, the vice chair shall preside over all meetings. All meetings of the EMC shall be held in compliance with the Oregon Public Meetings Law. (Ord. 19-07 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 17-05 § 1, 2017; Ord. 15-09 § 1, 2015)


8.08.090 Duties.

The EMC is an advisory committee and does not have any policy making authority. It shall perform the following duties when requested to do so by the city council, public works director, or the city manager:

A. Develop and recommend to the council strategies, informing the public, and advising the city council on fulfilling the public policies set out in the solid waste ordinance.

B. Recommend to the city council strategies for promoting and developing recycling, waste reduction and reuse.

C. Make recommendations to the city council on any rate adjustment or service level adjustment requested by the hauler.

D. Advise the city council on environmental and health issues.

E. Advise the city council on sustainability issues and practices with regard to solid waste, building maintenance and construction, energy and water conservation, and green purchasing guidelines.

F. When delegated to do so by the city council, hear complaints about the hauler’s services under its exclusive franchise. Any other similar matter or issue referred to the EMC by the city council. (Ord. 19-07 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 17-05 § 1, 2017; Ord. 15-09 § 1, 2015)


Chapter 8.12 PROHIBITED SOLICITATION

Sections:

8.12.010    Definitions.

8.12.020    Prohibited solicitation.

8.12.030    Violation.

8.12.040    Severance.


8.12.010 Definitions.

A. “Abusive solicitation” means intentionally, recklessly or knowingly, with the effect of either placing the solicited person in reasonable apprehension of imminent physical harm, or with the effect of provoking or likely to provoke an imminent violent or disorderly response from the person being solicited:

1. Continuing to solicit once the person being solicited has declined the request;

2. Blocking or impeding the passage of the person solicited;

3. Following the person solicited by proceeding behind, ahead or alongside of him or her after the person solicited has declined the request;

4. Touching the solicited person without the solicited person’s consent; or

5. Using words, gestures, and/or actions which are offensive or threatening.

B. “Solicitation” means an in-person request made to obtain an immediate donation of money or other item of value. (Ord. 17-11 § 1 (Exh. A), 2017)


8.12.020 Prohibited solicitation.

No person shall engage in abusive solicitation as defined in this section. (Ord. 17-11 § 1 (Exh. A), 2017)


8.12.030 Violation.

Any person found violating this chapter shall be guilty of committing a violation punishable by the general penalty under SMC 1.08.010. (Ord. 17-11 § 1 (Exh. A), 2017)


8.12.040 Severance.

If any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter is held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, it shall in no way affect the validity of any remaining portions of this chapter. (Ord. 17-11 § 1 (Exh. A), 2017)


Chapter 8.15 PROHIBITED PUBLIC ACTS

Sections:

8.15.010    Definitions.

8.15.020    Public acts.

8.15.030    Violation.

8.15.040    Severance.


8.15.010 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter:

A. “Public place” means premises, whether publicly or privately owned, that are open and available to the general public, in addition to streets, sidewalks, paths, trails, parks, squares, lots and grounds. If premises are privately owned, then they are a “public place” during the hours open to the general public. (Ord. 17-12 § 1 (Exh. A), 2017)


8.15.020 Public acts.

A. No person may knowingly perform while in a public place:

1. An act of open urination or defecation except in toilets provided for that purpose.

B. This prohibition does not extend to:

1. People who are undergoing a bona fide medical emergency supported by medical documentation. (Ord. 17-12 § 1 (Exh. A), 2017)


8.15.030 Violation.

Any person found violating this chapter shall be guilty of committing a violation punishable by the general penalty under SMC 1.08.010. (Ord. 17-12 § 1 (Exh. A), 2017)


8.15.040 Severance.

If any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter is held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, it shall in no way affect the validity of any remaining portions of this chapter. (Ord. 17-12 § 1 (Exh. A), 2017)


Title 9 CRIMINAL CODE

Chapters:

9.04    Criminal Statutes Adopted

9.08    Offenses Against Public Peace

9.12    Curfew for Minors

9.16    Weapons

9.20    Alarm System Control

9.24    Parental Responsibility Law

9.30    Inventory Searches of Impounded Vehicles


Chapter 9.04 CRIMINAL STATUTES ADOPTED

Sections:

9.04.010    State Criminal Code adopted – Exceptions.


9.04.010 State Criminal Code adopted – Exceptions.

The 2003 Criminal Code of the state of Oregon, as printed and published by the Legislative Counsel Committee, including selective laws relating to juvenile court proceedings, alcohol, liquors and controlled substances, including the penalties therefor, is here adopted in its entirety, save and except any sections thereof pertaining to felonies. In addition, any amendments and/or additions to the Criminal Code adopted and made laws by the 2001 or 2003 Legislature are also adopted and made a part of the ordinance codified in this section. (Ord. 03-120 § 1, 2003; Ord. 01-120 § 1, 2001; Ord. 99-117 § 1, 1999; Ord. 97-120 § 1, 1997; Ord. 95-121 § 1, 1995; Ord. 94-108 § 1, 1994; Ord. 91-116 § 1, 1992; Ord. 859 § 1, 1987)


Chapter 9.08 OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE

Sections:

9.08.010    Persons and groups obstructing public ways.

9.08.020    Cellar doors located in sidewalks.

9.08.030    Riding or tying animals in public ways.


9.08.010 Persons and groups obstructing public ways.

A. No person or group of persons shall so gather or stand upon any sidewalk or public pathway as to prevent, impede or obstruct the free passage of pedestrian traffic.

B. No person shall obstruct any entrance to any building or loiter unnecessarily about or near any entrance, stairway or hall leading to any building.

C. No person or persons shall fail or refuse to disperse when lawfully ordered to do so by any police officer. (Ord. 467 § 16(1) – (3), 1962)


9.08.020 Cellar doors located in sidewalks.

No person shall keep or leave open any cellar door or grating of any kind located in or upon any sidewalk, except when the same is necessarily open during the immediate use thereof, and when being used such opening shall be properly guarded and protected. (Ord. 467 § 16(4), 1962)


9.08.030 Riding or tying animals in public ways.

No person, except as may be the subject of a parade permit authorized by the city, shall lead, ride, tie or fasten any goat, cow, sheep, swine or similar animal in such a manner as to permit it to remain on or go along any parking strip, sidewalk area, or public pathway. (Ord. 99-109 § 1, 1999; Ord. 467 § 16(5), 1962)


Chapter 9.12 CURFEW FOR MINORS

Sections:

9.12.010    Hours of curfew.

9.12.020    Violation by parent or custodian.

9.12.030    Taking child into custody.

9.12.040    Exemption.

9.12.050    Permit for expressive activity.

9.12.060    Severability clause.


9.12.010 Hours of curfew.

A. No minor under the age of 16 years shall be in or upon any street, highway, park, alley, or other public place between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following morning unless such a minor is:

1. Accompanied by a parent, guardian or other person 21 years of age or over and authorized by the parent or by law to have care and custody of the minor; or

2. Engaged is a lawful pursuit or activity which requires the presence of the child, or there exists a reasonable necessity for the presence of the child during the hours specified in this section; or

3. Such a child is emancipated pursuant to ORS 419B.550 and 419B.558.

B. No minor who has attained the age of 16 years, but is under the age of 18 years, shall be in or upon any street, highway, park, alley, or other public place between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m., the following morning, unless such minor is:

1. Accompanied by a parent, guardian or other person 21 years of age or over and authorized by the parent or by law to have care and custody of the minor; or

2. Engaged in a lawful pursuit or activity which required the presence of the child, or there exists a reasonable necessity for the presence of the child during the hours specified in this section; or

3. Such child is emancipated pursuant to ORS 419B.550 and 419B.558.

Violation of this section is a civil infraction. (Ord. 98-120, 1998)


9.12.020 Violation by parent or custodian.

Any parent, guardian or person having the care and custody of any child under the age of 18 years shall not knowingly allow such minor to be in or upon any street, highway, park, alley or other public place between the hours specified in SMC 9.12.010, except as otherwise provided in that section. Violation of this section is a civil infraction. (Ord. 98-120, 1998)


9.12.030 Taking child into custody.

Any police officer is authorized to take into custody a minor violating any provisions of SMC 9.12.010 as provided in ORS 419C.080, 419C.085 and 419C.088. The officer shall use due diligence to find the parents or guardian or person having custody of the minor and shall release the minor to the parent, guardian, juvenile authorities or other authorized custodian. (Ord. 98-120, 1998)


9.12.040 Exemption.

It shall be a defense to any prosecution under this chapter if the court finds that a minor was in violation at such time as the minor has received a permit for expressive activity from the city. (Ord. 98-120, 1998)


9.12.050 Permit for expressive activity.

A minor who desires to engage in “expressive activity” at such times as would otherwise be prohibited by the “curfew” ordinance may do so by first obtaining a permit from the city. The application for the permit shall describe the type of expressive activity. It shall also describe the time(s) when such activity shall be undertaken. A permit shall be obtained at least 48 hours prior to the activity. The application for the permit shall be signed by the minor, and countersigned by the minor’s parents/guardians. There shall be no fee for the permit. As used in this chapter, the term “expressive activity” shall include those forms of religious, associational, or speech activity that are beyond the ability of the city to prohibit by virtue of the federal and state constitutions. This definition shall not be constructed to expand the scope of the term “expressive activity.” The permit shall be issued for a period not to exceed 24 hours. (Ord. 98-120, 1998)


9.12.060 Severability clause.

Should any section or portion of this chapter be held unlawful and unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall apply only to the specific section, or portion thereof, directly specified in the decision. All other sections or portions of this chapter shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 98-120, 1998)


Chapter 9.16 WEAPONS

Sections:

9.16.010    Discharging guns or other weapons prohibited – Exceptions.


9.16.010 Discharging guns or other weapons prohibited – Exceptions.

A. No person other than a federal officer or peace officer as those terms are defined in ORS 133.005 shall fire or otherwise discharge any firearm or other weapon employing a spring, air, bow, sling, explosion, jet or rocket force to propel a projectile within the city limits.

B. The prohibition set out in subsection (A) of this section does not apply to:

1. Any person in the defense or protection of their property, person or third person(s);

2. Activities taking place at any licensed target practice facility; or

3. At any federally licensed gunsmith facility when test firing firearms on the premises into a bullet recovery system.

C. Nothing stated in this section relieves a person from otherwise fully complying with any and all applicable federal, state or local laws or regulations. (Ord. 13-01 § 1, 2013; Ord. 467 § 10, 1962)


Chapter 9.20 ALARM SYSTEM CONTROL

Sections:

9.20.010    Title for citation.

9.20.020    Definitions.

9.20.030    User instructions.

9.20.040    Automatic dialing device – Certain interconnection prohibited.

9.20.050    False alarms, hearing and determination.

9.20.060    Confidentiality – Statistics.

9.20.070    Allocation of revenues.

9.20.080    Duty to maintain alarm system.


9.20.010 Title for citation.

This chapter shall be known as the alarm system control ordinance. (Ord. 92-115 § 1, 1992)


9.20.020 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter the following definitions apply:

“Alarm business” means a person, firm, partnership, corporation, association or other legal entity, engaged in the selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing of any alarm system in or on any building, structure, facility or portion thereof.

“Alarm system” means an assembly or equipment, mechanical or electrical, or both, designed and used to signal the occurrence of an illegal or unauthorized entry or attempted entry or other illegal activity on the premises of the alarm user, which requires or solicits urgent attention and to which the police are expected to respond.

“Alarm user” means a person, firm, partnership, corporation, association or other legal entity in control of a building, structure, facility or portion thereof within the city wherein an alarm system is used.

“Automatic dialing device” means a device which is interconnected to a telephone line and is programmed to select a predetermined telephone number and to transmit by voice message or code signal an emergency message indicating a need for emergency response. An automatic dialing device is an alarm system.

“Excessive false alarm” means a false alarm which occurs following two previous false alarms within a 12-month period.

“False alarm” means a signal or activation by an alarm system which elicits a response by the police department when a situation requiring a response by the police does not in fact exist. False alarms do not include an alarm signal by an alarm system which is caused by violent and extraordinary conditions of nature or other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably anticipated or subject to control by the alarm business operator or the alarm user.

“Governmental political unit” means any tax-supported public agency.

“Interconnect” means to connect an alarm system including an automatic dialing device to a telephone line either directly or through a mechanical device that utilizes a telephone for the purpose of using the telephone line to transmit a message upon the activation of the alarm system.

“Municipal court” means the Silverton municipal court.

“Monitoring center” means a facility used to receive emergency and general information from an alarm user and to direct an emergency response.

“Police chief” means the police chief of Silverton, Oregon or his designee.

“Police department” means the Silverton police department. (Ord. 92-115 § 2, 1992)


9.20.030 User instructions.

Every alarm business, which operates as such on behalf of alarm users within the city, shall furnish the user with instructions which enable the user to operate the alarm system properly without false alarms and to obtain service for the alarm system. (Ord. 92-115 § 3, 1992)


9.20.040 Automatic dialing device – Certain interconnection prohibited.

A. It is unlawful for any person to program an automatic dialing device to select any 911 line, capable of signalling a need for police response; and it is unlawful for an alarm user to fail to disconnect or reprogram an automatic dialing device which is programmed to select any 911 line upon receipt of notice from the police chief, directing that such disconnection or reprogramming occur.

B. The city and other governmental providers of emergency and critical municipal services, including but not limited to water, sewer, and streets, are exempt from the provisions of this section. (Ord. 92-115 § 4, 1992)


9.20.050 False alarms, hearing and determination.

A. An alarm user, whose alarm system has two or more false alarms within a 12-month period, shall be subject to a charge for excessive false alarms. Excessive false alarm charges shall be paid by the alarm user notwithstanding an agreement or claim of liability which holds an alarm business responsible for such charges. Excessive false alarm charges shall be established by resolution in an amount designed to encourage correction in an alarm system or in the operation of an alarm system, to discourage false alarms and to reimburse the city for the use of its policy resources.

B. After each of the first two false alarms during a year, the police chief shall send by regular mail a notice of false alarm to the alarm user and the alarm business. The notice shall advise the alarm user and the alarm business of the date and time of the false alarm and the specific number of false alarms recorded by the coordinator for the alarm system during the current year. The notice shall also advise that upon the occurrence of a third false alarm during the year, the alarm user will be charged a fee for each excessive false alarm.

C. If the police department responds to a second false alarm during the year, the police chief shall forward a notice by regular mail to the alarm business stating that the police department has responded to two false alarms at the address where the alarm system is located. This notice shall also advise that the occurrence of any additional false alarms at the address where the alarm system is located during the year will result in a fee to the user for excessive false alarms.

D. The police chief shall prescribe the form of the notice to be used in this section. For purposes of determining which form of mailing and notice to use, any alleged false alarm, which is disputed as provided in this section and for which a final determination has not been made, shall be treated as having occurred. The police chief shall insure that adequate records of notices being sent to alarm users and alarm businesses are maintained by the police department. Failure of a person to receive a notice shall not invalidate any proceeding in connection with a false alarm or in the imposition of additional charges.

E. An alarm user or alarm business who is aggrieved by the determination that a particular false alarm has occurred may request a hearing. The request shall be made in writing and filed with the police chief and the municipal court within 10 days of the date on which the alarm user is sent the notification of false alarm for which a hearing is requested. Unless a request for a hearing is made in accordance with this section, an alarm user shall have waived any right to challenge the decision whether a particular false alarm occurred and the false alarm shall thereafter be treated as having occurred on the date and time alleged. If a hearing is requested in accordance with this subsection, the municipal court shall notify by regular mail the person requesting the hearing of the time and place of the hearing.

F. Every hearing to determine whether a false alarm has occurred shall be held before the municipal court without a jury. The court may in the interest of justice consolidate hearings which involve the same alarm user or alarm system and false alarms within the same year. The person requesting the hearing may be represented by counsel, but counsel shall not be provided at public expense. If counsel is to appear, written notice shall be provided to the municipal court and police chief not less than five business days prior to the hearing date. The police chief, or the city’s designated representative, and the person requesting the hearing shall have the right to present written and oral evidence. Oral testimony shall be taken only on oath or affirmation and shall be subject to the right of cross-examination. (Ord. 92-115 § 5, 1992)


9.20.060 Confidentiality – Statistics.

A. Except as otherwise required by law, if an alarm user requests that information submitted by the user as part of an application to be kept in confidence, such information shall be held in confidence and shall be deemed a public record exempt from disclosure under Oregon law. The police department shall be responsible for maintenance of records created under this chapter.

B. Notwithstanding the requirements of subsection A of this section the police department shall develop and maintain statistics for purposes of evaluating alarm systems. (Ord. 92-115 § 6, 1992)


9.20.070 Allocation of revenues.

All fees and charges collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in the police budget of the general fund in the city, and are nonrefundable. (Ord. 92-115 § 7, 1992)


9.20.080 Duty to maintain alarm system.

A. It is the duty of an alarm user to maintain its alarm system in good operating condition and free of false alarms.

B. An alarm user whose alarm system generates three or more false alarms within a year violates this chapter. (Ord. 92-115 § 8, 1992)


Chapter 9.24 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY LAW

Sections:

9.24.010    Failing to supervise a minor.

9.24.020    Parental responsibility.

9.24.030    Additions to fines and penalties.

9.24.040    Under 11 years old.

9.24.050    First time offense.

9.24.060    Maximum fine for failure.


9.24.010 Failing to supervise a minor.

A person commits the offense of failing to supervise a minor if: the person is the parent, legal guardian or person with legal responsibility for the safety and welfare of a child under 18 years of age and the child has been found on private property or premises open to the public in violation of any provision of Silverton Municipal Code. (Ord. 94-132 § 1, 1994)


9.24.020 Parental responsibility.

It shall be a defense to the offense of failure to supervise a minor if the child’s violation of the code occurred in the presence of the person. It shall be a defense to the offense of failure to supervise a minor if the violation occurred on private property of the person. It shall be a further affirmative defense that the person:

A. Took reasonable steps to control the conduct of the child at the time the person is alleged to have failed to supervise; or

B. Reported the act to the appropriate authorities. (Ord. 95-117 § 1, 1995; Ord. 94-132 § 2, 1994)


9.24.030 Additions to fines and penalties.

In addition to any fine or penalty imposed pursuant to this chapter, the court may order the person to pay any restitution to a victim of the minor’s conduct. The amount of restitution ordered pursuant to this chapter shall not exceed $2,500. (Ord. 94-132 § 3, 1994)


9.24.040 Under 11 years old.

If a child in violation of SMC 9.24.010 is 11 years of age or younger, any citation issued shall be issued to the parent, legal guardian or person with legal responsibility for the safety and welfare of the child for violation of this chapter, rather than to the child for violation of any provision of the Silverton Municipal Code. (Ord. 94-132 § 4, 1994)


9.24.050 First time offense.

The first time a person is convicted of an offense described in SMC 9.24.010, the person shall not be required to pay a fine exceeding $100.00 if the person successfully participates and completes a parent effectiveness program to the satisfaction of the court. (Ord. 94-132 § 5, 1994)


9.24.060 Maximum fine for failure.

The offense described in this chapter of failure to supervise a minor is a Class A infraction punishable by a maximum fine of $1,000. (Ord. 94-132 § 6, 1994)


Chapter 9.30 INVENTORY SEARCHES OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLES

Sections:

9.30.010    Purpose.

9.30.020    Administrative program.

9.30.030    Inventory search procedure.


9.30.010 Purpose.

The purpose and intent of this chapter is to protect personal property which may be located in an impounded vehicle; to prevent or reduce the assertion of false claims against the city for lost or stolen property or damage to a vehicle; and to reduce or eliminate the danger to police officers and others which may result from dangerous or hazardous materials located in a vehicle. (Ord. 98-116, 1998)


9.30.020 Administrative program.

In order to meet the requirements of law, it is necessary to adopt an administrative program for inventory searches which is designed and systematically administered so that the inventory involves no exercise of discretion by the person conducting the inventory. (Ord. 98-116, 1998)


9.30.030 Inventory search procedure.

All impounded vehicles shall be inventoried by a police officer as soon as reasonably possible after the impoundment. The officer conducting the inventory shall make a written record of the condition of the vehicle and any personal property located therein, including all self-contained items. Locked containers shall be inventoried as a singular item and shall not be forced open unless special circumstances exist which justify the opening of the container under the policy reasons set forth above. The glove box, trunk, and all other enclosed compartments of the vehicle shall be inspected, provided they are unlocked or accessible by use of a key. Objects found with the vehicle shall be scrutinized only to the extent necessary to identify them. Once the inventory is completed, the vehicle shall be secured in a safe place. (Ord. 98-116, 1998)


Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC

Chapters:

10.04    Vehicle Code and Traffic Regulations

10.08    Stopping, Standing and Parking

10.20    Trucks and Heavy Equipment

10.24    Abandoned Vehicles

10.26    Recreational Vehicles

10.30    Parking Regulations

10.32    Truck Brakes


Chapter 10.04 VEHICLE CODE AND TRAFFIC REGULATIONS

Sections:

10.04.010    Document adopted by reference.

10.04.020    Definitions.

10.04.030    Traffic controls designated by council.

10.04.040    Local traffic regulations authorized when.

10.04.050    Existing signs and regulations.

10.04.060    Signs and markings prohibited when.

10.04.210    Pedestrians to use sidewalks.

10.04.220    Parades and processions – Permit requirements.

10.04.230    Funeral processions.

10.04.240    Processions – Driver procedures.

10.04.250    Processions – Driving through prohibited.

10.04.260    Trucks prohibited on certain streets.

10.04.270    Oversize vehicle permit requirements.

10.04.280    Damaging sidewalks and curbs.

10.04.290    Obstructing streets or signs.

10.04.300    Accidents – Removal of debris.

10.04.310    Skateboards, rollerskates and toy vehicles.

10.04.320    Bicycles – Rules of operation – Responsibility.

10.04.330    Bicycles – Equipment.

10.04.340    Bicycles – Rental agency requirements.

10.04.350    Bicycles – Method of operation.

10.04.360    Bicycles – Riding on streets and bicycle paths.

10.04.370    Bicycles – Carrying articles.

10.04.380    Bicycles – Speed.

10.04.390    Bicycles – Racing prohibited except by special permit.

10.04.400    Bicycles – Parking.

10.04.410    Clinging to vehicles prohibited.

10.04.420    Bicycles, skateboards, scooters – On downtown sidewalks, in designated parks, and in Town Square Park.

10.04.430    Bicycles, skateboards, scooters – Confiscation when.

10.04.431    Police officer taking custody under ordinance.

10.04.432    Validity of removal and custody – Hearing to contest validity of removal and custody.

10.04.433    Exemption for device held for investigation.

10.04.434    Sale of device not reclaimed.

10.04.450    Traffic violations – Impoundment and disposal conditions.


10.04.010 Document adopted by reference.

A. State Motor Vehicle Code Adopted – Exceptions. The 2003 Motor Vehicle Code of the State of Oregon, as printed and published by the Legislative Counsel Committee, including selective laws relating to infraction procedures, administrative procedures for state agencies, and motor vehicle and aircraft fuel taxes, including the penalties therefor, is hereby adopted in its entirety, save and except any sections thereof pertaining to felonies. In addition, any amendments and/or additions to the Vehicle Code adopted and made laws by the 2001 and 2003 Legislature are also adopted and made a part of the ordinance codified in this section. (Ord. 03-121 § 1, 2003; Ord. 01-121 § 1, 2001; Ord. 99-118 § 1, 1999; Ord. 97-119 § 1, 1997)


10.04.020 Definitions.

In addition to those definitions contained in the adopted sections of the Motor Vehicle Laws of Oregon, the following words or phrases, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, shall mean:

A. “Alley” means a narrow street through the interior of a block.

B. “Bicycle” means every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having two tandem wheels either of which is over 15 inches in diameter.

C. “Bus stand” means a fixed area in the roadway adjacent to the curb to be occupied exclusively by buses for layover in operating schedules or waiting for passengers.

D. “City manager” means the city manager or the city manager’s representative.

E. “Curb” means the extreme edge of the roadway.

F. “Holidays,” where used in this chapter or on signs or other devices erected in accordance with this chapter, means Sundays and legal holidays.

G. “Loading zone” means a space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of materials or freight.

H. “Park” or “parking” means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when a vehicle is temporarily standing for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading.

I. “Parkway” means that portion of a street not used as a roadway or as a sidewalk.

J. “Passenger loading zone” means a loading zone reserved only for the loading or unloading of passengers and their luggage.

K. “Pedestrian” means any person afoot.

L. “Stop” means complete cessation of movement.

M. “Taxicab stand” means a fixed area in the roadway adjacent to the curb set aside for taxicabs to stand or wait for passengers.

N. “Traffic lane” means that portion of the roadway used for the movement of a single line of vehicles. (Ord. 860 § 2, 1987)


10.04.030 Traffic controls designated by council.

A. After approval by the State Highway Commission, where such approval is required by the Motor Vehicle Laws of Oregon and for the best use of the streets in the public interest, the council shall designate by resolution the following traffic controls which shall become effective upon installation of appropriate traffic signs, signals, markings or devices:

1. Parking meter zones, denomination of coins for deposit in parking meters, the parking time permitted for the deposit of the coin, and the hours during which the coin is required;

2. Through streets;

3. One-way streets;

4. Truck routes;

5. Streets where trucks, machinery or any other large or heavy vehicles exceeding specified weights are prohibited, except for delivering or picking up materials or merchandise, but then only by entering such streets at the intersection nearest the destination of the vehicle and leaving by the shortest route.

B. Except when contrary to state law, if it appears that public safety or welfare does not require the installation or maintenance of a traffic sign, signal, marking or device, or will be better served by the removal or alteration thereof, the council may, by resolution, forbid the installation or order the removal or alteration of any traffic sign, signal, marking or device that is proposed or installed under SMC 10.04.040. Such traffic controls shall become inoperative only when removed or altered. (Ord. 860 § 3, 1987)


10.04.040 Local traffic regulations authorized when.

A. The city manager is authorized to provide appropriate and reasonable regulation of the classes of traffic signs, signals, markings and devices for the streets, sidewalks and other public property of the city as are found appropriate for public safety, convenience and welfare. Subject to approval by the State Highway Commission where such approval is required by the Motor Vehicle Laws of Oregon, the city manager shall base his or her determination only upon:

1. Traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations;

2. Standards, limitations and rules promulgated by the State Highway Commission; and

3. Other recognized traffic-control standards.

B. The city manager may establish, remove or alter the following classes of traffic controls:

1. Street areas and city-owned or city-leased land upon which parking may be entirely prohibited or prohibited during certain hours, and the angle of such parking;

2. Parking meters, with the zone provided for parking meters;

3. The location and the time of operation of traffic-control signals;

4. Bus stops, bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other passenger common carrier vehicles;

5. The location of passenger loading zones for use in connection with a hotel, auditorium, theater, church, school or public building;

6. Loading zones for commercial purposes;

7. Intersections or areas where drivers of vehicles shall not make right, left or U-turns, and the time when the prohibition applies;

8. Crosswalks, safety zones, parking spaces, traffic lanes and other symbols;

9. Traffic-control signs;

10. All other signs, signals, markings and devices required to implement traffic and parking controls enacted by the council or required by state law or regulations.

C. The city manager may provide for experimental or emergency traffic regulation of a temporary nature that shall not remain in effect more than 30 days. No experimental or emergency regulation is effective until adequate traffic signs, signals, markings or devices are erected clearly indicating the regulation.

D. The city manager shall not remove or alter a traffic sign, signal, marking or device if that act would be contrary to state law or ordinance. If a traffic sign, signal, marking or device is installed under authority of a resolution of the council, the council shall first approve any change or alteration by the city manager. (Ord. 860 § 4, 1987)


10.04.050 Existing signs and regulations.

All official traffic signs and signals existing on October 6, 1987, the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, such as stop signs, caution signs, slow signs, no U-turn signs, signs designating time limits for parking or prohibiting parking, lines painted or marked on street or curb designating parking areas or spaces, markers designating loading zones, parking meters, and all other official traffic signs or signals erected, installed or painted for the purpose of directing, controlling and regulating traffic, are hereby approved. (Ord. 860 § 45, 1987)


10.04.060 Signs and markings prohibited when.

Except as provided by this chapter, no person shall letter, mark or paint in any manner any letters, marks or signs on any sidewalk, curb or other portion of any street, or post anything designed or intended to prohibit or restrict parking on any street. (Ord. 860 § 5, 1987)


10.04.210 Pedestrians to use sidewalks.

Pedestrians shall not use any roadway for travel when abutting sidewalks are available. (Ord. 860 § 20, 1987)


10.04.220 Parades and processions – Permit requirements.

A. No procession or parade, except a funeral procession, the forces of the United States armed forces and the military forces of this state, shall occupy, march or proceed along any street except in accordance with a permit issued by the chief of police. Such permit may be granted where it is found that such parade is not to be held for any unlawful purpose and will not in any manner tend to be a breach of the peace, cause damage, or unreasonably interfere with the public use of the streets, or the peace and quiet of the inhabitants of the city.

B. Requests for permits will be in writing to the chief of police, and will indicate date, time, route, purpose and makeup of the parade. The request will also identify the group or organization responsible for the parade, and state the name of the individual responsible for parade arrangements. Requests will be submitted as early as possible but not later than 24 hours prior to the parade date.

C. While permits will not be issued for funerals or military units of the federal or state forces, it is required that the chief of police be notified as early as possible, but not later than 24 hours prior to the parade or funeral date, except when emergency conditions preclude such notice, in which case notice will be made as soon as possible prior to the parade or funeral. (Ord. 860 § 21, 1987)


10.04.230 Funeral processions.

Vehicles in a funeral procession may be escorted by at least one person authorized by the chief of police to direct traffic for such purposes, and shall follow routes established by the chief of police. (Ord. 860 § 22, 1987)


10.04.240 Processions – Driver procedures.

Except when approaching a left turn, each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive along the right-hand traffic lane, and shall follow the vehicle ahead as closely as is practical and safe. (Ord. 860 § 23, 1987)


10.04.250 Processions – Driving through prohibited.

No driver of a vehicle shall cross through a procession except where traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals, or when so directed by a police officer. This provision shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles. (Ord. 860 § 24, 1987)


10.04.260 Trucks prohibited on certain streets.

When the use of certain streets is prohibited to trucks exceeding a specified weight, no person shall operate a truck on such streets contrary to such prohibition, except for the purpose of delivering or picking up materials or merchandise, but then only by entering such streets at the intersection nearest the destination of the vehicle, and leaving by the shortest route. (Ord. 860 § 26, 1987)


10.04.270 Oversize vehicle permit requirements.

When written application is made therefor, the city manager, in accordance with applicable provisions of the Motor Vehicle Laws of Oregon, may grant permits for the use of the streets by vehicles, combinations of vehicles, or other property, which are prohibited by state law from using the streets because of excessive weight, length or width, and may set out in such permit such conditions, regulations and restrictions as the public interest may require, and which shall be sufficient to prevent injury or damage to streets, sidewalks and all other improvements or private property, and to protect the public. Such permit may be canceled at any time by the city manager upon satisfactory proof that the permittee has violated any of the terms of the permit, or when in the judgment of the city manager the public interest requires cancellation. (Ord. 860 § 27, 1987)


10.04.280 Damaging sidewalks and curbs.

A. The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon or within any sidewalk or parkway area except to cross at a permanent driveway.

B. Any person who damages or causes to be damaged any public improvement within the street by driving a vehicle upon or within any sidewalk or parkway area shall be liable for such damage. (Ord. 860 § 28, 1987)


10.04.290 Obstructing streets or signs.

Except as provided by this chapter or any other ordinance of the city, no person shall place, park, deposit or leave upon any street or other public way, sidewalk or curb, any article or thing or material which in any way prevents, interrupts or obstructs the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or obstructs a driver’s view of traffic or official traffic signs and signals. (Ord. 860 § 29, 1987)


10.04.300 Accidents – Removal of debris.

Any party to a collision or other vehicle accident, or any other person causing glass or other materials or substances likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle to be upon any street in the city shall, as soon as possible, remove or cause to be removed from such street all such glass or other material or substance. (Ord. 860 § 30, 1987)


10.04.310 Skateboards, rollerskates and toy vehicles.

No person upon rollerskates, skateboards, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device, shall go upon any street except to cross at a crosswalk. (Ord. 860 § 25, 1987)


10.04.320 Bicycles – Rules of operation – Responsibility.

A. No parent of any minor child, and no guardian of any minor ward shall authorize or knowingly permit any such minor child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this chapter.

B. Except as otherwise provided herein, every person riding or operating a bicycle upon any street or other public place shall be subject to all the provisions of this chapter and the laws of the state applicable to the drivers of vehicles, except those provisions which by their very nature can have no application. (Ord. 860 § 31, 1987)


10.04.330 Bicycles – Equipment.

A bicycle operated within the city shall be equipped as required by Oregon Revised Statutes, Chapter 815. No bicycle shall be equipped with a siren or whistle. (Ord. 860 § 32, 1987)


10.04.340 Bicycles – Rental agency requirements.

A rental agency shall not rent or offer any bicycle for rent unless the bicycle is equipped as required by the Motor Vehicle Laws of Oregon and this chapter. (Ord. 860 § 33, 1987)


10.04.350 Bicycles – Method of operation.

A. A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than with his or her feet on the pedals, and facing the front of the bicycle.

B. No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped, and no person shall be permitted to operate a bicycle with a passenger in front of the operator. (Ord. 860 § 34, 1987)


10.04.360 Bicycles – Riding on streets and bicycle paths.

A. Every person operating a bicycle upon a street or other public place shall ride as near to the right-hand side of the street as practicable, exercising due care when passing a pedestrian or a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.

B. Persons riding bicycles on a street or other public place shall not ride two abreast. (Ord. 860 § 36, 1987)


10.04.370 Bicycles – Carrying articles.

No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars and in full control of such bicycle. (Ord. 860 § 39, 1987)


10.04.380 Bicycles – Speed.

No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing, but in no event more than the posted speed limit. (Ord. 860 § 37, 1987)


10.04.390 Bicycles – Racing prohibited except by special permit.

Bicycle racing shall be allowed for special events upon application for and approval of a permit to be obtained from the police department. The department shall be authorized to prepare forms for obtaining the permit. (Ord. 98-113 § 1, 1998)


10.04.400 Bicycles – Parking.

No person shall park a bicycle upon a street or sidewalk except in a rack to support it or against a building or at the curb so as not to obstruct pedestrian traffic. (Ord. 860 § 41, 1987)


10.04.410 Clinging to vehicles prohibited.

No person riding any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, rollerskates, sled, skateboard, toy vehicle or any similar device shall attach the same or the rider to any moving vehicle upon the streets. (Ord. 860 § 35, 1987)


10.04.420 Bicycles, skateboards, scooters – On downtown sidewalks, in designated parks, and in Town Square Park.

No person shall ride or operate a bicycle, skateboard, scooter, roller device such as in-line skates, roller skates, roller skis, or similar device upon a sidewalk in the Central Downtown Area. As used in this section, “Central Downtown Area” means the sidewalks on both sides of 1st Street between the north curb line of Lewis Street and south curb line of Park Street, the sidewalks on the east side of Water Street between the north curb line of Lewis Street and the south curb line of Park Street, the sidewalks on the west side of Water Street between the south curb line of Jersey Street and the south curb line of Park Street, the sidewalks on both sides of High Street, Oak Street, and E Main Street between Water Street and 1st Street, the sidewalk on the south side of Park Street between Water Street and 1st Street, and the sidewalk on the north side of Lewis Street between Water Street and 1st Street. Furthermore, this prohibition shall also apply to the sidewalks on both sides of the West Main Street bridge, to the grass, railings, picnic tables, and paths in Town Square Park, to the grass, railings, picnic tables, and paths in Coolidge-McClaine Park, as well as to any area in city parks or on other city property where posted by the city manager. This prohibition does not apply to the parking lot in Town Square Park, to the Old Mill Park area between the Library and the swimming pool, or to the foot bridge and the extension of Coolidge Street adjacent to Coolidge-McClaine Park. During special events, for which a permit has been issued by the city, the city manager may temporarily suspend the right to ride such devices in places where it would otherwise be legal to ride them during the event on any property or street included in the permit for the event. Any person riding such devices upon sidewalks outside the restricted areas in this section shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian. (Ord. 16-12 § 1, 2016; Ord. 08-09 § 1, 2008; Ord. 98-111, 1998; Ord. 95-119 § 1, 1995; Ord. 860 § 40, 1987)


10.04.430 Bicycles, skateboards, scooters – Confiscation when.

Any device described in SMC 10.04.420, which is used to violate SMC 10.04.420, may be taken into custody for a period not to exceed 30 days for the first offense, 60 days for any second offense, 90 days for any third offense, and 180 days for any subsequent offense. (Ord. 95-119 § 2, 1995; Ord. 860 § 43, 1987)


10.04.431 Police officer taking custody under ordinance.

If a police officer proposes to take custody of a device under ORS 819.110, the officer shall provide written notice to the person in possession of the device and any persons claiming ownership of such device and shall provide an explanation of procedures available for obtaining a hearing under SMC 10.04.432. Except as otherwise provided hereunder, notice required under this section shall comply with all of the following:

A. Notice shall be given by the following methods:

1. By personally providing a notice concerning the device to the person in possession of the device with the required information.

2. If the person in possession of the device at the time of the taking does not claim to be the owner of the device, the officer shall transmit a notice by first class within not more than three days after taking the device into custody, with the required information to the known owners at the address as shown by the records of the police department, or by the address given by the person in possession. The three-day period under this subsection does not include holidays, Saturdays or Sundays.

B. Notice shall state all of the following:

1. That the device was subject to being taken into custody and removed by the appropriate officer.

2. The statute, ordinance or rule violated by the device and under which the device was removed.

3. That the owner, possessor or person having an interest in the device is entitled to a hearing, after the device is impounded, to contest the removal if a hearing is timely requested.

4. The appeal costs and time within which a hearing must be requested and the method for requesting a hearing. The appeal fee shall be $20.00, and must accompany the request for a hearing. (Ord. 95-119 § 3, 1995)


10.04.432 Validity of removal and custody – Hearing to contest validity of removal and custody. 

A person provided notice under this chapter or any other person who reasonably appears to have an interest in the device may request a hearing under this section to contest the validity of the removal by submitting a request for hearing with the appropriate officer not more than three days from the mailing date of the notice. The three-day period in this section does not include holidays, Saturdays or Sundays. A hearing under this section shall comply with all of the following:

A. A request for hearing shall be in writing and shall state grounds upon which the person requesting the hearing believes that the custody and removal of the device is not justified.

B. Upon receipt of a request for a hearing under this section, the city manager, or designee, shall set a time for the hearing within 72 hours of the receipt of the request and shall provide notice of the hearing to the person requesting the hearing and to the owners of the device shown in the records of the police department, if not the same as the person requesting the hearing. The 72-hour period in this subsection does not include holidays, Saturdays or Sundays.

C. If the city manager or designee finds, after hearing and by substantial evidence on the record, that the custody and removal of a device was:

1. Invalid, the city manager shall order the immediate release of the device to the owner or person with right of possession. If the device is released under this subsection, the person to whom the device is released is not liable for any appeal charges.

2. Valid, the city manager shall order the device to be held in custody until the term appropriate to the frequency of the violation specified in this chapter shall have been met.

D. A person who fails to appear at a hearing under this section is not entitled to another hearing unless the person provides reasons satisfactory to the city manager for the person’s failure to appear.

E. The city manager is only required to provide one hearing under this section for each time the city manager takes a device into custody.

F. The manager shall provide a written statement of the results of a hearing held under this section to the person requesting the hearing.

G. Hearings held under this section may be informal in nature, but the presentation of evidence in a hearing shall be consistent with the presentation of evidence required for contested cases under the administrative procedures act of Oregon.

H. The hearings officer at a hearing under this section may be an officer, official or employee of the city manager but shall not have participated in any determination or investigation related to taking into custody and removing the device that is the subject of the hearing.

I. The determination of a hearings officer at a hearing under this section is final and is subject to appeal to the municipal court upon filing written notice thereof, accompanied by a fee of $100.00. (Ord. 95-119 § 4, 1995)


10.04.433 Exemption for device held for investigation.

A device that is being held as part of any criminal investigation is not subject to any requirements under this chapter unless the criminal investigation relates to the theft of the device. (Ord. 95-119 § 5, 1995)


10.04.434 Sale of device not reclaimed.

A. If a device taken into custody under this chapter is not reclaimed within 30 days after it is to be released from custody, the officer with custody of the device shall either:

1. Sell the device and its contents at public auction in the manner provided in state law, or

2. Dispose of the device in a manner provided by ordinance.

B. Funds received from the sale of a device or its contents under this section shall be used for sidewalk maintenance. (Ord. 95-119 § 6, 1995)


10.04.450 Traffic violations – Impoundment and disposal conditions.

A. Whenever a traffic citation is issued, or a physical arrest made for a violation of Oregon’s Vehicle Code, or local traffic regulations, and the driver of such motor vehicle is charged with Driving Under the Influence of Intoxicants, or does not possess a valid operator’s license, or is driving on a suspended or revoked license or is without liability insurance required by the Oregon Vehicle Code, the vehicle shall, pursuant to city policy, be towed by a licensed towing company to the city impound lot, garage or other suitable storage place.

B. The owner of the impounded vehicle, or the owner’s authorized agent, may redeem such vehicle upon payment of the towing bill, a $50.00 impound fee and storage fees in the amount of $10.00 per day commencing at 0001 hours on the day following the impounding of the vehicle. If redemption is not made within 30 days after the vehicle is impounded, then such vehicle shall be disposed of in accordance with the procedure provided by ordinance for the disposal of abandoned vehicles, or pursuant to ORS 819.210 through 819.260. (Ord. 00-101, 2000; Ord. 89-101 § 1, 1989; Ord. 870 § 1, 1988; Ord. 860, 1987)


Chapter 10.08 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING

Sections:

10.08.010    Definitions.

10.08.020    Parking meter zones designated.

10.08.021    Parking – Methods authorized – Emergencies and fires.

10.08.022    Parking – Oversized vehicles.

10.08.023    Parking – Prohibited locations and activities.

10.08.024    Loading zone use restrictions.

10.08.025    Bus – Operation restrictions.

10.08.026    Bus – Use of stands.

10.08.027    Lights on parked vehicles.

10.08.028    Governmental and public utility vehicles.

10.08.029    Meters – Deposit of coins.

10.08.030    Meters – Legal time limit.

10.08.031    Meters – Collection of money.

10.08.032    Meters – Effect of defects on violations.

10.08.033    Parking permits and meter hoods.

10.08.034    Parking violation – Impoundment and disposal conditions.

10.08.036    Meters – Installation.

10.08.040    Meters – Location and operation.

10.08.050    Meters – Parking space markings.

10.08.070    Repealed.

10.08.080    Repealed.

10.08.090    Bus parking exemptions.

10.08.100    Meters – Payments as fee for services.

10.08.110    Meters – Deposit collections.

10.08.120    Meters – Holidays and exempt days.

10.08.130    Meters – Recordkeeping of parking violations.

10.08.140    Meters – Unlawful coins.

10.08.150    Meters – Tampering and other prohibited acts.

10.08.160    Meters – Penalty for violation.

10.08.170    Repealed.

10.08.180    Repealed.

10.08.190    Logging trucks and other large vehicles.

10.08.210    Violation – Notice – Form and contents – Penalties.

10.08.220    Violation – Failure to pay fine – Penalty.

10.08.230    Chapter provisions not exclusive.

10.08.300    Street sweeping.


10.08.010 Definitions.

Whenever in this chapter the following terms are used, they shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:

A. “Parking meter zones” means portions of streets described and established by the city council as zones within which the parking of vehicles shall be controlled, regulated and inspected with the aid of timing devices or meters, referred to in this chapter as “parking meters” or “meters.”

B. “Roadway” means that portion of a street between the regularly established curb lines.

C. “Sidewalk” means that portion of a street between the curb lines and the adjacent property lines.

D. “Stand” means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, other than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers.

E. “Street” means every public way, road, thoroughfare and place, including bridges, viaducts, and other structures within the boundaries of the city, open, used or intended for use by the general public for vehicles or vehicular traffic as a matter of right.

F. “Vehicle” means any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public street and includes vehicles that are propelled or powered by any means. (Ord. 18-09 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 99-120 § 3, 1999; Ord. 384 § 1, 1949)


10.08.020 Parking meter zones designated.

Sections of streets may be established as parking meter zones as determined by city council resolution. (Ord. 18-09 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 03-103 § 1, 2003; Ord. 90-206 § 1, 1990; Ord. 697 § 1, 1975; Ord. 674 § 1, 1974; Ord. 603 § 14, 1970; Ord. 388 § 1, 1949; Ord. 384 § 2, 1949)


10.08.021 Parking – Methods authorized – Emergencies and fires.

A. No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a street other than parallel with the edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement, and with the curbside wheels of the vehicle within 12 inches of the edge of the curb, except where the street is marked or signed for angle parking, in which case motor vehicles shall be parked with the front head-in to the curb at the angle of and between painted stripes or other markings upon the pavement where such head-in parking is indicated.

B. Where parking space markings are placed on a street, no person shall stand or park a vehicle other than in the indicated direction and within a single marked space.

C. An owner or driver of a vehicle, upon discovering that such vehicle is parked immediately in front of or close to a building to which an emergency vehicle has been summoned, shall immediately remove such vehicle from the area unless otherwise directed by police or fire personnel.

D. No person, whether in a vehicle or not, shall intrude upon a street or premises where a fire is in progress in such manner as to interfere with fire personnel in their efforts to extinguish a fire, and no person shall congregate in the vicinity of a fire in such a manner as to hinder or interfere with fire personnel in their efforts to extinguish a fire. (Ord. 18-09 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 99-120 § 4, 1999; Ord. 860 § 6, 1987)


10.08.022 Parking – Oversized vehicles.

Any vehicle which because of its size or shape cannot be parked as provided by SMC 10.08.021 may be parked outside the restricted or limited parking area of the city in a manner which will not impede or interfere with vehicular traffic. (Ord. 18-09 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 99-120 § 4, 1999; Ord. 860 § 7, 1987)


10.08.023 Parking – Prohibited locations and activities.

In addition to provisions of the Motor Vehicle Laws of Oregon prohibiting parking, no person shall park a vehicle:

A. Upon a bridge, viaduct or other elevated structure used as a street, unless otherwise indicated by lawfully installed signs;

B. In any alley, except to load or unload persons or materials, not to exceed 20 minutes for loading or unloading;

C. Upon a street for the principal purpose of:

1. Displaying the vehicle for sale;

2. Washing, greasing or repairing the vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency;

3. Displaying advertising from the vehicle;

4. Selling merchandise from the vehicle, except in an established market place, or when so authorized or licensed under the ordinances of the city;

5. Storing the vehicle, or as junkage or dead storage, for more than 72 consecutive hours;

D. Upon any parkway, except where specifically authorized. (Ord. 18-09 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 99-120 § 4, 1999; Ord. 860 § 8, 1987)


10.08.024 Loading zone use restrictions.

A. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the continuous and expeditious unloading and delivery or pick up and loading of materials or freight in any place designated as a loading zone, during the hours when the provisions applicable to loading zones are in effect.

B. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the continuous and expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any place designated as a passenger loading zone, during the hours when the provisions applicable to passenger loading zones are in effect.

C. The penalty for violation of this section shall be set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 18-09 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 99-120 § 4, 1999; Ord. 93-127 § 1, 1993; Ord. 93-110 § 1, 1993; Ord. 860 § 9, 1987)


10.08.025 Bus – Operation restrictions.

The driver of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street in any business district at any place other than at a bus stand, except that this provision shall not prevent the driver of any passenger vehicle from temporarily stopping for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the loading or unloading of passengers. (Ord. 18-09 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 99-120 § 4, 1999; Ord. 860 § 10, 1987)


10.08.026 Bus – Use of stands.

No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stand, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the loading or unloading of passengers, when such stopping does not interfere with any bus about to enter or using such zone. (Ord. 18-09 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 99-120 § 4, 1999; Ord. 860 § 11, 1987)


10.08.027 Lights on parked vehicles.

No lights need be displayed upon any vehicle parking in accordance with this chapter, and upon a street where there is sufficient light to reveal any person or object upon such street within a distance of 500 feet. (Ord. 18-09 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 99-120 § 4, 1999; Ord. 860 § 13, 1987)


10.08.028 Governmental and public utility vehicles.

The provisions of this chapter regulating the parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a city department or public utility while in use for construction or repair work on the street, or any vehicle owned by the United States while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of United States mail. (Ord. 18-09 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 99-120 § 4, 1999; Ord. 860 § 13, 1987)


10.08.029 Meters – Deposit of coins.

No person shall park a vehicle in any metered parking space, except as otherwise permitted by ordinance, without immediately depositing in the parking meter adjacent to such space such lawful coin or coins of the United States as are required by such meter and as designated by directions on the meter, and when required by the directions on the meter, unless the parking meter indicates at the time such vehicle is parked that an unexpired portion remains of the period for which a coin or coins had been previously deposited. (Ord. 18-09 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 99-120 § 4, 1999; Ord. 860 § 14, 1987)


10.08.030 Meters – Legal time limit.

A. Except as otherwise permitted by ordinance, no person shall park any vehicle and let it remain parked in any such parking metered space during any time when the parking meter adjacent to such space indicates that no portion remains of the period for which the last previous coin or coins had been deposited, or beyond the 120-minute time limit for parking in such space between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. (Monday through Friday), Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays excepted.

B. Continued parking beyond the 120-minute time limit for any meter parking space shall constitute a separate offense for each period or portion of a single time limit for any such meter parking space during which the vehicle remains so parked.

C. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (A) and (B) of this section, where a meter specifically authorizes parking for a period in excess of 120 minutes, a person may park a vehicle in such metered space for such time as is authorized by the meter adjacent to the space. (Ord. 18-09 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 03-103 § 1, 2003; Ord. 99- 120 § 4, 1999; Ord. 860 § 15, 1987; Ord. 391 § 1, 1949; Ord. 384 § 6, 1949)


10.08.031 Meters – Collection of money.

It shall be the duty of the chief of police to direct the collection of all money deposited in parking meters. (Ord. 18-09 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 99-120 § 4, 1999; Ord. 860 § 18, 1987)


10.08.032 Meters – Effect of defects on violations.

Any unintentional violation of any provisions of this chapter by reason of a mechanical failure of a parking meter is not an offense within the meaning of this chapter. (Ord. 18-09 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 99-120 § 4, 1999; Ord. 860 § 17, 1987)


10.08.033 Parking permits and meter hoods.

A. The city manager or their designee may issue up to two parking meter hood permits to either the general contractor or property owner engaged in the construction, reconstruction or repair of a building, or engaged in the installation or removal of equipment in a building, adjacent to a street where parking meters are installed for a period of up to 10 days. In addition, the city manager or their designee may issue up to two parking meter hood permits to either the tenant or property owner engaged in a loading or maintenance activity adjacent to a street where parking meters are installed for a period of up to three days. All parking fees are set by resolution of the city council and shall be charged for each parking space where a parking meter hood is requested. Extensions of time may be requested prior to the expiration date of the permit if the construction activity has not been completed. Parking meter hoods may be used only for parking space(s) adjacent to the identified location under the granted permit. For construction activities, parking meter hoods shall be returned and all payments shall be received by the city prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the project.

B. Additionally, the city manager or their designee may issue parking meter hoods to a governmental agency or private, nonprofit agency engaging in an activity or event that has community-wide benefit where parking meters are installed. Parking meter hoods may be issued only for use during each particular activity or event and may not exceed a period of three days.

C. Parking meter hoods shall not be used for the construction, reconstruction or repair of a building, installation or removal of equipment, or loading or unloading or maintenance activities while community activities or events are taking place. At all times when meter hoods are used, vision clearance areas shall be maintained at street intersections. With the exception of debris containers, meter hoods shall be removed and vehicles and equipment shall not remain in parking spaces over the weekend unless expressly allowed by the city manager or his designee.

D. An initial deposit as established by resolution shall be paid for each parking meter hood issued. The city manager or his designee may waive the meter hood deposit for governmental and/or nonprofit agencies.

E. Upon termination of use, the parking meter hood(s) shall be returned to the city. If the hood is returned within five days of permit expiration and is in good condition, the deposit shall be refunded. If the hood is not returned within the allotted time period, then the hood shall be confiscated and the deposit forfeited. Lost or stolen hoods shall be reported immediately to the city manager or their designee for the hood to be replaced and applicable fees shall be paid as per resolution. (Ord. 18-09 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 09-01 § 1, 2009; Ord. 07-07 § 1, 2007; Ord. 99-120 § 4, 1999; Ord. 860 § 19, 1987)


10.08.034 Parking violation – Impoundment and disposal conditions.

A. Whenever a traffic citation is issued for violation of any city parking regulation, the police department may impound the vehicle involved and remove it to a garage, parking lot or other suitable storage place.

B. The owner of the impounded vehicle, or the owner’s authorized agent, may redeem such vehicle upon payment of the towing and storage charges. If redemption is not made within 30 days after the vehicle is impounded, then such vehicle shall be disposed of in accordance with the procedure provided by ordinance for the disposal of abandoned vehicles. (Ord. 18-09 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 99-120 § 4, 1999; Ord. 860 § 42, 1987)


10.08.036 Meters – Installation.

The installation of parking meters is authorized in all parking meter zones established by this chapter or hereafter established by the city council for the purpose of and in such numbers and at such places as the city council in its judgment may deem necessary to regulate, control and inspect the parking of vehicles therein, including the regulation of loading zones for commercial vehicles. (Ord. 18-09 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 99-120 § 5, 1999; Ord. 384 § 3, 1949)


10.08.040 Meters – Location and operation.

Parking meters installed in parking meter zones shall be installed upon the curb immediately adjacent to the individual parking spaces described in SMC 10.08.050, and each parking meter shall be so constructed and adjusted as to show, when properly operated, a signal that the space adjacent to which it is installed is or is not legally in use. (Ord. 18-09 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 384 § 4, 1949)


10.08.050 Meters – Parking space markings.

A. The city shall have lines or markings painted upon the curb or street adjacent to each parking meter, designating the parking space for which the meter is to be used, and each vehicle parked adjacent to any parking meter shall park within such lines or markings.

B. It is unlawful to park any vehicle across any such line or marking, or to park a vehicle in such a position that it shall not be entirely within the space designated by such lines or markings. (Ord. 18-09 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 384 § 5, 1949)


10.08.070 Meters – Operation by coins.

Repealed by Ord. 03-103. (Ord. 384 § 7, 1949)


10.08.080 Loading and unloading – Meter parking permits.

Repealed by Ord. 18-09. (Ord. 99-120 § 6, 1999; Ord. 687 § 1, 1975; Ord. 384 § 18, 1949)


10.08.090 Bus parking exemptions.

A. Upon application being made and approved by the city council, showing a public need therefor, a public transportation company or a bus company may be exempted from the requirement of paying a fee.

B. The application called for in this section shall provide for a showing by the public transportation body that a genuine public need exists for their service and that the same is in the public interest.

C. Upon approval by the city council of the application, a permit shall be issued to the applicant indicating the particular area where the parking is available, and shall state thereon that the permit is revocable and give the license number or numbers of the vehicle or vehicles that may use such permit.

D. The application permit called for in this section shall be renewable annually or sooner, as the city council may direct. (Ord. 18-09 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 732 § 1, 1977; Ord. 384 § 19, 1949)


10.08.100 Meters – Payments as fee for services.

The amount of coins required to be deposited in parking meters as provided in this chapter is levied and assessed as a fee to provide for the proper regulation, control and inspection of traffic upon the public streets, and to cover the cost of supervising, regulating and inspecting the parking of vehicles in the parking meter zones provided for in this chapter and the cost of the purchase, supervision, protection, inspection, installation, operation, maintenance, control and use of the parking meters installed hereunder. (Ord. 18-09 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 99-120 § 6, 1999; Ord. 384 § 12, 1949)


10.08.110 Meters – Deposit collections.

It shall be the duty of the chief of police to designate some person or persons to make regular collections of the money deposited in the parking meters and deliver the money to the bank or finance department, and it shall also be the duty of the finance department to assure the money is deposited at the bank and recorded in the appropriate fund. (Ord. 18-09 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 99-120 § 6, 1999; Ord. 384 § 13, 1949)


10.08.120 Meters – Holidays and exempt days.

A. Parking meter regulations will not be enforced on any Saturday, Sunday and any federally recognized holidays.

B. When the holidays fall on Saturday, the prior Friday is exempt from parking meter enforcement; when the holiday falls on a Sunday, the following Monday is exempt from parking meter enforcement. (Ord. 18-09 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 99- 120 § 6, 1999; Ord. 843 § 1, 1986)


10.08.130 Meters – Recordkeeping of parking violations.

The police department shall maintain an official account of and report the number of each parking meter which indicates that the vehicle occupying the parking space adjacent to such meter is or has been parked in violation of any provision of this chapter, to show, in part, the date, the hour of the violation, the meter number, if appropriate, the make and state vehicle license number of the vehicle, and any other information considered necessary to establish a better understanding of circumstances surrounding such violation. (Ord. 18-09 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 384 § 10(B)(2), 1949)


10.08.140 Meters – Unlawful coins.

It is unlawful to deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slug, device or metallic substitute for a one-cent, five-cent, 10-cent or 25-cent coin of the United States. (Ord. 18-09 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 384 § 8, 1949)


10.08.150 Meters – Tampering and other prohibited acts.

It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to open, or for any person to deface, injure, tamper with or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of, any parking meter installed pursuant to this chapter, or to hitch any animals thereto. (Ord. 18-09 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 384 § 9, 1949)


10.08.160 Meters – Penalty for violation.

Any person violating any provisions of SMC 10.08.140 and 10.08.150 shall be deemed guilty of an infraction, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 18-09 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 99-120 § 6, 1999; Ord. 97-105 (3), 1997; Ord. 384 § 11, 1949)


10.08.170 East Main Street parking restrictions.

Repealed by Ord. 18-09. (Ord. 406 §§ 1 – 3, 1952)


10.08.180 Oak Street parking restrictions.

Repealed by Ord. 18-09. (Ord. 401 §§ 1 – 3, 1952; Ord. 390 §§ 1 – 3, 1949)


10.08.190 Logging trucks and other large vehicles.

A. Between the hour of sunset and the hour of sunrise, Pacific Standard Time, it is unlawful for any person or persons to park any of the vehicles described in this section upon any public street or roadway within the city, within an area of one block, or within a like area upon any street or roadway which is not designated in blocks, for a period of more than two hours.

B. The vehicles covered by the provisions of this section are as follows: logging trucks, logging truck trailers, logging trucks with trailer attached, any trucks with trailers or semi-trailers attached, truck trailers, semi-truck trailers, gravel trucks, and any vehicle of an overall length exceeding 20 feet and any vehicle of a width at its widest point exceeding 80 inches.

C. Anyone violating the terms of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 18-09 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 97-105 (3), 1997; Ord. 392 §§ 1 – 3, 1950)


10.08.210 Violation – Notice – Form and contents – Penalties.

The police department shall attach to such vehicle an official notice stating that it has been parked in violation of this chapter, and instructing the owner or operator to report to the finance department at City Hall in regard to such violation. The penalty amounts for violations of this section and any collection costs shall be set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 18-09 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 99-120 § 6, 1999; Ord. 93-110 § 2, 1992; Ord. 818 § 1, 1985; Ord. 709 § 3, 1976; Ord. 384 § 10(B)(3), 1949)


10.08.220 Violation – Failure to pay fine – Penalty.

The police department shall secure the attention of the subject violator who remains unresponsive to the official citation by impoundment and/or immobilization of the vehicle identified by state license number or by official registration information identifying the vehicle for which the citation was originally issued. Costs incurred by such impoundment action of the police department shall be assessed to the registered owner at the time the vehicle is reclaimed. In addition, such costs shall include an administrative fee set by resolution of the city council. The violator cannot claim his/her vehicle until payment of all outstanding fines and fees has been received. (Ord. 18-09 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 99-120 § 6, 1999; Ord. 89-103 § 4, 1989; Ord. 709 § 4, 1976; Ord. 384 § 10(B)(4), 1949)


10.08.230 Chapter provisions not exclusive.

This chapter shall be deemed to be in addition and supplementary to, and not in conflict with nor a repeal of, existing ordinances of the city, but shall be an additional provision for the regulation of traffic and parking in the parking meter zones provided for herein. (Ord. 18-09 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 384 § 14, 1949)


10.08.300 Street sweeping.

A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to park any motor vehicle, trailer, motorcycle or to store any personal property of any nature on a public street within designated downtown parking areas on Friday mornings between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:30 a.m. The city staff shall schedule those times that sweeping shall occur and establish and maintain signs for that purpose.

B. Any person, firm, or corporation who shall be found in violation of this section shall be fined an amount set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 18-09 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 99-120 § 7, 1999; Ord. 94-106 § 1, 1994)


Chapter 10.20 TRUCKS AND HEAVY EQUIPMENT

Sections:

10.20.010    Streets restricted – Designated.

10.20.020    Streets restricted – Exempt activities.

10.20.025    Motortruck defined.

10.20.030    Emergency declared.


10.20.010 Streets restricted – Designated.

All truck and construction equipment traffic is prohibited from use of the following city streets, in the interest of community safety, the general health and welfare, with the exception of city maintenance equipment and/or maintenance equipment under specific contract to the city, Marion County, and/or the state:

A. Alder Street between Brook Street and Silver Street;

B. Brook Street between Wilson Street and James Street;

C. Chester Street between North Second Street and Mill Street;

D. Mill Street between B Street north to a line 255 feet south of the railroad spur crossing Mill Street;

E. Silver Street between Alder Street and James Street;

F. Third Street between Oak Street and East Main Street;

G. Whittier Street between North Second Street and Mill Street;

H. Wilson Street between the SP Railroad right-of-way and Brook Street;

I. James Avenue between Hobart Road and “C” Street;

J. Pine Street between Airport Road and Brown Street;

K. North Water Street between Grant Street and “C” Street;

L. Lincoln Street between Mill Street and Second Street;

M. Jefferson Street between Mill Street and Second Street;

N. Washington Street between Mill Street and Second Street;

O. Chester Street between Mill Street and Second Street;

P. Whittier Street between Mill Street and Second Street. (Ord. 94-133 § 1, 1994; Ord. 89-115 § 1, 1989; Ord. 651 § 1, 1973; Ord. 647 § 1, 1972; Ord. 634 § 1, 1971; Ord. 615 § 1, 1970)


10.20.020 Streets restricted – Exempt activities.

The prohibition announced in SMC 10.20.010 does not apply to vehicles used for the purpose of commercial delivery or picking up materials or merchandise or providing a service to residents within the above-described restricted streets. Subject vehicles will proceed as provided by Section 421 of Ordinance 469. (Ord. 94-133 § 2, 1994; Ord. 651 § 1, 1973; Ord. 647 § 1, 1972; Ord. 615 § 2, 1970)


10.20.025 Motortruck defined.

For the purposes of this section, a “motortruck” shall mean a motor vehicle that is primarily designed for use in carrying loads other than passengers and requiring registration by the Public Utility Commissioner of the state. (Ord. 89-115 § 2, 1989)


10.20.030 Emergency declared.

An emergency is hereby declared to exist and the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage by the council and signature by the mayor. (Ord. 94-133 § 2, 1994)1

Editor’s Note: Ord. 469 § 42 was repealed by Ord. 860; new regulations on this subject are forthcoming. 


Chapter 10.24 ABANDONED VEHICLES

Sections:

10.24.010    Application of provisions.

10.24.020    Definitions.

10.24.030    Investigation of vehicle – Impoundment notice.

10.24.040    Unremoved vehicle – Nuisance – Removal by city.

10.24.050    Impounded vehicle – Identification procedure.

10.24.060    Impounded vehicle – Notice to owner.

10.24.080    Impounded vehicle – Redemption.

10.24.090    Sale of vehicle – Use of proceeds.

10.24.100    Sale of vehicle – Certificate – Liability limitation.

10.24.110    Delivery to purchaser.

10.24.120    Fees and charges – Private garage services.

10.24.130    Fees and charges – Designated.


10.24.010 Application of provisions.

This chapter shall apply to all abandoned vehicles now in the possession of the city, as well as to all such vehicles as may hereafter be impounded. (Ord. 90-111 § 1, 1990)


10.24.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise:

A. “Abandoned” means left unoccupied and unclaimed or in a damaged or dismantled condition upon the streets or alleys of the city, and upon any area of public property.

B. “Chief of police” means and includes any authorized law enforcement officer of the city.

C. “City” means the city of Silverton, Oregon.

D. “Costs” means the expense of removing, storing or selling an impounded vehicle.

E. “Owner” means any individual, firm, corporation or unincorporated association with a claim, either individually or jointly, of ownership, or any interest, legal or equitable, in a vehicle.

F. “Vehicle” means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. 90-111 § 1, 1990)


10.24.030 Investigation of vehicle – Impoundment notice.

A. It shall be the duty of the police department, whenever a vehicle is found abandoned upon the streets or alleys, or any area of public property, in the same position for a period of two days, to:

1. Make a routine investigation to discover the owner and request removal of the vehicle; and

2. If the owner is not found, to place a notice upon the windshield, or some other part of the vehicle easily seen by the passing public.

B. Such notice shall state that the police department will remove and impound the vehicle under the provisions of this chapter within 24 hours of the day of the posting, unless:

1. The owner removes the vehicle; or

2. Good cause is shown, satisfactory to the chief of police, why such vehicle should not be removed by the owner, or removed and impounded by the city. (Ord. 90-111 § 1, 1990)


10.24.040 Unremoved vehicle – Nuisance – Removal by city.

A. An abandoned vehicle which remains in the same position for a period of 24 hours after a notice to remove has been posted upon such vehicle, and no person has appeared to show good cause why such vehicle should not be moved, shall constitute a nuisance.

B. It shall be the duty of the police department to remove any vehicle which shall constitute a nuisance under the provisions of this chapter, and store such vehicle upon city property, or store the same in a private garage, pending investigation into the ownership of such vehicle. (Ord. 90-111 § 1, 1990)


10.24.050 Impounded vehicle – Identification procedure.

The police department, after impounding any vehicle in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, shall:

A. Make a diligent inquiry as to the name and address of the owner of the vehicle;

B. Examine such vehicle for license number, motor number, serial number, make, style, and any other information which will aid in the identification of the ownership of the vehicle. (Ord. 90-111 § 1, 1990)


10.24.060 Impounded vehicle – Notice to owner.

If the owner is identified, he or she shall be notified immediately by registered mail that such vehicle is held by the police department of the city. The notice to the owner shall also state:

A. The reason for impounding the vehicle;

B. The existing costs charged against the vehicle;

C. An estimate of future costs, including the cost of advertising the vehicle for sale; and

D. That unless the owner redeems the vehicle within 10 days from the day of mailing the notice, if the address of the owner is within the state of Oregon, or within 20 days of the day of mailing the notice if the address of the owner is without the state, and pays all the costs, the vehicle:

1. Will be sold at a public auction, at a definite time and place within the city, to the highest and best bidder for cash. (Ord. 90-111 § 1, 1990)


10.24.080 Impounded vehicle – Redemption.

An owner may redeem a vehicle impounded under the provisions of this chapter, before a sale has taken place, by applying to the police department, whereupon the owner shall:

A. Submit evidence of ownership or interest in the vehicle, satisfactory to the chief of police, that such claim is rightful; and

B. Pay the costs due and owing at the time the application to redeem is made. (Ord. 90-111 § 1, 1990)


10.24.090 Sale of vehicle – Use of proceeds.

A. If no claim shall have been made to redeem an impounded vehicle before the time set for the sale of such vehicle, the chief of police shall hold a sale at the time and place appointed, within the view of the vehicle to be sold.

B. The vehicle shall be sold to the highest and best bidder, providing that if no bids are entered, or those bids which are entered are less than the costs incurred by the city, the chief of police shall enter a bid on behalf of the city in an amount equal to such costs.

C. The proceeds of such sale shall be applied:

1. To the payment of costs incurred by the city; and

2. Then for such services as may be rendered by a private garage; and

3. The balance, if any, shall be transferred to the city treasurer, to be credited to the general fund. (Ord. 646 § 8, 1972)


10.24.100 Sale of vehicle – Certificate – Liability limitation.

A. At the time of payment of the purchase price, the chief of police shall execute a certificate of sale, in duplicate, the original of which shall be delivered to the purchaser, and the copy thereof filed with the city clerk.

B. The certificate of sale shall be substantially as follows:

CERTIFICATE OF SALE

This is to certify that under the provisions of Ordinance No. 646, entitled “An Ordinance for the Impounding and Disposition of Abandoned Vehicles” and pursuant to due notice of the time and place of sale, I did on the _____ day of ________, 20___, sell at public auction to ____________ for the sum of $___________ cash, he or she being the highest and best bidder, and that being the highest and best sum bid therefor, the following described personal property, to-wit:

(brief description of the property)

And in consideration of the payment of the said sum of $___________, receipt whereof is hereby acknowledged, I have this day delivered to said purchaser the foregoing property.

Dated this ______ day of _______, 20___.

Note: the City of Silverton assumes no responsibility as to the condition of title of the above described property. In case this sale shall for any reason be invalid, the liability of the City is limited to the return of the purchase price.

(Ord. 646 § 9, 1972)


10.24.110 Delivery to purchaser.

Upon such sale being consummated, the chief of police shall deliver the vehicle and the certificate of sale to the purchaser. Such sale and conveyance shall be without redemption. (Ord. 646 § 10, 1972)


10.24.120 Fees and charges – Private garage services.

Where the council selects a private garage, the council shall also establish reasonable fees for such services by resolution, with the following conditions:

A. The city shall not be liable for services rendered by a private garage from any source other than such amounts as may be collected from the owner on redemption, or from a purchaser upon sale, after the city shall have deducted its expenses, unless the city shall be the purchaser of the vehicle.

B. No lien shall be created by this chapter in favor of the private garage upon the vehicle for such services.

C. The vehicle shall not be released from the private garage except upon a receipt, signed by the chief of police, proffered by the purchaser. (Ord. 646 § 13, 1972)


10.24.130 Fees and charges – Designated.

In the enforcement and execution of the provisions of this chapter, the chief of police shall charge and collect the following charges:

A. Ten dollars and fifty cents for towing, or, if a larger amount is charged by the towing service, then the amount of such charge;

B. Seventy-five cents per day for storage. (Ord. 646 § 12, 1972)


Chapter 10.26 RECREATIONAL VEHICLES

Sections:

10.26.010    Recreational vehicle defined.

10.26.020    Parking on public street – Time limit.

10.26.030    Residency or occupancy in public places prohibited.

10.26.040    Residence in vehicle on private property – Permit required.

10.26.050    Permits generally.

10.26.060    Permits – Time limit.

10.26.070    Permits – No cost.


10.26.010 Recreational vehicle defined.

As used in this chapter, “recreational vehicle” means any motor home, travel trailer, camper or other vehicle used for or equipped for sleeping and living purposes. (Ord. 92-102, 1992)


10.26.020 Parking on public street – Time limit.

It is unlawful to park a recreational vehicle on any public street for more than three consecutive days. (Ord. 92-102, 1992)


10.26.030 Residency or occupancy in public places prohibited.

It is unlawful to reside in or occupy any recreational vehicle in any public place within the city. (Ord. 02-118 § 1, 2002; Ord. 92-102, 1992)


10.26.040 Residence in vehicle on private property – Permit required.

It is unlawful to reside and live in a recreational vehicle on private property for more than 15 days in any particular 30-day period without having a permit issued by the city. To park and live in a recreational vehicle on private property for more than 15 days in any particular 30-day period, the applicant shall apply for and obtain a permit from the city which shall be good for an additional 15-day period. (Ord. 92-102, 1992)


10.26.050 Permits generally.

Permits shall be in the form as prescribed by the city manager and shall not be issued unless the applicant shows satisfactory proof to the city manager or his designee that the recreational vehicle is fully self contained with respect to water supply, garbage disposal and sanitation. The permit shall be temporary in nature and shall not be issued to the same vehicle more than twice in any particular six-month period. (Ord. 92-102, 1992)


10.26.060 Permits – Time limit.

Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, a permit shall be available for a period not to exceed 90 days for purposes of residing in a recreational vehicle on the same premises wherein a dwelling is being constructed and the applicant has a current building permit for said construction. In this respect, the applicant shall furnish proof to the city manager that the recreational vehicle is fully self contained and provides no health hazard to the community with respect to water, sewer and garbage. Said permit shall be renewable in the discretion of the city manager. (Ord. 92-102, 1992)


10.26.070 Permits – No cost.

All permits required and issued under this chapter shall be free of charge and the same shall be renewable at the discretion of the city manager. (Ord. 92-102, 1992)


Chapter 10.30 PARKING REGULATIONS

Sections:

10.30.010    On-street and city-owned parking lot parking permits.

10.30.020    Violation of regulations prohibited.

10.30.030    Parking with on-street and city-owned parking lot parking permit.

10.30.040    Restricted parking violations.

10.30.050    Revocation of permit.

10.30.060    Creation of residential permit parking zone.

10.30.070    Considerations.

10.30.080    Issuance of permits – Erection of signs.

10.30.090    Restricted parking violations in residential permit parking zones.

10.30.100    Revocation of permit.

10.30.110    Unauthorized use of parking permits.

10.30.120    Unauthorized parking control devices.


10.30.010 On-street and city-owned parking lot parking permits.

A. The council, by resolution, may authorize issuance of parking permits for on-street and certain city-owned parking lots for the parking of motor vehicles for a time or in a manner which would otherwise constitute a violation of the provisions of this chapter. The fees for such permits shall be prescribed by resolution of the council.

B. Such permits shall set forth the time, place, and manner in which vehicles may be parked.

C. A vehicle may be lawfully parked under a permit issued pursuant to this section only to the extent that it is parked in compliance with all conditions and restrictions imposed thereon, the terms of which shall be strictly construed. 

D. The city manager shall have the authority to implement regulations necessary to carry out this chapter. (Ord. 03-103 § 2, 2003)


10.30.020 Violation of regulations prohibited.

It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any regulation implemented by the city manager pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 03-103 § 2, 2003)


10.30.030 Parking with on-street and city-owned parking lot parking permit.

Notwithstanding any other provision of this code to the contrary, the holder of a valid parking permit for on-street or city-owned parking lots designated for permit parking may park a vehicle at a place, for a time, or in a manner which would otherwise constitute a violation of the provisions of this chapter if:

A. The holder parks only at the location, in the manner, at the times, and in compliance with the conditions specified in the permit; and

B. While a vehicle for which an on-street or city-owned parking lot permit has been issued is so parked, such permit shall be displayed so as to be clearly visible through the windshield of the vehicle. A parking permit shall not guarantee or reserve to the holder any given on-street or city-owned parking lot parking space. An on-street or city-owned parking lot parking permit shall not authorize the holder thereof to stop, stand or park a motor vehicle in such places or during such times as the stopping, standing, or parking of motor vehicles is prohibited or set aside for specified types of vehicles, nor exempt the holder from the observance of any traffic regulation other than parking time limits. (Ord. 03-103 § 2, 2003)


10.30.040 Restricted parking violations.

It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in a space designated as permit parking only without displaying a valid parking permit. It shall further be unlawful for a person to represent that he or she is entitled to a parking permit for on-street or city-owned parking lots when that person is not so entitled, or for a person to fail to surrender a permit to which he or she is no longer entitled, or for a person to park a vehicle displaying such a permit at any time when the holder of such permit is not entitled to hold it. (Ord. 03-103 § 2, 2003)


10.30.050 Revocation of permit.

A. The city manager is authorized to revoke a parking permit for on-street or city-owned parking lots if the holder of the permit is found to be in violation of this chapter. Upon written notification thereof, the permit holder shall surrender such permit to the city manager.

B. Failure to surrender a parking permit that has been revoked shall constitute a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 03-103 § 2, 2003)


10.30.060 Creation of residential permit parking zone.

Whenever the city manager shall make a determination that a residential area is impacted by commuter vehicles, the manager may initiate action to create a residential permit parking zone. (Ord. 03-103 § 2, 2003)


10.30.070 Considerations.

In recommending whether an area shall be designated as a residential permit parking zone, the following factors shall be taken into consideration:

A. The desire and need of the residents for residential permit parking. 

B. The need for parking in proximity to establishments located therein and used by the general public for religious, health, business or educational purposes. (Ord. 03-103 § 2, 2003)


10.30.080 Issuance of permits – Erection of signs.

Following approval of the designation of a residential permit parking zone, the city manager shall cause parking signs to be erected in the zone, indicating the times and locations where parking shall be permitted by permit. The city manager shall issue appropriate permits. A permit shall be issued upon application only to the owner or the operator of a motor vehicle who resides on property immediately adjacent to a street or other location within the residential permit parking zone. There shall be no charge for the permit other than a processing fee in an amount set by resolution of the council. The application for a permit shall contain the name of the owner or operator of the motor vehicle, residential address, the motor vehicle’s make, model, and the applicant’s driver’s license number. The owner or operator of any motor vehicle applying for a residential parking permit shall have a current and valid Oregon vehicle registration. The permit shall be renewed annually upon such conditions and procedures as the city manager shall specify. The permit shall be displayed on the inside rear view mirror of the vehicle. (Ord. 03-103 § 2, 2003)


10.30.090 Restricted parking violations in residential permit parking zones.

It shall be unlawful for any person:

A. To represent falsely that the person is entitled to a residential parking permit or to fail to surrender a permit to which the person is no longer entitled; or 

B. To park a vehicle displaying such a permit at any time when the holder of such permit is not entitled to it; or

C. To park in a designated residential permit parking zone without display of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter; or

D. To park without display of a permit in a limited time parking zone within a residential permit parking zone for a period in excess of that listed in a parking control device. (Ord. 03-103 § 2, 2003)


10.30.100 Revocation of permit.

The city manager is authorized to revoke a parking permit for on-street or city-owned parking lots if the holder of the permit is found to be in violation of this chapter. Upon written notification thereof, the permit holder shall surrender such permit to the city manager. Failure to surrender a parking permit that has been revoked shall constitute a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 03-103 § 2, 2003)


10.30.110 Unauthorized use of parking permits.

A. It shall be unlawful for any person to copy, reproduce, or alter any parking decal, form, sticker, or other device used by the city of Silverton pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

B. It shall be unlawful for any person to use any altered, forged, or expired permit on any vehicle for the purpose of representing that such vehicle is in compliance with any section of this chapter which requires a sticker, form, decal, or other device when that vehicle and the owner are not so entitled. (Ord. 03-103 § 2, 2003)


10.30.120 Unauthorized parking control devices.

It shall be unlawful for any person to place, erect, paint, inscribe, or otherwise establish any parking control device which purports to restrict or control parking, except such parking control devices as are authorized by this code or the laws of the state of Oregon and the city of Silverton. (Ord. 03-103 § 2, 2003)


Chapter 10.32 TRUCK BRAKES

Sections:

10.32.010    Definitions.

10.32.020    Prohibition.

10.32.030    Signs.

10.32.040    Violation – Penalty.


10.32.010 Definitions.

For purposes of this chapter:

“Dynamic braking devices” means a motor vehicle brake which is activated or worked by the compression of the engine of a motor vehicle. (Ord. 07-05 § 1, 2007)


10.32.020 Prohibition.

No person shall use any dynamic braking device on any motor vehicle, except to avoid imminent danger to persons or property; however, fire engines, ambulances, aid trucks, police vehicles and other emergency vehicles shall be exempted from this prohibition. (Ord. 07-05 § 1, 2007)


10.32.030 Signs.

Prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, signs shall be erected by the city manager at entrances to the city in accordance with ORS 810.214 advising motorists that Silverton prohibits unmuffled engine brakes. The sign shall give the dollar amount of the maximum fine provided for violation. (Ord. 07-05 § 1, 2007)


10.32.040 Violation – Penalty.

Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter and any person, firm or corporation who allows or permits any motor vehicle owned and/or operated by it in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a violation and upon conviction of any violation hereof shall be punished according to the provisions of this code. (Ord. 07-05 § 1, 2007)


Title 11 (RESERVED)


Title 12 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES 

Chapters:

12.04    Numbering of Buildings and Naming of Streets

12.08    Public Improvements

12.12    Repealed

12.16    Sidewalks

12.20    Repealed

12.28    Street and Sidewalk Obstructions

12.32    Closing of Streets

12.36    Repealed

12.40    Telecommunications

12.44    Cable Regulations

12.48    City Park Regulations

12.50    Repealed

12.55    Use of City Property for Special Events


Chapter 12.04 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS AND NAMING OF STREETS

Sections:

12.04.010    All buildings to be numbered.

12.04.020    Numbering system – Placement of numbers.

12.04.030    Numbering system – Described.

12.04.040    Additional numbers.

12.04.050    Numbers for houses and buildings.

12.04.060    All streets to be named.

12.04.070    Street names shall be approved by the city.

12.04.080    Street names shall not be confusing.

12.04.090    Signage.

12.04.100    Street name changes.


12.04.010 All buildings to be numbered.

All buildings within the city shall be numbered in the manner provided in this chapter. (Ord. 08-06 § 4, 2008)


12.04.020 Numbering system – Placement of numbers.

A. There shall be a uniform system of numbering all houses, stores and other buildings, except sheds and outbuildings, erected or to be erected within the city, by placing on the door or doorframe of the main entrance to such building, or as near thereto as may be practical, the number assigned thereto, as hereinafter provided, such number to be painted on the building or on metal or glass, or a metallic figure used, at the option of the owner, and so placed as to be readily seen from the street.

B. The figures designating the numbers, whether printed or otherwise, shall not be less than six inches in height. (Ord. 08-06 § 4, 2008)


12.04.030 Numbering system – Described.

A. The houses or buildings erected on lots which abut upon streets running northerly and southerly shall be numbered as follows:

1. That part of each of such streets lying south of Main Street shall be numbered southerly from the south side of Main Street, beginning with the number 100 and allowing 100 numbers to each block, both sides of the street to be considered a block; the even numbers to be used for numbering houses and buildings on the east side of such street, and the odd numbers to be used for such numbering on the west side of such street. The first tier of blocks south of Main Street shall be numbered southerly, beginning such numbering with the figure 100 and continuing with successive numbers thereafter to and inclusive of the figure 199.

2. The second tier of blocks shall be numbered beginning with the number 200 and continuing with successive numbers thereafter to and inclusive of the number 299, and continuing in like manner the numbering of each successive tier of blocks, giving 100 numbers to each tier of blocks and ending such numbering at the southern boundary of the city.

3. All the portions of such streets north of Main Street shall be numbered in the same manner, but northerly from Main Street, beginning with the number 100 and allowing 100 numbers to each tier of blocks northerly, and numbering in the same manner as hereinbefore provided for the numbering of buildings southerly of Main Street.

4. In case any streets in the city, running northerly and southerly, do not intersect with Main Street, the numbering thereof shall nevertheless commence and continue in the same manner as if such streets actually intersected Main Street; that is to say, if two tiers of blocks intervene between Main Street, the first numbers on such street shall be 300, and if one tier of blocks intervenes, then 200 shall be the first number for each intervening tier of blocks, and then proceeding from such commencing point in the manner hereinbefore specified.

B. The buildings or houses erected on lots abutting streets running easterly and westerly shall be numbered as follows:

1. That part of each of such streets east of Silver Creek shall be numbered easterly therefrom, beginning with the number 100 and allowing 100 numbers to each block, both sides of the street being considered a block, the even numbers to be used for numbering houses and buildings on the north side of such streets, and the odd numbers for such numbering on the south sides of the streets.

2. The first tier of blocks east of Silver Creek shall be numbered easterly, beginning such numbering with the number 100 and continuing with successive numbers thereafter to and inclusive of the figure 199.

3. The second tier of blocks shall be numbered beginning with the number 200, and continuing with successive numbers thereafter to and inclusive of the number 299, and continuing in like manner the numbering of each successive tier of blocks, giving 100 numbers to each tier of blocks and ending such numbering at the eastern boundary of the city.

4. All those parts of the streets west of Silver Creek shall be numbered in the same manner, but westerly from Silver Creek, beginning with the number 100 and giving 100 numbers to each tier of blocks westerly, and numbering in the same manner as hereinbefore provided for the numbering of houses and buildings easterly from Silver Creek.

5. In case any streets in the city, running easterly and westerly, do not intersect with Silver Creek, the numbering thereof shall, nevertheless, commence and continue in the same manner as if the streets actually intersected Silver Creek; that is to say, if two tiers of blocks intervene between Silver Creek and the nearest portion of the street to Silver Creek, the first number on the street shall be 300; and if one tier of blocks only so intervenes, then the first number shall be 200, and so on, allowing 100 numbers for each intervening tier of blocks, and then proceeding from such commencing point in the manner hereinbefore provided.

C. All buildings and houses located upon lots abutting short and irregular streets which are not covered by the foregoing provisions shall be numbered as nearly alike as possible to the nearest adjacent block of regular streets running in relatively the same direction.

D. In order to ascertain the proper position of numbers in a block, the side of the block along which it is desired to locate the number shall, if within the fire limits of the city, as at present constituted, be divided by 25, and if outside the fire limits aforesaid, then by 50, and this will give the relative distance apart of each number.

E. Where streets pass through acreage, not regularly divided into blocks, the size of the blocks, for the purpose of so numbering the same, shall correspond, as near as may be, to the size of the regular blocks nearest adjacent thereto. (Ord. 08-06 § 4, 2008)


12.04.040 Additional numbers.

As additional numbers and memoranda may from time to time be required, on account of subdivision of existing blocks, or for other reasons, the numbering thereon shall be extended by the recorder to include such changes. (Ord. 08-06 § 4, 2008)


12.04.050 Numbers for houses and buildings.

All houses and buildings now erected shall be numbered as provided in this chapter within 30 days from the time of the taking effect of the ordinance codified herein, and all buildings and houses hereafter erected shall be numbered before being occupied. (Ord. 08-06 § 4, 2008)


12.04.060 All streets to be named.

All streets, public and private, within the city shall be named in the manner provided in this chapter. (Ord. 08-06 § 4, 2008)


12.04.070 Street names shall be approved by the city.

In the course of development by public and private parties, there shall be new streets established. When development is proposed by the city, the council shall establish the names of public streets. In the course of other development such as subdivisions or planned developments, the officials designated to make final decisions on such development (typically the planning commission or development director) shall establish names for any public and private streets as part of that development decision. (Ord. 08-06 § 4, 2008)


12.04.080 Street names shall not be confusing.

Developers may propose names for streets as part of their application for development or improvement (such as an unnamed alley). Proposed names shall be reviewed by the city, the fire district, and the 911 district to avoid conflicts with similar or closely sounding names. Except for extensions of existing streets, no street names shall be used that will duplicate or be confused with names of existing streets. Street names and numbers shall conform to the established pattern in the surrounding area and be subject to approval of the city. (Ord. 08-06 § 4, 2008)


12.04.090 Signage.

All nonpublic accessways serving more than four houses shall be named and signed and shall be designated as a private lane or street. All houses shall be addressed consistent with the name of the private lane as well as with the provisions within this chapter. Signs shall be uniform in size, shape and color and shall be available from the city at the applicant’s expense. Nonpublic accessways serving four or fewer houses shall be addressed consistent with the name of the public street, but shall be provided with a sign available from the city at the applicant’s expense indicating the addresses of residences located on the accessway. (Ord. 08-06 § 4, 2008)


12.04.100 Street name changes.

A. An action to rename a street in the city may be initiated by the council:

1. On its own action; or

2. If a person or persons files a petition as described in this section accompanied by a fee reasonably related to the costs of the process.

B. A petition for naming or renaming a street shall include the following:

1. A statement of the reasons for the proposed name change.

2. The name and address of all persons owning any real property abutting the street proposed to be renamed and the existing addresses abutting the street proposed to be renamed. For the purposes of this section, “owner” means the record holder of legal title to the land, except that if there is a purchaser of the land according to a recorded land sales contract, the purchaser is the owner.

3. Signatures of 60 percent of all owners of the land abutting the street proposed to be renamed.

C. Notice and Hearing.

1. The processing procedure for a street name change shall occur in conformance with a Type IV Procedure.

2. Upon adoption of an ordinance approving the street name change by the city council, notice shall be sent to the Marion County Surveyor and Marion County Tax Assessment Department, all departments within the city, and all property owners and addressed properties impacted by the street name change.

D. Criteria for Approval. The planning commission and city council shall determine whether the name change is in the public interest and is necessary due to confusion as a result of similarity in sound or spelling, such as Fairview and Farview, complexity of pronunciation or spelling, or the result of the need for the continuation of a street name where confusion may be created as the result of two different street names on a through street. No street shall be given a name that is the same as, similar to, or pronounced the same as any other street in the city unless that street is an extension of an already existing street. Whenever practicable, historical names, names of Native American tribes of Marion County, heirs of original settlers or long-time residents of Silverton (50 to 100 years) or names relating to Silverton’s natural environment will be considered in the renaming of public streets. (Ord. 08-06 § 4, 2008)


    


Chapter 12.08 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS

Sections:

Article I. Construction Standards

12.08.010    Standards adopted by reference.

Article II. Public Improvement Procedures

12.08.020    City Charter authority.

12.08.030    Initiation of proceedings.

12.08.040    City engineer’s report – Contents.

12.08.050    Notice of public meeting.

12.08.060    City engineer’s report – Hearing.

12.08.070    Construction – Authorized agencies.

12.08.080    Construction – Notice to property owner.

12.08.090    Construction – Call for bids.

12.08.100    Construction – Bond requirements.

12.08.110    Construction – Special hearing on bids.

12.08.120    Assessments – Made by ordinance.

12.08.130    Assessments – Methods authorized.

12.08.140    Other financing methods.

12.08.150    Assessments – Notice to property owner.

12.08.160    Assessments – Installment payments.

12.08.165    Assessments – Installment payments – Application for semi-annual payments.

12.08.170    Assessments – Interest rate.

12.08.180    Assessments – Appeal procedure.

12.08.190    Assessment liens – Recordation.

12.08.200    Assessment liens – Foreclosure.

12.08.210    Assessments – Errors and corrections.

12.08.220    Deficit assessments.

12.08.230    Rebates.

12.08.240    Abandonment of proceedings.

12.08.250    Assessments – Curative provisions.

12.08.260    Reassessment.

12.08.270    Waivers to the right of remonstrance.

12.08.280    Engineering fees.

Article III. Alternative Improvement Procedure

12.08.290    Initiation when improvements paid in cash.

12.08.300    Plans required – Contents.

12.08.310    Approval – Bond or deposit required.

12.08.320    Property owner’s responsibilities.

12.08.330    Cost reimbursement conditions.

Article IV. General Requirements

12.08.340    As-built drawings required for public improvements.

Article I. Construction Standards


12.08.010 Standards adopted by reference.

The city adopts by reference the construction standards set forth by the Oregon Section of the American Public Works Association, the American Water Works Association and, when applicable, the Uniform Building Code and Oregon Plumbing Code. Where conflicting standards arise between the above institutions, then the more restrictive shall apply. (Ord. 847 Art. 3, 1987)

Article II. Public Improvement Procedures


12.08.020 City Charter authority.

Improvements to street, sewer, water, storm sewer, sidewalks, and such other improvements as may be deemed necessary by the council, shall be made in accordance with Chapter IX of the City Charter. (Ord. 847 Art. 1 § 1, 1987)


12.08.030 Initiation of proceedings.

A. Initiation. Initiation of a public improvement to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessment according to benefits, may be made in one of two ways:

1. Council Initiative. The city council may, by its own motion, deem it necessary that a public improvement be made. The council shall base its motion on findings of fact and conclusions thereof which explain to the affected property owners why the decision was made to initiate the public improvement;

2. Petition by Property Owners. Upon petition of the owners of one-half of the property to benefit specially from the improvement.

B. Verification of Petition. The city engineer shall verify that the petitioners’ signatures are valid, complete, and constitute at least one-half of the property to be benefitted. For the purpose of verification, the city engineer shall determine the basis of proportioning an assessment according to benefits, and use such to calculate the ratio of petitioners’ property to all specially benefitted property.

C. Time for Consideration. The city engineer shall have a maximum of 30 days to bring any valid improvement petition before the city council. Notice of the council’s meeting to consider the petition shall be sent to the petitioners by regular mail.

D. Council Consideration of Petition or Council Motion. Upon council initiative or presentation of a valid petition, the council shall direct the city engineer to make a survey and written report of such project, and file the same with the city recorder. If the council decides the petition is invalid, notification of such to the petitioners shall be sent by regular mail within 10 days. Findings explaining the council’s decision shall be provided in the notice. (Ord. 847 Art. 1 § 2, 1987)


12.08.040 City engineer’s report – Contents.

Unless the council shall direct otherwise, the city engineer’s report shall contain the following:

A. A vicinity plan showing the general nature, location and extent of the proposed improvement, including the boundaries of the land to be assessed;

B. Plans and specifications of the work to be done; provided, however, that where the proposed project is to be carried out in cooperation with any other governmental agency, the engineer may adopt the plans, specifications and estimates of such agency;

C. An estimate of the probable cost of the improvement, including any legal, administrative and engineering costs attributable thereto;

D. An estimate of the unit cost of the improvement to the specially benefitted properties;

E. A recommendation as to the method of assessment to be used to arrive at a fair apportionment of the whole or any portion of the cost of the improvement to the properties specially benefitted;

F. A reference to the parcels of land to be assessed. Reference may be made by assessor’s number, tax lot, deed, or description. Names of the record holders thereof and names of contract purchasers shall also be provided;

G. The recommended assessment cost to each specially benefitted property. (Ord. 847 Art. 1 § 3, 1987)


12.08.050 Notice of public meeting.

A. Upon completion of the engineer’s report, the city recorder shall give notice of such improvement as follows:

1. Posting of the notice in three places in the immediate vicinity of the affected area;

2. Publication of two notices, one week apart, in a newspaper of general circulation in the city;

3. Mailing of copies of such notice, including certain engineer’s report information, by certified mail to the owners to be assessed for the cost for such improvement.

B. Published and posted notices shall contain the following:

1. A statement that the report of the city engineer is on file in the office of the city recorder and is subject to public examination;

2. A statement that the council will hold a public hearing on the proposed improvement on a specified date, which shall not be earlier than 10 days following the first publication of the notice;

3. A statement that public testimony, objections and remonstrances shall be received at the council hearing, and if at such hearing there are presented to the recorder valid remonstrances by the owners of assessed land which will bear 66.66 percent of the estimated assessment cost of the improvement, the improvement will be abandoned and not reinstated for at least six months;

4. A description of the property or tax account number or assessment number to be specially benefitted by the improvement;

5. Identification of the owners of such property;

6. The method of assessment;

7. The total cost of the improvement to be paid.

C. Notices mailed to property owners affected shall contain the same information provided in published and posted notices, along with the following:

1. A vicinity plan showing the general nature, location and extent of the improvement, including boundaries of the land to be assessed;

2. The city engineer’s estimate of the unit cost and total cost of the improvement to each specially benefitted property. (Ord. 847 Art. 1 § 4, 1987)


12.08.060 City engineer’s report – Hearing.

A. The city council shall hear public testimony and submitted remonstrances at the public hearing. Improvement remonstrances are considered valid only when signed by affected property owners and presented to the city recorder at or prior to the public hearing, or when orally presented by the affected property owners, or their agents, at the public hearing. If valid remonstrances represent 66.66 percent or more of the estimated assessed cost of the improvement, the improvement will be abandoned and not reinstated for at least six months.

B. If valid remonstrances represent less than 66.66 percent of the estimated assessment cost of the improvement, then, on the basis of the hearing or other findings, the council will by motion, at the time of the hearing or within 60 days thereafter, order the improvement to be carried out in accordance with a resolution. During the public hearing, the council may, by motion, modify the improvement or require the city engineer to supply additional or different information for such improvement. All such modifications and additional or different information shall allow subsequent public hearing testimony by the affected property owners or their agents. (Ord. 847 Art. 1 § 5, 1987)


12.08.070 Construction – Authorized agencies.

The council shall provide in the improvement resolution that the construction work be done by one of the following:

A. Private contractor through competitive bids;

B. City of Silverton forces;

C. Another governmental agency;

D. Any combination thereof. (Ord. 847 Art. 1 § 5, 1987)


12.08.080 Construction – Notice to property owner.

Affected property owners shall be sent notice by regular mail of the council’s decision within 20 days of the decision. The notice shall include amended material, as dictated in SMC 12.08.060 through 12.08.080. (Ord. 847 Art. 1 § 5, 1987)


12.08.090 Construction – Call for bids.

The council, at its discretion, may direct the city recorder to advertise for competitive bids for construction of all or any part of the improvement project. No contract shall be let until after the public hearing has been held to hear remonstrances to the proposed improvement. The council shall determine the time and manner for advertisement for bids. The council shall award the construction contract to the lowest responsible bidder; provided, that the council shall have the right to reject all bids when they are deemed unreasonable and/or unsatisfactory. In addition, the council reserves the right to reject any or all bids not conforming with the bid specifications, and to waive any informalities in the bidder’s proposal. (Ord. 847 Art. 1 § 6, 1987)


12.08.100 Construction – Bond requirements.

The city shall require bonding, product guarantee and prequalification of all contractors. Bonding shall be for the faithful performance of any contract let under its authority. The provisions thereof, in case of default, shall be enforced by action in the name of the city of Silverton. (Ord. 847 Art. 1 § 6, 1987)


12.08.110 Construction – Special hearing on bids.

If the council finds, upon opening bids for the work of such improvement, that the lowest responsible bid is substantially in excess of the engineer’s estimate, it may, at its discretion, provide for holding a special hearing of objections. The city engineer shall publish one notice thereof in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. Affected property owners shall be sent, by certified mail, one copy of such notice at least 10 days prior to the hearing. (Ord. 847 Art. 1 § 6, 1987)


12.08.120 Assessments – Made by ordinance.

Following the public hearing forming the local improvement district, the city council may elect to immediately pass an ordinance assessing the various benefiting lots, or delay the assessment ordinance until the contract for the work is let and/or completed. 

In the event the council elects to pass the assessment ordinance when costs for the improvement are known, the following process shall be employed. 

A. When the improvement has been completed, the cost shall be determined by adding to the contract price of the work or, if not contracted, the city work crew cost of the work, the cost of right‑of‑way, condemnation expenses, cost of engineering, supervision, inspection, advertising, legal expenses, and any other necessary and proper expenses, which costs and expenses shall be a part of the amounts to be assessed to the benefited properties. 

B. The final report of the above costs shall be submitted to council, and when the final report has been approved by motion of council, the engineering staff of the city of Silverton shall prepare a proposed assessment roll ordering and describing each lot to be assessed, with the names of the owners, and shall levy against those lots in a manner directed by council and provisions of ordinances applicable to special assessments. The proposed assessment roll shall be submitted for the approval of the city manager. The city manager may require the engineering staff to make any changes or modifications in the proposed assessment roll. When the proposed assessment roll has been approved by the city manager, she or he shall file it with the city recorder and refer it to council for review, modification, acceptance or rejection by council.

C. When the proposed assessment roll is received for filing council shall publish a notice of the time and place of a public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation published in the city at least 10 days before the public hearing. The notice shall state that at the public hearing council will, at a stated time and place, consider oral and written remonstrances to the proposed assessment roll, and that written remonstrances should be filed with the city recorder prior to the public hearing. This notice shall state that within 30 days after council passage of the ordinance confirming the assessment roll, the owner of the assessed properties may file with the city recorder, on a form provided for the purpose, an application to pay the assessment in whole or in part on an installment basis, as provided by the Bancroft Bonding Act, ORS 223.205 to 223.300, which is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this section. This notice shall also state that, if the assessment is not eligible under the provisions of the Bancroft Bonding Act, or if the owner of the assessed property does not apply to use the installment basis, all or part of the assessment shall be excluded from the installment payment procedure and shall be paid in full by cash within 30 days of the date of entry in the unbonded lien docket. 

D. The city recorder shall, at least 10 days before the public hearing, mail a notice to each owner of property to be assessed, which notice shall be deposited in the post office in the city, postage prepaid, addressed to such owners at their last known address. If the address of the owner is unknown to the recorder, she or he shall mail the notice to the owner or his or her agent at the address where the property to be assessed is located. The mailed notice shall show the amount proposed to be assessed to the addressee, owner or property proposed to be assessed. 

E. The council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed assessment roll at the time and place stated in the notice of public hearing. Council may continue the hearing. After hearing the remonstrances, if any, council may refer the proposed assessment roll to the city manager for correction or adjustment, or may make corrections or adjustments, and shall pass an assessment ordinance confirming the assessment roll, including any corrections or adjustment, providing for the assessment of the benefited properties, and for the apportionment of the assessment to the individual lots within the local improvement district.

F. Immediately after council has approved the assessment ordinance, the city manager shall enter the assessments in the city unbonded lien docket, which assessments shall be a lien and charge upon the respective lots against which they are placed. Such liens shall be first and prior to all other liens or encumbrances insofar as the laws of Oregon allow. (Ord. 03-110 § 1, 2003; Ord. 847 Art. 1 § 7, 1987)


12.08.130 Assessments – Methods authorized.

The city council, in adopting a method of assessment of the costs of the improvement, may:

A. Use any just and reasonable method of determining the extent of any improvement district consistent with the benefits derived;

B. Use any method of apportioning the sum to be assessed as is just and reasonable between the properties determined to be specially benefitted;

C. Authorize payment by the city of all or any part of the cost of any such improvement when, in the opinion of the council, the topographical or physical conditions, or unusual or excess public travel, or other character of the work involved, warrants only a partial payment or no payment by the benefitted property of the costs of the improvement. (Ord. 847 Art. 1 § 7, 1987)


12.08.140 Other financing methods.

Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit the council from using any other available means of financing improvements. In the event that such other means of financing improvements is used, the council may, at its discretion, levy special assessments. The assessments would be according to the benefits derived, to cover any remaining part of the cost of the improvement. (Ord. 847 Art. 1 § 7, 1987)


12.08.150 Assessments – Notice to property owner.

A. Within 10 days after the ordinance levying assessments has been passed, the city recorder shall send, by certified mail, a notice of assessment to the owner of the assessed property.

B. The notice of assessment shall contain:

1. The date of the assessment ordinance;

2. A statement that, upon failure of the owner of the property assessed to make application to pay the assessment in installments within 10 days from the date of the receipt of notice or the first publication of same, or upon failure of the owner to pay the assessment in full within 30 days from the date of the assessment ordinance, then interest will commence to run on the assessment, and the property assessed will be subject to foreclosure;

3. A description of the property assessed;

4. The name of the owner of the property assessed;

5. The amount of assessment.

C. Any mistake, error, omission or failure with respect to such mailing shall not be jurisdictional or invalidate the assessment proceedings. (Ord. 847 Art. 1 § 7, 1987)


12.08.160 Assessments – Installment payments.

At any time within 10 days after receipt of notice of assessment, or the first publication of the same, the property owner liable for such assessment may file with the city finance director a written application to pay the assessment in installments. The application shall state that the applicant (property owner) does hereby waive all irregularities or defects, jurisdictional or otherwise, in the proceedings or construction of the public improvement for which the assessment is levied, and in the apportionment of the cost thereof. The application shall provide that the applicant (property owner) agrees to pay the assessment in 20 semi-annual installments, including interest charges on the unpaid balance of the assessment. The application shall also contain a description of the property assessed for such public improvement, and contain such further information as the council may request. An application may be denied, as provided herein, by the city’s director of finance, if the assessment, together with any previous assessments and remaining unpaid, equals or exceeds the valuation of the property as shown on the tax roll for Marion County. (Ord. 847 Art. 1 § 7, 1987)


12.08.165 Assessments – Installment payments – Application for semi-annual payments.

The city may allow the assessment described hereinabove to be paid in 40 semi-annual installments. The application for payment in 40 semi-annual installments shall set forth the reasons therefor and that it is in the best interest of the city taking into consideration the need of the city for such improvement, the city’s desire for such improvement and any other factors the city council may require. It is the exception rather than the rule that 40 semi-annual payments are allowed and the council shall make a determination that the allowance of the 40 semi-annual payments is in the best interest of the city. (Ord. 93-113 § 1, 1993)


12.08.170 Assessments – Interest rate.

Interest on all outstanding assessments shall be charged at a rate of one percent per year over and above whatever the city is required to pay for its construction warrants in any particular year, but in no event more than is authorized under the laws of the state. (Ord. 847 Art. 1 § 7, 1987)


12.08.180 Assessments – Appeal procedure.

Subject to the curative provisions of this code and the rights of the city to reassess, proceedings for writs of review and suits in equity may be filed not earlier than 30 days nor later than 60 days after the filing of written objections as provided herein. A property owner who has filed written objections with the city recorder prior to the public hearing may have the right to apply for a writ of review based upon the city council exercising its functions erroneously or arbitrarily or exceeding its jurisdiction to the injury of some substantial right of such owner, if the facts supporting such claim have been specifically set forth in the written objections. A property owner who has filed written objections with the city recorder prior to the public hearing may commence a suit for equitable relief based upon a total lack of jurisdiction on the part of the city; and if notice of the improvement shall not have been sent to the owner, and if the owner did not have actual knowledge of the proposed improvement prior to the hearing, then the owner may file written objections alleging lack of jurisdiction with the city recorder within 30 days after receiving notice or knowledge of the improvement. No provision of this section shall be construed to lengthen any period of redemption or so as to affect the running of any statute of limitation. Any proceeding on a writ of review or suit in equity shall be abated if proceedings are commenced and diligently pursued by the city council to remedy or cure the alleged errors or defects. (Ord. 03-110 § 2, 2003; Ord. 847 Art. 1 § 8, 1987)


12.08.190 Assessment liens – Recordation.

A. Upon passage of the assessment ordinance by the council, the city recorder shall enter the amount assessed in the docket of city liens. Information placed in the docket is as follows:

1. Statement of amounts assessed upon each particular lot;

2. Parcel of land or portion thereof;

3. Description or tax lot or assessor’s number;

4. Name of property owners;

5. Date of the assessment ordinance.

B. Upon such entry in the lien docket, the amount so entered shall become a lien and charge upon the respective lots, parcels or land, or portions thereof, which have been assessed for such an improvement. All assessment liens of the city shall be superior and prior to all other liens and encumbrances on property insofar as the state permits. (Ord. 847 Art. 1 § 9, 1987)


12.08.200 Assessment liens – Foreclosure.

After expiration of 30 days from the date of such assessment ordinance, the city may proceed to foreclose or enforce collection of the assessment liens in the manner provided by the general law of the state. The city may, at its option, enter a bid for the property being offered at a foreclosure sale. The bid shall be prior to all bids except those made by persons who would be entitled under the laws of the state to redeem such property. (Ord. 847 Art. 1 § 9, 1987)


12.08.210 Assessments – Errors and corrections.

Claimed errors in the calculation of assessments shall be called to the attention of the city recorder, who shall determine whether there has been an error in fact. If the recorder shall find that there has been an error in fact, the recorder shall recommend to the council an amendment to the assessment ordinance to correct such an error, and upon enactment of such amendment, the city recorder shall make the necessary correction in the docket of city liens and send a correct notice of assessment by registered or certified mail. (Ord. 847 Art. 1 § 10, 1987)


12.08.220 Deficit assessments.

A. In the event the assessment is found to be insufficient to defray the expenses of the improvement, the council may, by motion, declare such deficit and prepare a proposed deficit assessment. Upon declaring such a motion, the council shall:

1. Set a time for a hearing of objections;

2. Direct the city recorder to publish one notice thereof in a newspaper of general circulation in the city;

3. Direct the city recorder to mail copies of such notice by certified mail to the owners to be assessed for the additional costs of the improvement.

B. After such hearing, the council shall make a just and equitable deficit assessment by ordinance, which shall be entered in the docket of city liens as provided by this chapter.

C. Notices of the deficit assessment shall be published and mailed, and the collection of assessments shall be made in accordance with SMC 12.08.120 through 12.08.170, 12.08.190 and 12.08.200. (Ord. 847 Art. 1 § 11, 1987)


12.08.230 Rebates.

If, upon completion of the improvement project, it is found that the assessment previously levied upon any property is more than sufficient to pay the cost of such improvements:

A. Council must ascertain and declare the same by ordinance;

B. The excess amounts must be entered on the lien docket as a credit upon the appropriate assessment;

C. Any person(s) having previously paid such assessments shall be entitled to repayment of such rebate credit. (Ord. 847 Art. 1 § 12, 1987)


12.08.240 Abandonment of proceedings.

The council shall have full power and authority to abandon and rescind proceedings from improvements made under this chapter at any time prior to the final completion of such improvements. If liens have been assessed upon any property under such procedure, the properties benefitted by the improvement shall be liable for the cost of the actual completed portions of the improvement. (Ord. 847 Art. 1 § 13, 1987)


12.08.250 Assessments – Curative provisions.

A. No improvement assessment shall be rendered invalid by reason of any of the following:

1. Failure of the engineer’s report to contain all of the information required by SMC 12.08.040;

2. Failure of any of the following to have all of the information required:

a. Improvement resolution,

b. Assessment ordinance,

c. Lien docket,

d. Notices required to be published,

e. Notices to be mailed,

f. Failure to list the name of or mail notice to the owner of any property as required;

3. Any other error, mistake, delay, omission, irregularity or other act, jurisdictional or otherwise, in any of the proceedings or steps herein specified.

B. Improvement assessments may be ruled invalid if the assessment is unfair or unjust in its effect upon the person complaining. The council shall have the power and authority to remedy and correct all such matters by suitable action and proceedings. (Ord. 847 Art. 1 § 13, 1987)


12.08.260 Reassessment.

Whenever any assessment, deficit or reassessment for any improvement which has been made by the city has been or shall be set aside, annulled, declared or rendered void, or its enforcement restrained by any court of the state, or any federal court having jurisdiction thereof, or when the council shall be in doubt as to the validity of such assessment, deficit assessment or reassessment, or any part thereof, then the council may make a reassessment in the manner provided by the laws of the state. (Ord. 847 Art. 1 § 13, 1987)


12.08.270 Waivers to the right of remonstrance.

Any property owner or agent thereof applying for a permit to construct a new building, for the purpose of habitation or commercial or industrial business, in any area of the city lacking adequate public improvements such as street, storm drain, sidewalk, water or sewer, as determined by the city engineer, shall, as a condition of receiving said permit, waive their right to remonstrate against such future public improvements benefiting the property for which the permit is requested. In the event the area has any combination of sewer, water, storm drain, sidewalk or street improvement, but lacks one or more of these improvements, then waivers for the deficient improvement(s) shall be required before issuance of the permit. All such improvement waivers shall be given as a covenant to and with the city, and such shall be taken to run with the property affected. See SDC 3.4.700 for the requirement of waivers for land use actions and exemptions thereof. (Ord. 90-112 § 4, 1990; Ord. 847 Art. 1 § 14, 1987)


12.08.280 Engineering fees.

In order to defray the cost of engineering services needed to produce the improvement, an engineering fee shall be included as part of the improvement assessment. Engineering may be done in whole or in part by the city, by a contract, or by any other governmental agency, or by any combination thereof. Where engineering fees are to be split among the different organizations performing the work, the rates shall be as agreed upon by the council prior to proceeding with the work. Where the city will perform all engineering services for the improvement, the fee schedule is as called for in the fees resolution section in effect at the time an engineer’s report is initiated by council motion. (Ord. 847 Art. 1 § 15, 1987)

Article III. Alternative Improvement Procedure


12.08.290 Initiation when improvements paid in cash.

In a case where a property owner wishes to make improvements within a city right-of-way which will benefit his or her property, and desires to do so at his or her own initial expense, the owner may initiate the improvement by petition to the city council by way of the city engineer. (Ord. 97-109 Art. 3 § 1, 1997)


12.08.300 Plans required – Contents.

A. The property owner or agent of the property owner shall provide the city engineer with a written construction plan completed by a registered engineer representing the owner/agent. The city engineer shall review the plans prior to presenting them to the city council, and may require additional information, as needed, to provide for a viable improvement.

B. Plans shall contain the minimum following information:

1. The proposed improvement, in detail sufficient for construction by a typical contractor, and in conformance with existing city design and construction standards;

2. Dimensioned property and easement lines, and ownerships within the affected area;

3. Existing street name(s) and the width and zoning of adjacent property;

4. A maximum horizontal scale of one inch equals 40 feet, and a vertical scale of one inch equals two feet;

5. A vicinity map;

6. North arrow and title block;

7. Engineer’s registration stamp;

8. Location of existing public and private utilities;

9. Location of any drainage ways. (Ord. 847 Art. 2 § 2, 1987)


12.08.310 Approval – Bond or deposit required.

Upon approval of the proposed improvement by the city council, the property owner/agent shall ensure the completion of the improvement by providing one of the following to the city prior to the start of construction:

A. Surety bonding through a surety company authorized to do business in the state in an amount equal to the total improvement costs as estimated by the city engineer. The bond shall be in a form approved by the city attorney;

B. A deposit of funds with either the city manager or licensed escrow agent or trust company, subject to approval of the city council, in an amount equal to the total improvement costs as estimated by the city engineer. If a cash deposit is made, the agreement may provide that portions of that deposit may be released to the property owner as the extent of progress is certified by the city engineer. (Ord. 847 Art. 2 § 3, 1987)


12.08.320 Property owner’s responsibilities.

A. The property owner shall insure the finished improvement against poor materials and/or workmanship for not less than one year by providing the city either a surety bond or cash deposit of not less than 20 percent of the total improvement costs for the period of one year. If the property owner fails to carry out the improvement and the city has unreimbursed costs or expenses resulting from such failure, the city may call on the measure of assurance provided for reimbursement. If the amount of the city-held assurance exceeds the costs and expenses incurred by the city, the city shall release the remainder. If the amount of the city-held assurance is less than the cost and expense incurred by the city, the property owner shall be liable to the city for the difference.

B. The city engineer shall be the city’s representative, and as such perform inspection of all improvement construction on city right-of-way. All construction shall conform to the city’s standards. If the city engineer determines that the city standards are not being met, then the city engineer shall require the changes necessary, and may stop construction if such changes are not effected.

C. An engineering inspection fee shall be paid to the city by the property owner starting any improvement construction. The fee shall be based on the city engineer’s estimate of the total improvement cost, and charged at the rate specified for subdivision improvements stipulated by the Silverton fee resolution.

D. The property owner or agent of the property owner shall be responsible for the conduct of all work within the public rights-of-way, and shall indemnify, defend and save harmless the city from and against all losses and all claims, demands, payments, suits, actions, recoveries and judgements of every nature by reason of any act or omission of the property owner, or employees or agents, in the execution of the work. The property owner shall conform with all provisions of appropriate city ordinances, as well as complying with the appropriate regulations and statutes of all other governing entities in the state.

E. The property owner or agent therefor shall maintain and show proof of public liability insurance against death or injury to persons, or damage to property, in the performance of their duties while working in any city right-of-way or easement. The type and amounts of insurance will protect the contractor and owner from all claims, and will be found in the Silverton fee resolution. (Ord. 847 Art. 2 § 4, 1987)


12.08.330 Cost reimbursement conditions.

A. Upon approved construction of a public improvement to the water system, the property owner paying for such, or the property owner’s assignee, shall have the right to receive reimbursement from such other property owners receiving a new service directly from the improvement. Reimbursement shall be through the city and shall be a proportionate share as determined by the water and sewer ordinances in effect.

B. Upon approved construction of a public improvement to the sanitary sewer system, the property owner paying for such, or the property owner’s assignee, shall have the right to receive reimbursement from such other property owners receiving new service directly from the improvement.

C. Upon approved construction of public improvements to a public street, including, curbs and/or paving, the property owner, or the property owner’s assignee, shall have the right to receive reimbursement from such other owner of undeveloped, or valid street improvement waivered property that both directly fronts and also would have direct benefit from these improvements upon development. Direct benefit from a public street improvement shall be constituted by direct access by way of a driveway curb cut. Said reimbursement shall, either be required upon development, or as provided in any valid street improvement waiver affecting said benefitted property.

D. Upon approved construction of a public improvement to the city storm drain system, the property owner paying for such, or the property owner’s assignee, shall have the right to receive reimbursement from such other property owners receiving a direct benefit from the new storm drain improvement. Direct benefit from a public storm drain shall be constituted when stormwater from the property affected enters the storm drain piping system improvement by way of a direct pipeline connection from the benefitting property.

E. Where the city’s zoning code requires a public notification or public hearing as part of any land use action that will require public infrastructure improvements, the city shall include notice of potential reimbursement assessment in such notice and to all properties in the notification areas specified. Where other code provisions do not require public notification or public hearing, the city shall provide notice by mail to all property owners immediately adjacent to the improvement being initiated by this method and prior to any construction.

F. “Development” means the construction of a main use building where no such use has existed for three or more years on the property affected herein.

G. The property owner requesting reimbursement for any public improvements included herein shall request such in writing to the city within 60 days of final completion of work as accepted by the city and, shall provide such documentation as determined necessary by the city engineer to verify actual construction and engineering costs of said improvement. The city engineer shall prepare an assessment distribution based on the city’s current code for special assessments of public improvements. Notice of potential assessment shall be sent to each affected property giving the city engineer’s estimate of the reimbursement amount upon receipt of the aforementioned letter requesting reimbursement. The reimbursement assessment amount will be set by the city council by resolution, as soon as practical. The council approved assessment amounts for each property shall be recorded by the city as a lien on each affected property. Failure to give notice to the city within 60 days of final completion shall void any right for reimbursement as provided for in this section.

H. This reimbursement policy shall continue for 10 years from the date that improvement bonding or other security, as provided by city code, is received and then end.

I. Reimbursement shall be through the city and shall be in the amount proportionate to the benefit received as determined by SMC 12.08.130. Only in the case of sewer improvements, where currently developed but unserved property connects to the sewer line, said property shall be allowed to finance all assessable sewer improvements costs by installment payments to the city as per SMC 12.08.165. In the case of sewering only, property owners choosing to connect to the available public sewer at the time of initial construction by another developer, or the city, interest shall not accrue if the term for repayment is 10 years or less. However, should any payments during the payment term be determined to be late or deficient in meeting the requirements of SMC 12.08.165, interest shall thereafter accrue at the same rate as the most current rates of the city. All other public improvement reimbursements shall be by payment in full to the city within 30 days of receipt of notification of assessment invoice from the city. Reimbursement to a developer shall be upon receipt of payments, only. The city shall use similar methods for reimbursement collections as provided in this section of the code, including assessment liens recording and foreclosure.

J. Where a public improvement qualifies for both credits and reimbursement pursuant to Chapter 13.70 SMC and this section, respectively, the developer shall assign to the city any right for reimbursement for which a developer has redeemed system development charge credits. The city shall only collect reimbursement for that portion of the improvement up to and including the city standard for size or capacity appropriate for the respective property owner’s usage, as determined by the city manager or his designee. All provisions of this assignment, including time limits, shall follow the original developers reimbursement approval.

K. Where the city constructs a new public improvement with city funds, the provisions of this section for reimbursement shall accrue with the city in the same manner as for a developer completing such improvements. (Ord. 98-122 § 1, 1998; Ord. 98-109 § 1, A, 1998)

Article IV. General Requirements


12.08.340 As-built drawings required for public improvements.

The engineer of any improvement to be maintained or to come under the control of the city shall furnish the city upon completion of construction, a complete set of as-built drawings prior to city acceptance of the improvements. Said drawings shall be made on archivable material suitable for reproduction, at least 24 inches by 36 inches in size with graphic and text information made with permanent black India type ink or silver halide permanent photocopy. If the drawings are produced on a Computer Aided Drafting (CAD) system, the engineer shall submit the drawings on computer disc to the city in a format acceptable for inclusion into the city’s CAD system. The city engineer shall approve and maintain a file of all as-built drawings.

“As-built” drawings are defined as engineering drawings completed after construction of an improvement to reflect the location and materials utilized in construction of the facility. In addition, it shall also include identification of surface and underground natural features (rock, ditches, groundwater, etc.) and manmade features (utility lines, improvements, etc.) encountered during construction. (Ord. 90-118 § 2, 1990)


Chapter 12.12 PUBLIC OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITIES

(Repealed by Ord. 06-03)


Chapter 12.16 SIDEWALKS

Sections:

12.16.010    Definitions.

12.16.020    New sidewalks or repairs – When required.

12.16.030    Sidewalks reconstruction or repairs – City work and assessments.

12.16.040    Repair and maintenance of sidewalks, curbs, or monolithic curbs and gutters in the public right-of-way.

12.16.050    Filling of space between sidewalk and curb.

12.16.060    Permit to construct, reconstruct, or repair and fees.

12.16.070    Procedure when owner refuses to construct or repair.


12.16.010 Definitions.

As used in this chapter:

A. “City” means the city of Silverton, Marion County, Oregon.

B. “Contractor” means and includes all persons whomsoever constructing or having in charge the construction of any sidewalk.

C. “Council” means the city council of Silverton.

D. “Engineer” means the city engineer, and shall include engineers appointed especially for particular work as well as a regularly appointed city engineer.

E. “Owner” means and shall include all persons, firms and corporations whomsoever owing real property abutting upon any public street in the city, and shall include a purchaser under an executory contract of sale.

F. “Recorder” means the recorder and clerk of the city.

G. “Sidewalk” means that portion of the street set apart by ordinance, resolution, use or otherwise for the use of pedestrians. (Ord. 19-03 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019)


12.16.020 New sidewalks or repairs – When required.

A. Property owners shall maintain at all times any sidewalk or curb adjacent to their land in a reasonably safe condition. The owner of property adjacent to a defective sidewalk shall be liable to any person suffering bodily injuries, property damage, or both as a result of any breach of a duty imposed under this chapter.

B. No recourse whatsoever shall be had against the city, its council, mayor, employees or agents for damage or loss to person or property arising out of the negligent or otherwise harmful maintenance of any sidewalk or curb described in subsection (A) of this section.

C. A property owner described in subsection (A) of this section shall indemnify, defend and hold the city, its council, mayor, employees and agents harmless against any claim, suit or action made against the city, its council, mayor, employees and agents as a result of any person’s failure to fulfill the duty imposed by subsection (A) of this section.

D. The public works director or his/her designee shall prescribe standards for the maintenance of sidewalks in usable condition and any other standards the director deems appropriate to maintain the effective use of sidewalk surfaces by pedestrians. Whenever the director learns of any condition in a sidewalk which may not conform to the standards, the director shall cause the sidewalk to be inspected and, if found to be defective under those standards, document the substandard conditions and prioritize them for repairs. Repairs required to be made by the abutting property owner(s) are to be in accordance with the applicable provisions of this chapter.

E. In case the owner fails to keep such sidewalk in repair, the council may proceed to repair or replace the same on the same notice and in the same manner as specified in this chapter for the construction of new walks.

F. No walk shall be repaired where, in the judgment of the council, a new walk should be installed, and the decision of the council as to whether an existing walk should be repaired or a new walk constructed in the place thereof shall be final and binding upon all property owners.

G. Requirements for New Construction Abutting Improved Streets. Except as otherwise provided in the Silverton Development Code, it is the duty and shall be required of every property owner whose property abuts any street that has been improved with hard surface pavement and curbs to construct a sidewalk conforming to the provisions of this chapter within 100 days from the completion of construction of any building located upon the property of such owner. For the purposes of this section, sidewalks shall be required along the entire length of said property composing the building site abutting any improved street. This section shall not apply to accessory buildings as defined in Article 1 of the Silverton Development Code, provided such accessory buildings are located in a residential district.

H. Requirements for Undeveloped Lots Abutting Improved Streets.

1. Every property owner whose property abuts upon any street that has been improved with hard surface pavement and curbs shall construct a sidewalk conforming to the provisions of this chapter, under the following circumstances:

a. At least 70 percent of the property frontage is developed along that side of the block;

b. At least 70 percent of the required sidewalks on that side of the block are already constructed; and

c. It has been at least three years since the abutting street was improved to hard surface pavement and curbs, beginning with streets constructed on or after January 1, 2004.

2. For the purposes of subsection (H)(1)(b) of this section, a property having a sidewalk construction deferral pursuant to the Silverton Development Code shall be counted as if a sidewalk were constructed, and shall be subject to having its deferral terminated and sidewalk construction required. All property owners affected by the requirements of this section must be in compliance within 12 months of notification by the public works director.

3. Property owners failing to comply with this section shall be subject to actions taken by the public works director pursuant to SMC 12.16.070. (Ord. 19-03 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019)


12.16.030 Sidewalks reconstruction or repairs – City work and assessments.

A. Whenever, in the judgment of the public works director or his/her designee, it is necessary that any existing sidewalk be repaired or any new sidewalk be constructed, the public works director or his/her designee shall cause written notice of the damaged sidewalk to be mailed to the owner or owners, by certified mail, of the property abutting the sidewalk.

1. The notice shall specify therein the name of the owner, if known, and a description of the property adjacent to which such walk is to be constructed, sufficient for identification, and for that purpose the notice shall be sufficient if it shall specify the street and number of such property.

2. The notice shall direct that 30 days’ notice shall be given to the owner to obtain a permit to begin the construction of a sidewalk, and shall specify generally, according to the district in which such walk is to be constructed, whether the same shall be constructed of concrete or other material.

3. The notice shall state that if the owner of the property affected fails to make such reconstruction or repair within the time limited by the notice, then the public works director shall proceed to reconstruct or repair such sidewalk. The cost of labor and material required for the reconstruction or repair, including inspection services plus 10 percent to cover overhead, shall be charged to the owner of the property abutting the reconstructed or repaired sidewalk.

4. The notice shall state that the owner shall obtain a permit to undertake repair or reconstruction within 30 days of the date of notice and that the repair or reconstruction must be completed within a reasonable period of time.

5. The notice may also specify the nature and location of lighted barricades to be placed and maintained by the owner.

6. The notice shall inform the property owner directed to reconstruct or repair a sidewalk that they may appeal therefrom to the city council by giving written notice of appeal to the city manager within 14 days of the date the notice was mailed. The notice of the appeal shall state one or more of the following grounds for the appeal:

a. That the alleged defect is not in violation of the standards adopted under this chapter;

b. That the alleged defect is not hazardous in fact because of special conditions in the particular case;

c. That the compliance period is unreasonable;

d. That an extension of the compliance period was unreasonably denied;

e. That warning devices or barricades specified in the notice are unreasonable; or

f. That the person to whom notice has been given is not the owner of the property adjacent to the allegedly defective sidewalk.

B. If, in the opinion of the public works director or his/her designee, the defect in the sidewalk represents an immediate and extreme hazard to the public, he/she may cause lighted barricades or warning devices to be immediately placed to give warning of the hazard; and shall, if the abutting property is occupied, give written notice to the occupant, as well as the owner, that such lighted barricades have been erected, from which time it shall be the responsibility of the owner to maintain adequate lighted barricades or warning devices continually in place. The owner may place substitute lighted barricades, in which event the director or his/her designee shall cause the city’s equipment to be removed; but in any event the abutting owner shall pay to the city a fee as prescribed by resolution of the city council.

C. The owner whose property is so charged with such construction shall, within 30 days from date of such service, obtain a permit to undertake repair or reconstruction as required by subsection (A) of this section. The construction or repair of the sidewalk described in the notice shall be completed within a reasonable period of time considering limitation of weather and season, not to exceed 120 days from the date of the notice of noncompliance. If the owner shall fail so to do, he or she shall be deemed to have waived his or her right to himself or herself construct such sidewalk, and the city shall proceed to construct the same in the manner hereinafter provided; provided, however, that the city manager or his/her designee may, on application of such owner and for good cause shown, extend, for such reasonable time as it shall deem proper, the time limit within which the owner shall proceed with the work.

D. Any person who, by the notice prescribed in subsection (A) of this section, is directed to reconstruct or repair a sidewalk may appeal to the city council by giving written notice of appeal to the city manager within 14 days of the date the notice was mailed. The notice of the appeal shall state one or more of the following grounds for the appeal:

1. That the alleged defect is not in violation of the standards adopted under this chapter;

2. That the alleged defect is not hazardous in fact because of special conditions in the particular case;

3. That the compliance period is unreasonable;

4. That an extension of the compliance period was unreasonably denied;

5. That warning devices or barricades specified in the notice are unreasonable; or

6. That the person to whom notice has been given is not the owner of the property adjacent to the allegedly defective sidewalk.

E. Upon receiving a notice of appeal, the city manager shall set the matter for public hearing before the city council and give notice thereof to the appellant. Following the hearing, the city council may affirm, reverse, or modify the public works director’s action.

F. If no appeal is filed within the time provided in subsection (D) of this section and no permit has been obtained or the repairs or reconstruction are not completed as required by the notice, or if the direction of the city council following an appeal is not complied with, the public works director shall make full report to the city council and the council may proceed as provided hereinafter. (Ord. 19-03 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019)


12.16.040 Repair and maintenance of sidewalks, curbs, or monolithic curbs and gutters in the public right-of-way.

A. It is declared to be the duty of the owners, lessees, and occupants abutting upon or adjacent to any sidewalk to keep such sidewalk clean and clear of ice, snow, dirt, vegetation, debris, or obstructions for the safe use of the public at all times.

B. No person owning real property shall cause or allow the sidewalk, curb or monolithic curb and gutter in the abutting public right-of-way to present an unreasonable risk of harm to persons or property.

C. For purposes of this section, a sidewalk, curb or monolithic curb and gutter shall be deemed to present an unreasonable risk of danger to person or property if, among other things:

1. Panels or pieces of same are gap-separated more than one-half inch from adjacent panels or pieces; or

2. Panels or pieces of same are vertically displaced from each other more than one-quarter inch; or

3. Entire pieces or panels are absent, or there exist pieces or panels broken into parts smaller than one square foot; or

4. The grade from one piece or panel to the adjacent piece changes by more than one-half inch per foot in any direction; or

5. Handicap access ramps or driveways deviate from the slopes and dimensions included in the standards and specifications set by the city engineer; or

6. Curb pieces exist less than two feet in length; or

7. Monolithic curb and gutter sections are cracked or broken longitudinally, or displaced one-half inch or more from the adjacent paving; or

8. The surface irregularities are generally more than one-half inch from the original surface.

9. This list is not intended to be exclusive.

D. The existence of sidewalks, curbs or monolithic curbs and gutters in such condition as to present an unreasonable risk of danger to persons or property hereby is declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated by any of the procedures set forth in SMC 8.04.050 et seq.

E. A person who owns property that abuts a sidewalk, curb or monolithic curb and gutter in such condition as to present an unreasonable risk of danger to persons or property is civilly liable for all claims arising from that condition. (Ord. 19-03 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019)


12.16.050 Filling of space between sidewalk and curb.

It shall be the duty of all property owners to fill in the space between the curb and sidewalks in front of or abutting their property, and to the curb line of the street at the intersections, with earth or other material approved by the public works director or his/her designee to a level and grade with the curb and sidewalk. If such space is filled with earth, at least 75 percent of the surface area shall be covered with perennial living plant material which conforms to all other requirements of this code, and which is kept free of noxious vegetation. (Ord. 19-03 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019)


12.16.060 Permit to construct, reconstruct, or repair and fees.

A. No person shall construct a sidewalk in the public right-of-way, except in accordance with current standards and specifications established by the public works director or in accordance with this section and the Silverton Development Code.

B. The public works department shall issue a permit upon approval of a permit application for construction and repairs to all sidewalks on city rights-of-way. No persons shall construct, reconstruct, or repair any sidewalk without first obtaining said permit.

1. Permit and Service Fees. Application for the permits required shall be made to the public works department and shall describe the location, width, length, and material proposed to be used, and shall include a plan view drawing with such other information as the public works director or his/her designee may deem necessary to demonstrate compliance with the provisions of this chapter. The application shall be accompanied with an inspection fee in the amount prescribed by resolution of the city council.

2. Compliance. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully construct, reconstruct, or repair any sidewalk upon a grade or alignment contrary to the specifications or directions of any permits granted by the public works department.

3. Inspection of Sidewalks Constructed under Permit. The owner or his/her contractor shall notify the public works department in accordance with the prescribed schedule that forms are ready for inspection and prior to placing concrete. After a permit to construct, reconstruct, or repair a sidewalk is issued and notification is given by the owner or contractor, it shall be the duty of the public works director or his/her designee to make inspection of the sidewalk forms as, in his judgement, is necessary to have full compliance with the provisions of this chapter and other ordinances that may be applicable. If the forms are not placed in accordance with the specifications, the owner or his/her contractor shall make the required corrections before placing concrete. After forms are approved by the director or his/her designee, concrete shall be placed and finished in accordance with the specifications. If the finished sidewalk is not constructed in accordance with the specifications and other terms of this chapter, it shall be the duty of the director or his/her designee to proceed in accordance with this section against the owner of the property affected, being the owners of the property abutting upon that part of the street where the sidewalk is being constructed.

4. Failure to Obtain a Permit. In the event the owner or his contractor fails to obtain a permit as required by this section or fails to call for a form inspection as required by this section, the director or his/her designee shall collect a fee double the normal fee currently prescribed by resolution of the city council. In addition it shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee, or occupant of any property, or for any person or agent of such, or for any contractor, or any agent or employee of any contractor, to construct any sidewalk or area between the sidewalk and curb in any manner contrary to the terms and provisions of this chapter. Any sidewalk or area between the sidewalk and curb constructed contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be removed and corrected or caused to be removed and corrected by the property owner affected, within 10 days after he or she receives notice from the director or his/her designee, and each day the offending situation remains in place after 10 days of the owner receiving notice from the director or his/her designee shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter. Violation of this chapter is an infraction.

5. Deposit or Bond. A deposit or bond in the amount established by council resolution shall be collected from all applicants for new sidewalk construction prior to issuance of a permit. The deposit shall be returned to the applicant upon inspection and approval by the city engineer’s designee of the constructed or repaired sidewalk. The deposit or bond shall be waived in the case of repairs to an existing sidewalk. The permit for each construction or repair shall declare the applicant’s responsibility for repair or replacement of any defective or damaged sidewalk affected by this work. (Ord. 19-03 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019)


12.16.070 Procedure when owner refuses to construct or repair.

Whenever the public works director or his/her designee determines that the construction, reconstruction or repair of any sidewalk is necessary, per the requirements found in this chapter, and the owner of the property affected fails to make such construction, reconstruction, or repair within the time limits specified in this chapter, then the public works director shall proceed to construct, reconstruct, or repair such walk, and shall keep an accurate account of the cost of labor and material required for such construction or repair, including inspection services. Such cost, plus 10 percent additional to defray the cost of preparing and serving the notice, engineering, and advertising, shall constitute the cost of construction, reconstruction, or repair of such sidewalk and shall constitute a lien upon the benefitted property, which lien shall be entered by the recorder in the appropriate lien docket of the city and shall be collected and foreclosed as a lien. (Ord. 19-03 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019)


Chapter 12.20 DRIVEWAYS

(Repealed by Ord. 06-03)


Chapter 12.28 STREET AND SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTIONS

Sections:

12.28.010    Obstructing public ways by storing personal property.

12.28.020    Delivery of personal property – Exemptions.

12.28.030    Warning lights required when.

12.28.040    Selling, storing or displaying merchandise.

12.28.050    Depositing earth or debris on streets or sidewalks.


12.28.010 Obstructing public ways by storing personal property.

No person shall, except as otherwise permitted by ordinance, obstruct, cause to be obstructed, or assist in obstructing pedestrian or vehicular traffic on any sidewalk or street by deposit or storage thereon of personal property. (Ord. 467 § 15(1), 1962)


12.28.020 Delivery of personal property – Exemptions.

The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the delivery of merchandise or equipment; provided, that no person shall permit such merchandise or equipment to remain on any street or sidewalk beyond a reasonable time. (Ord. 467 § 15(2), 1962)


12.28.030 Warning lights required when.

No person shall, from sunset to sunrise, permit any merchandise, equipment or other obstruction to remain on any street or sidewalk unless a warning light or lights are placed by such obstruction in such a position as to be clearly visible for a distance of at least 200 feet both ways; provided, however, that such obstructions will be allowed only upon express authorization obtained from the chief of police when such obstruction will not unduly hinder or impede traffic. (Ord. 467 § 15(3), 1962)


12.28.040 Selling, storing or displaying merchandise.

No person shall use any street or sidewalk, or portion thereof, for selling, storing or displaying merchandise or equipment except as follows:

A. Merchandising in the public right-of-way shall be allowed only in the commercial districts on the public sidewalk along the business frontage of an associated ground level retail space; provided, that all products are sold within the principal use, all merchandise and related fixtures are removed from the right-of-way at the end of the business’s hours of operation, and the use does not encroach on door openings, drive aisles, parking areas, loading zones or fire lanes, and maintains a 60-inch unobstructed pedestrian way.

B. Placement of all merchandise must also adhere to the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act and all other applicable standards and shall not unreasonably obstruct sidewalk spaces or inhibit the free passage in such areas. All merchandise and/or supporting structures must be placed on the ground, and may not be affixed exclusively to the face of the building. Displays of merchandise may not obstruct ingress to or egress from the building.

C. Merchandise and supporting structures shall not project more than two feet from the property line of the building housing the permanent retail operation.

D. All merchandise and supporting structures shall be kept clean and in good repair.

E. No electricity may be used in conjunction with the display of merchandise, for artificial light or any other purpose. Electrical goods which are not plugged in may be displayed.

F. Any merchandising display must be removed whenever required by city personnel.

G. Any merchandise otherwise prohibited from being sold outdoors shall be prohibited from being displayed and sold under this section. (Ord. 14-05 § 1, 2014; Ord. 467 § 15(4), 1962)


12.28.050 Depositing earth or debris on streets or sidewalks.

No unauthorized person shall deposit any earth, gravel or debris upon any street or sidewalk. (Ord. 467 § 15(5), 1962)


Chapter 12.32  CLOSING OF STREETS

Sections:

12.32.010    Barriers and lights – Required when.

12.32.020    Barriers and lights – City control and supervision.

12.32.030    Barriers and lights – Contractor requirements.

12.32.040    Barriers and lights – Specifications – Failure to comply.

12.32.050    Barriers and lights – Removal prohibited.

12.32.060    Construction material storage requirements.

12.32.070    Driving through barriers prohibited.

12.32.080    Injuring or destroying work or materials prohibited.

12.32.090    Violation – Penalty.


12.32.010 Barriers and lights – Required when.

A. Whenever it shall be necessary to improve or repair or do any construction work or store any material in or upon any of the streets, sidewalks, alleys or other public places in the city, it shall be lawful to erect barricades or temporary fences thereon, and display warning lights on the same in such a manner as to temporarily close such public streets or any part thereof to public traffic, to the extent that may be necessary to protect any such improvement work, construction work or material which may be necessarily deposited in or upon any of such places for the purpose of carrying on the improvement or construction work, and to protect the public from danger and injury.

B. Whenever any such barricades or temporary fences shall be erected or installed by the city or any contractor or other person for the purposes set forth in this chapter, such public street, sidewalk, alley or other public place or part thereof shall be deemed to be and is hereby declared to be closed to public traffic, and the barricades, fences, warning lights and any and all things used by the city or any contractor or other person, and all of the construction work and places so barricaded and closed, as well as all material assembled for use in the course of such construction work or improvements, shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 109 § 1, 1912)


12.32.020 Barriers and lights – City control and supervision.

All barricades, fences, warning lights or other devices placed in or upon any of the public streets, sidewalks, alleys or other public places in the city pursuant to the authority of SMC 12.32.010 are declared to be under the supervision and control of the city marshal, and all contractors and other persons barricading or temporarily closing any of such places under authority of this chapter shall exercise such rights and privileges subject to the control and supervision of the city marshal. (Ord. 109 § 2, 1912)


12.32.030 Barriers and lights – Contractor requirements.

It shall be the duty of all contractors or other persons doing any construction work or making any improvements upon or in any of the public streets, sidewalks, alleys or other public places in the city to guard any and all places which may be dangerous to the public by erecting barricades or fences or other protective devices of suitable material at proper places and displaying warning lights thereon. (Ord. 109 § 3, 1912)


12.32.040 Barriers and lights – Specifications – Failure to comply.

A. It shall be the duty of every contractor or other person erecting any barricade or fence or other device, as provided for in this chapter, to place thereon from and after sunset, lighted lanterns having either clear or ruby colored globes, and to keep the same lighted until sunrise of the following day. The number of such warning lanterns shall be sufficient to properly warn the public of the danger existing and that any of the said places are closed temporarily to the use of the public.

B. All barricades and signal lights required to be maintained by the terms of this chapter shall be under the supervision and control of the city marshal, and any contractor or other person who fails to comply with the directions and orders of the city marshal in respect to the number or kind of barricades, fences or other kinds of device used or in respect to the number and kind of warning lanterns required by this chapter, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of the provisions of this chapter, and shall be punished as provided for herein. (Ord. 109 § 4, 1912)


12.32.050 Barriers and lights – Removal prohibited.

It is unlawful for any person to remove, break, take down, carry away, destroy or in any manner render ineffective any barricade, fence or other device required to be maintained by this chapter, or any lantern or warning light which may be used or displayed as required by this chapter. (Ord. 109 § 5, 1912)


12.32.060 Construction material storage requirements.

It shall be the duty of every contractor or other person using any of the public streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public places in the city for the storage of material or for carrying on any private improvement or construction work, or who shall leave any obstruction in any of such places, to properly barricade and protect the public against danger from the same, and to display warning lights as provided for in SMC 12.32.040. (Ord. 109 § 6, 1912)


12.32.070 Driving through barriers prohibited.

It is unlawful for any person (other than an authorized police officer) to ride or drive any horse or other animal or vehicle of any kind in or upon any of the public streets, sidewalks, alleys or other public places which may be barricaded for the purpose of closing any of such places to public traffic. (Ord. 99-109 § 2, 1999; Ord. 109 § 7, 1912)


12.32.080 Injuring or destroying work or materials prohibited.

It is unlawful for any person to in any manner interfere with, disturb, injure, damage or destroy any construction work, public improvement, construction material or repair work during the course of construction or repair of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place, or to in any manner interfere with, disturb, injure, damage or destroy any public or private improvement or construction work. (Ord. 109 § 8, 1912)


12.32.090 Violation – Penalty.

Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof before the city recorder, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be fined in a sum not less than $5.00 nor more than $100.00, and in default of the payment of any such fine imposed, shall be imprisoned in the city jail one day for each $2.00 of such fine, or may be punished by both fine and imprisonment not exceeding 10 days. (Ord. 109 § 9, 1912)


Chapter 12.36 TREES, SHRUBS AND PLANTS

(Repealed by Ord. 06-03)


Chapter 12.40 TELECOMMUNICATIONS

Sections:

12.40.010    Purpose.

12.40.030    Jurisdiction and management of the public rights-of-way.

12.40.040    Regulatory fees and compensation, not a tax.

12.40.050    Definitions.

12.40.060    Registration of telecommunications carriers.

12.40.070    Registration required.

12.40.080    Registration fee.

12.40.090    Exceptions to registration.

12.40.100    Construction standards – Responsibility of owner.

12.40.110    Construction standards – Codes.

12.40.120    Construction standards – General.

12.40.130    Construction standards – Construction permits.

12.40.140    Construction standards – Permit applications.

12.40.150    Construction standards – Engineer’s certification.

12.40.160    Construction standards – Construction schedule.

12.40.170    Construction standards – Traffic control plan.

12.40.180    Construction standards – Construction permit fee.

12.40.190    Construction standards – Issuance of permit.

12.40.200    Construction standards – Notice of construction.

12.40.210    Construction standards – Locates.

12.40.220    Construction standards – Compliance with permit.

12.40.230    Construction standards – Display of permit.

12.40.240    Construction standards – Noncomplying work.

12.40.250    Construction standards – Completion of construction.

12.40.260    Construction standards – As-built drawings.

12.40.270    Construction standards – Restoration of public rights-of-way and city property.

12.40.280    Construction standards – Landscape restoration.

12.40.290    Construction standards – Performance and completion bond.

12.40.300    Location of facilities.

12.40.310    Location of facilities – Interference with the public rights-of-way.

12.40.320    Location of facilities – Relocation or removal of facilities.

12.40.330    Location of facilities – Removal of unauthorized facilities.

12.40.340    Location of facilities – Coordination of construction activities.

12.40.350    Telecommunications franchise.

12.40.360    Franchise – Application.

12.40.370    Franchise – Application and review fee.

12.40.380    Franchise – Determination by the city.

12.40.390    Franchise – Rights granted.

12.40.400    Franchise – Term of grant.

12.40.410    Franchise – Territory.

12.40.420    Franchise – Fee.

12.40.430    Franchise – Amendment.

12.40.440    Franchise – Renewal applications.

12.40.450    Franchise – Renewal determinations.

12.40.460    Franchise – Obligation to cure as a condition of renewal.

12.40.470    Franchise – Assignments or transfers of system or franchise.

12.40.480    Franchise – Revocation or termination.

12.40.490    Franchise – Notice and duty to cure.

12.40.500    Franchise – Public hearing.

12.40.510    Franchise – Standards for revocation or lesser sanctions.

12.40.520    Franchise – Other city costs.

12.40.530    General franchise terms – Facilities.

12.40.540    General franchise terms – Damage to grantee’s facilities.

12.40.550    General franchise terms – Duty to provide information.

12.40.560    General franchise terms – Nondiscrimination.

12.40.570    General franchise terms – Service to the city.

12.40.580    General franchise terms – Compensation for city property.

12.40.590    General franchise terms – Cable franchise.

12.40.600    General franchise terms – Leased capacity.

12.40.610    General franchise terms – Grantee insurance.

12.40.620    General franchise terms – General indemnification.

12.40.630    General franchise terms – Performance surety.


             

12.40.640    General provisions – Governing law.

12.40.650    General provisions – Written agreement.

12.40.660    Nonexclusive grant.

12.40.670    Severability and preemption.

12.40.680    Penalties.

12.40.690    Other remedies.

12.40.700    Captions.

12.40.710    Compliance with laws.

12.40.720    Consent.

12.40.730    Application to existing ordinance and agreements.

12.40.740    Confidentiality.


Chapter 12.40 TELECOMMUNICATIONS

Sections:

12.40.010    Purpose.

12.40.030    Jurisdiction and management of the public rights-of-way.

12.40.040    Regulatory fees and compensation, not a tax.

12.40.050    Definitions.

12.40.060    Registration of telecommunications carriers.

12.40.070    Registration required.

12.40.080    Registration fee.

12.40.090    Exceptions to registration.

12.40.100    Construction standards – Responsibility of owner.

12.40.110    Construction standards – Codes.

12.40.120    Construction standards – General.

12.40.130    Construction standards – Construction permits.

12.40.140    Construction standards – Permit applications.

12.40.150    Construction standards – Engineer’s certification.

12.40.160    Construction standards – Construction schedule.

12.40.170    Construction standards – Traffic control plan.

12.40.180    Construction standards – Construction permit fee.

12.40.190    Construction standards – Issuance of permit.

12.40.200    Construction standards – Notice of construction.

12.40.210    Construction standards – Locates.

12.40.220    Construction standards – Compliance with permit.

12.40.230    Construction standards – Display of permit.

12.40.240    Construction standards – Noncomplying work.

12.40.250    Construction standards – Completion of construction.

12.40.260    Construction standards – As-built drawings.

12.40.270    Construction standards – Restoration of public rights-of-way and city property.

12.40.280    Construction standards – Landscape restoration.

12.40.290    Construction standards – Performance and completion bond.

12.40.300    Location of facilities.

12.40.310    Location of facilities – Interference with the public rights-of-way.

12.40.320    Location of facilities – Relocation or removal of facilities.

12.40.330    Location of facilities – Removal of unauthorized facilities.

12.40.340    Location of facilities – Coordination of construction activities.

12.40.350    Telecommunications franchise.

12.40.360    Franchise – Application.

12.40.370    Franchise – Application and review fee.

12.40.380    Franchise – Determination by the city.

12.40.390    Franchise – Rights granted.

12.40.400    Franchise – Term of grant.

12.40.410    Franchise – Territory.

12.40.420    Franchise – Fee.

12.40.430    Franchise – Amendment.

12.40.440    Franchise – Renewal applications.

12.40.450    Franchise – Renewal determinations.

12.40.460    Franchise – Obligation to cure as a condition of renewal.

12.40.470    Franchise – Assignments or transfers of system or franchise.

12.40.480    Franchise – Revocation or termination.

12.40.490    Franchise – Notice and duty to cure.

12.40.500    Franchise – Public hearing.

12.40.510    Franchise – Standards for revocation or lesser sanctions.

12.40.520    Franchise – Other city costs.

12.40.530    General franchise terms – Facilities.

12.40.540    General franchise terms – Damage to grantee’s facilities.

12.40.550    General franchise terms – Duty to provide information.

12.40.560    General franchise terms – Nondiscrimination.

12.40.570    General franchise terms – Service to the city.

12.40.580    General franchise terms – Compensation for city property.

12.40.590    General franchise terms – Cable franchise.

12.40.600    General franchise terms – Leased capacity.

12.40.610    General franchise terms – Grantee insurance.

12.40.620    General franchise terms – General indemnification.

12.40.630    General franchise terms – Performance surety.


             

12.40.640    General provisions – Governing law.

12.40.650    General provisions – Written agreement.

12.40.660    Nonexclusive grant.

12.40.670    Severability and preemption.

12.40.680    Penalties.

12.40.690    Other remedies.

12.40.700    Captions.

12.40.710    Compliance with laws.

12.40.720    Consent.

12.40.730    Application to existing ordinance and agreements.

12.40.740    Confidentiality.


12.40.010 Purpose.

The purpose and intent of this chapter is to:

A. Comply with the provisions of the 1996 Telecommunications Act as they apply to local governments, telecommunications carriers and the services those carriers offer;

B. Promote competition on a competitively neutral basis in the provision of telecommunications services;

C. Encourage the provision of advanced and competitive telecommunications services on the widest possible basis to businesses institutions and residents of the city;

D. Permit and manage reasonable access to the public rights-of-way of the city for telecommunications purposes on a competitively neutral basis and conserve the limited physical capacity of those public rights-of-way held in trust by the city;

E. Assure that the city’s current and ongoing costs of granting and regulating private access to and the use of the public rights-of-way are fully compensated by the persons seeking such access and causing such costs;

F. Secure fair and reasonable compensation to the city and its residents for permitting private use of the public right-of-way;

G. Assure that all telecommunications carriers providing facilities and/or services within the city, or passing through the city, register and comply with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city;

H. Assure that the city can continue to fairly and responsibly protect the public health, safety and welfare of its citizens;

I. Enable the city to discharge its public trust consistent with the rapidly evolving federal and state regulatory policies, industry competition and technological development. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.030 Jurisdiction and management of the public rights-of-way.

A. The city has jurisdiction and exercises regulatory control over all public rights-of-way within the city under authority of the City Charter and state law.

B. Public rights-of-way include, but are not limited to, streets, roads, highways, bridges, alleys, sidewalks, trails, paths, public easements and all other public ways or areas, including the subsurface under and air space over these areas.

C. The city has jurisdiction and exercises regulatory control over each public right-of-way whether the city has a fee, easement, or other legal interest in the right-of-way. The city has jurisdiction and regulatory control over each right-of-way whether the legal interest in the right-of-way was obtained by grant, dedication, prescription, reservation, condemnation, annexation, foreclosure or other means.

D. No person may occupy or encroach on a public right-of-way without the permission of the city. The city grants permission to use rights-of-way by franchises and permits.

E. The exercise of jurisdiction and regulatory control over a public right-of-way by the city is not official acceptance of the right-of-way, and does not obligate the city to maintain or repair any part of the right-of-way.

F. The city retains the right and privilege to cut or move any telecommunications facilities located within the public rights-of-way of the city, as the city may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.040 Regulatory fees and compensation, not a tax.

A. The fees and costs provided for in this chapter, and any compensation charged and paid for use of the public rights-of-way provided for in this chapter, are separate from, and in addition to, any and all federal, state, local and city taxes as may be levied, imposed or due from a telecommunications carrier, its customers or subscribers, or on account of the lease, sale, delivery or transmission of telecommunications services.

B. The city has determined that any fee imposed by this chapter is not subject to the property tax limitations of Article XI, Sections 11 and 11b of the Oregon Constitution. These fees are not imposed on property or property owners. These fees are not new or increased fees. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.050 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number. The words “shall” and “will” are mandatory and “may” is permissive. Words not defined herein shall be given the meaning set forth in the Communications Policy Act of 1934, as amended, the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and the Telecommunications Act of 1996. If not defined there, the words shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.

A. “Aboveground facilities.” See “overhead facilities.”

B. “Affiliated interest” shall have the same meaning as ORS 759.010.

C. “Cable Act” shall mean the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. 521, et seq., as now and hereafter amended.

D. “Cable service” means the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming, or other programming service; and subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service.

E. “City” means the city of Silverton, an Oregon municipal corporation, and individuals authorized to act on the city’s behalf.

F. “City council” means the elected governing body of the city of Silverton, Oregon.

G. “Control” or “controlling interest” means actual working control in whatever manner exercised.

H. “City property” means and includes all real property owned by the city, other than public rights-of-way and utility easements as those are defined herein, and all property held in a proprietary capacity by the city, which are not subject to right-of-way franchising as provided in this chapter.

I. “Conduit” means any structure, or portion thereof, containing one or more ducts, conduits, manholes, handholes, bolts, or other facilities used for any telegraph, telephone, cable television, electrical, or communications conductors, or cable right-of-way, owned or controlled, in whole or in part, by one or more public utilities.

J. “Days” means calendar days unless otherwise specified.

K. “Duct” means a single enclosed raceway for conductors or cable.

L. “FCC” or “Federal Communications Commission” means the federal administrative agency, or its lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee telecommunications carriers, services and providers on a national level.

M. “Franchise” means an agreement between the city and a grantee which grants a privilege to use public right-of-way and utility easements within the city for a dedicated purpose and for specific compensation.

N. “Grantee” means the person to which a franchise is granted by the city.

O. “Oregon Public Utilities Commission” or “OPUC” means the statutorily created state agency in the state of Oregon responsible for licensing, regulation and administration of certain telecommunications carriers as set forth in Oregon law, or its lawful successor.

P. “Overhead (or aboveground) facilities” means utility poles, utility facilities and telecommunications facilities above the surface of the ground, including the underground supports and foundations for such facilities.

Q. “Person” means an individual, corporation, company, association, joint stock company or association, firm, partnership, or limited liability company.

R. “Private telecommunications network” means a system, including the construction, maintenance or operation of the system, for the provision of a service or any portion of a service, by a person for the exclusive use of that person and not for resale, directly or indirectly. “Private telecommunications network” includes services provided by the state of Oregon pursuant to ORS 190.240 and 283.140.

S. “Public rights-of-way” includes, but is not limited to, streets, roads, highways, bridges, alleys, sidewalks, trails, paths, public easements and all other public ways or areas, including the subsurface under and air space over these areas, but only to the extent of the city’s right, title, interest or authority to grant a franchise to occupy and use such streets and easements for telecommunications facilities. “Public rights-of-way” shall also include utility easements as defined below.

T. “State” means the state of Oregon.

U. “Telecommunications” means the transmission between and among points specified by the user, of information of the user’s choosing, without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received.

V. “Telecommunications Act” means the Communications Policy Act of 1934, as amended by subsequent enactments including the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (47 U.S.C. 151, et seq.) and as hereafter amended.

W. “Telecommunications carrier” means any provider of telecommunications services and includes every person that directly or indirectly owns, controls, operates or manages telecommunications facilities within the city.

X. “Telecommunications facilities” means the plant and equipment, other than customer premises equipment, used by a telecommunications carrier to provide telecommunications services.

Y. “Telecommunications service” means the offering of telecommunications for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used.

Z. “Telecommunications system.” See “telecommunications facilities.”

AA. “Telecommunications utility” has the same meaning as ORS 759.005(1).

BB. “Underground facilities” means utility and telecommunications facilities located under the surface of the ground, excluding the underground foundations or supports for “overhead facilities.”

CC. “Usable space” means all the space on a pole, except the portion below ground level, the 20 feet of safety clearance space above ground level, and the safety clearance space between communications and power circuits. There is a rebuttable presumption that six feet of a pole is buried below ground level.

DD. “Utility easement” means any easement granted to or owned by the city and acquired, established, dedicated or devoted for public utility purposes.

EE. “Utility facilities” means the plant, equipment and property, including but not limited to the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, cable, wires, plant and equipment located under, on, or above the surface of the ground within the public right-of-way of the city and used or to be used for the purpose of providing utility or telecommunications services. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.060 Registration of telecommunications carriers.

The purpose of registration is:

A. To assure that all telecommunications carriers who have facilities and/or provide services within the city comply with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city.

B. To provide the city with accurate and current information concerning the telecommunications carriers who offer to provide telecommunications services within the city, or that own or operate telecommunications facilities within the city.

C. To assist the city in the enforcement of this chapter and the collection of any city franchise fees or charges that may be due the city.

D. To assist the city in monitoring compliance with local, state and federal laws as they apply to grantees under this chapter. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.070 Registration required.

Except as provided in SMC 12.40.090, all telecommunications carriers having telecommunications facilities within the corporate limits of the city, and all telecommunications carriers that offer or provide telecommunications service to customer premises within the city, shall register with the city on forms to be provided by the public works department which shall include the following:

A. The identity and legal status of the registrant, including any affiliates.

B. The name, address and telephone number of the officer, agent or employee responsible for the accuracy of the registration statement.

C. A description of the registrant’s existing or proposed telecommunications facilities within the city.

D. A description of the telecommunications service that the registrant intends to offer or provide, or is currently offering or providing, to persons, firms, businesses or institutions within the city.

E. Information sufficient to determine whether the registrant is subject to public right-of-way franchising under this chapter.

F. Information sufficient to determine whether the transmission, origination or receipt of the telecommunications services provided or to be provided by the registrant constitutes an occupation or privilege subject to any business tax imposed by the city.

G. Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for and received any certificate of authority or permit required by the FCC or the OPUC to provide telecommunications services within the city.

H. Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for and received any construction permit, operating license or other approvals required by the FCC to have telecommunications facilities within the city.

I. If the registrant has applied for and received a city business license, list the license number.

J. Such other information as the city may reasonably require. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.080 Registration fee.

Each application for registration as a telecommunications carrier shall be accompanied by a non-refundable registration fee in an amount to be determined by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.090 Exceptions to registration.

The following telecommunications carriers are excepted from registration:

A. Telecommunications carriers that are owned and operated for its own use by the state or a political subdivision of this state.

B. A private telecommunications network; provided, that such network does not occupy any public rights-of-way of the city. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.100 Construction standards – Responsibility of owner.

The owner of the telecommunications facilities to be constructed and, if different, the grantee, is responsible for performance of and compliance with all provisions of SMC 12.40.100 through 12.40.280. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.110 Construction standards – Codes.

Telecommunications facilities shall be constructed, installed, operated and maintained in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local codes, rules and regulations including the National Electrical Code and the National Electrical Safety Code. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.120 Construction standards – General.

No person shall commence or continue with the construction, installation or operation of telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way except as provided in SMC 12.40.120 through 12.40.290. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.130 Construction standards – Construction permits.

No person shall construct or install any telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way without first obtaining a construction permit, and paying the construction permit fee established in SMC 12.40.180. No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way:

A. Unless the telecommunications carrier has first filed a registration statement with the city pursuant to SMC 12.40.060 through 12.40.090; and

B. Unless the telecommunications carrier has first applied for and received a franchise pursuant to SMC 12.40.350 through 12.40.420. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.140 Construction standards – Permit applications.

Applications for permits to construct telecommunications facilities shall be submitted upon forms to be provided by the city and shall be accompanied by drawings, plans and specifications in sufficient detail to demonstrate:

A. That the facilities will be constructed in accordance with all applicable codes, rules and regulations.

B. That the facilities will be constructed in accordance with the franchise agreement.

C. The location and route of all facilities to be installed underground.

D. The location and route of all facilities to be located under the surface of the ground, including the line and grade proposed for the burial at all points along the route which are within the public rights-of-way. Existing facilities shall be differentiated on the plans from new construction.

E. The location of all existing underground utilities, conduits, ducts, pipes, mains and installations which are within the public rights-of-way along the underground route proposed by the applicant. A cross section shall be provided showing new or existing facilities in relation to the street, curb, sidewalk or right-of-way.

F. The construction methods to be employed for protection of existing structures, fixtures, and facilities within or adjacent to the public rights-of-way.

G. The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and obstructions, if any, that applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove or relocate, together with a landscape plan for protecting, trimming, removing, replacing and restoring any trees or areas to be disturbed during construction. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.150 Construction standards – Engineer’s certification.

All permit applications shall be accompanied by the certification of a registered professional engineer that the drawings, plans and specifications submitted with the application comply with applicable technical codes, rules and regulations. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.160 Construction standards – Construction schedule.

All permit applications shall be accompanied by a written construction schedule, which shall include a deadline for completion of construction. The construction schedule is subject to approval by the public works department. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.170 Construction standards – Traffic control plan.

All permit applications shall be accompanied by a traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures and devices that will be employed, consistent with Uniform Manual of Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.180 Construction standards – Construction permit fee.

Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, prior to issuance of a construction permit, the applicant shall pay a permit fee in an amount to be determined by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.190 Construction standards – Issuance of permit.

If satisfied that the applications, plans and documents submitted comply with all requirements of this chapter and the franchise agreement, the public works department shall issue a permit authorizing construction of the facilities, subject to such further conditions, restrictions or regulations affecting the time, place and manner of performing the work as they may deem necessary or appropriate. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.200 Construction standards – Notice of construction.

The permittee shall notify the public works department not less than two working days in advance of any excavation or work in the public rights-of-way. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.210 Construction standards – Locates.

The permittee shall comply with the rules adopted by the Oregon Utility Notification Center regulating the notification and marking of underground facilities. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.220 Construction standards – Compliance with permit.

All construction practices and activities shall be in accordance with the permit and approved final plans and specifications for the facilities. The public works department and their representatives shall be provided access to the work site and such further information as they may require to ensure compliance with such requirements. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.230 Construction standards – Display of permit.

The permittee shall maintain a copy of the construction permit and approved plans at the construction site and shall display the permit. Plans shall be made available for inspection by the public works department or their representatives at all times when construction work is occurring. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.240 Construction standards – Noncomplying work.

Upon order of the public works department, all work which does not comply with the permit, the approved plans and specifications for the work, or the requirements of this chapter, shall be removed at the sole expense of the permittee. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.250 Construction standards – Completion of construction.

The permittee shall promptly complete all construction activities so as to minimize disruption of the city rights-of-way and other public and private property. All construction work within city rights-of-way, including restoration, must be completed within 120 days of the date of issuance of the construction permit unless an alternate schedule has been approved pursuant to the schedule submitted and approved by the appropriate city official as contemplated by SMC 12.40.160. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.260 Construction standards – As-built drawings.

Within 60 days after completion of construction, the permittee shall furnish the city with two complete sets of plans drawn to scale and certified to the city as accurately depicting the location of all telecommunications facilities constructed pursuant to the permit, in a format acceptable to the city engineer. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.270 Construction standards – Restoration of public rights-of-way and city property.

A. When a permittee, or any person acting on its behalf, does any work in or affecting any public rights-of-way or city property, it shall, at its own expense, promptly remove any obstructions therefrom and restore such ways or property to at least as good a condition as existed before the work was undertaken, unless otherwise directed by the city and as determined by the city engineer.

B. If weather or other conditions do not permit the complete restoration required by this section, the permittee shall temporarily restore the affected rights-of-way or property. Such temporary restoration shall be at the permittee’s sole expense and the permittee shall promptly undertake and complete the required permanent restoration when the weather or other conditions no longer prevent such permanent restoration. Any corresponding modification to the construction schedule shall be subject to approval by the city.

C. If the permittee fails to restore rights-of-way or property to at least as good a condition as existed before the work was undertaken, the city shall give the permittee written notice and provide the permittee a reasonable period of time not exceeding 30 days to restore the rights-of-way or property. If, after said notice, the permittee fails to restore the rights-of-way or property to as good a condition as existed before the work was undertaken, the city shall cause such restoration to be made at the expense of the permittee.

D. A permittee or other person acting in its behalf shall use suitable barricades, flags, flagging attendants, lights, flares and other measures as required for the safety of all members of the general public and to prevent injury or damage to any person, vehicle or property by reason of such work in or affecting such rights-of-way or property. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.280 Construction standards – Landscape restoration.

A. All trees, landscaping and grounds removed, damaged or disturbed as a result of the construction, installation, maintenance, repair or replacement of telecommunications facilities, whether such work is done pursuant to a franchise or permit shall be replaced or restored as nearly as may be practicable, to the condition existing prior to performance of work.

B. Any trees, shrubs or other landscaping that show substantial damage within 18 months of completion of the construction, which damage can be attributed to permittee’s construction activities, must be replaced at the sole expense of the permittee.

C. All restoration work within the public rights-of-way shall be done in accordance with landscape plans approved by the city. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.290 Construction standards – Performance and completion bond.

Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, a performance bond written by a corporate surety acceptable to the city, and authorized to transact business in Oregon, equal to at least 100 percent of the estimated cost of constructing permittee’s telecommunications facilities within the public rights-of-way of the city shall be deposited before construction is commenced.

A. The performance bond shall remain in force until 60 days after substantial completion of the work, as determined in writing by the city, including restoration of public rights-of-way and other property affected by the construction.

B. The performance bond shall guarantee, to the satisfaction of the city:

1. Timely completion of construction;

2. Construction in compliance with applicable plans, permits, technical codes and standards;

3. Proper location of the facilities as specified by the city;

4. Restoration of the public rights-of-way and other property affected by the construction;

5. The submission of “as-built” drawings after completion of the work as required by this chapter; and

6. Timely payment and satisfaction of all claims, demands or liens for labor, material or services provided in connection with the work. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.300 Location of facilities.

All facilities located within the public right-of-way shall be constructed, installed and located in accordance with the following terms and conditions, unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement:

A. Grantee shall install its telecommunications facilities underground unless the city specifically permits attachments to utility poles or other aboveground facilities.

B. Grantee shall install its telecommunications facilities within an existing underground duct or conduit whenever surplus capacity exists within such utility facility, unless grantee demonstrates to the satisfaction of the city that such installation is not feasible.

C. A grantee with permission to install overhead facilities shall install its telecommunications facilities on pole attachments to existing utility poles only, and then only if surplus space is available.

D. Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located underground within a public right-of-way of the city, a grantee with permission to occupy the same public right-of-way must also locate its telecommunications facilities underground.

E. Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located or relocated underground within a public right-of-way of the city, a grantee that currently occupies the same public right-of-way shall relocate its facilities underground concurrently with the other affected utilities to minimize disruption of the public right-of-way, absent extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship as determined by the city and consistent with state law. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.310 Location of facilities – Interference with the public rights-of-way.

No grantee may locate or maintain its telecommunications facilities so as to unreasonably interfere with the use of the public rights-of-way by the city, by the general public or by other persons authorized to use or be present in or upon the public rights-of-way. All such facilities shall be moved by the grantee, temporarily or permanently, as determined by the city at the sole expense of the grantee. All use of public rights-of-way shall be consistent with city codes, ordinances and regulations. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.320 Location of facilities – Relocation or removal of facilities.

Within 30 days following written notice from the city, a grantee shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any telecommunications facilities within the public rights-of-way whenever the city shall have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary for:

A. The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any city or other public improvement in or upon the public rights-of-way.

B. The operations of the city or other governmental entity in or upon the public rights-of-way.

C. The public interest. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.330 Location of facilities – Removal of unauthorized facilities.

Within 30 days following written notice from the city, any grantee, telecommunications carrier, or other person that owns, controls or maintains any unauthorized telecommunications system, facility or related appurtenances within the public rights-of-way of the city shall, at its own expense, remove such facilities or appurtenances from the public rights-of-way of the city. A telecommunications system or facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances:

A. One year after the expiration or termination of the grantee’s telecommunications franchise.

B. Upon abandonment of a facility within the public rights-of-way of the city. A facility will be considered abandoned when it is deactivated, out of service, or not used for its intended and authorized purpose for a period of 90 days or longer. A facility will not be considered abandoned if it is temporarily out of service during performance of repairs or if the facility is being replaced.

C. If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a telecommunications franchise.

D. If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the prior issuance of a required construction permit.

E. If the system or facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the grantee’s telecommunications franchise or other legally sufficient permit. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.340 Location of facilities – Coordination of construction activities.

All grantees are required to cooperate with the city and with each other.

A. By January 1st of each year, grantees shall provide the city with a schedule of their proposed construction activities in, around or that may affect the public rights-of-way.

B. Each grantee shall meet with the city, other grantees and users of the public rights-of-way annually or as determined by the city to schedule and coordinate construction in the public rights-of-way.

C. All construction locations, activities and schedules shall be coordinated, as ordered by the city engineer, to minimize public inconvenience, disruption or damages. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.350 Telecommunications franchise.

A telecommunications franchise shall be required of any telecommunications carrier who desires to occupy public rights-of-way of the city. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.360 Franchise – Application.

Any person that desires a telecommunications franchise shall file an application with the public works department which includes the following information:

A. The identity of the applicant, including all affiliates of the applicant.

B. A description of the telecommunications services that are or will be offered or provided by the applicant over its telecommunications facilities.

C. A description of the transmission medium that is being used or will be used by the applicant to offer or provide such telecommunications services.

D. Engineering plans, specifications and a network map of the facilities located or to be located within the city, all in sufficient detail to identify:

1. The location and route requested for applicant’s proposed telecommunications facilities;

2. The location of all aboveground and underground public utility, telecommunication, cable, water, sewer, storm drainage and other facilities in the public rights-of-way along the proposed route;

3. The location(s), if any, for interconnection with the telecommunications facilities of other telecommunications carriers.

E. If applicant is proposing to install aboveground facilities, to the extent that they will be using utility poles, evidence that surplus space is available for locating its telecommunications facilities on existing utility poles along the proposed route.

F. If applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing ducts or conduits within the public rights-of-way, provide information in sufficient detail to identify:

1. The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits before installation of applicant’s telecommunications facilities;

2. The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of applicant’s telecommunications facilities.

G. If applicant is proposing an underground installation within new ducts or conduits to be constructed within the public rights-of-way:

1. The location proposed for the new ducts or conduits;

2. The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits after the installation of applicant’s telecommunications facilities.

H. The area or areas of the city the applicant desires to serve and a preliminary construction schedule for build-out to the entire franchise area.

I. Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles demonstrating the applicant’s financial ability to construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove the facilities.

J. Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant’s technical qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the telecommunications facilities and services described in the application.

K. Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities and to offer or provide the telecommunications services proposed.

L. Whether the applicant intends to provide cable service, video dialtone service or other video programming service.

M. An accurate map showing the location of any existing telecommunications facilities in the city that applicant intends to use or lease.

N. A description of any services or facilities that the applicant will offer or make available to the city and other public, educational and governmental institutions and at what cost.

O. A description of applicant’s access and line extension policies.

P. Such other information as may be requested by the city manager or their designee. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.370 Franchise – Application and review fee.

A. Applicant shall reimburse the city for such reasonable costs as the city incurs in entering into the franchise agreement.

B. An application and review fee of $2,000 shall be deposited with the city as part of the application filed pursuant to SMC 12.40.360. Expenses exceeding the deposit will be billed to the applicant or the unused portion of the deposit will be returned to the applicant following the determination granting or denying the franchise. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.380 Franchise – Determination by the city.

The city shall issue a written determination granting or denying the application in whole or in part, applying the standards listed below. If the application is denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for denial. The standards to be applied by city are:

A. The financial and technical ability of the applicant.

B. The legal capacity of the applicant.

C. The capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate the applicant’s proposed facilities.

D. The capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate additional utility and telecommunications facilities if the franchise is granted.

E. The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities, improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the franchise is granted.

F. The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of construction within the public rights-of-way.

G. The service that applicant will provide to the community and region.

H. The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare if the franchise is granted.

I. The availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the proposed facilities.

J. Applicable federal and state telecommunications laws, regulations and policies. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.390 Franchise – Rights granted.

No franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall convey any right, title or interest in the public rights-of-way, but shall be deemed a grant to use and occupy the public rights-of-way for the limited purposes and term stated in the franchise agreement. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.400 Franchise – Term of grant.

Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, a telecommunications franchise granted hereunder shall be in effect for a term of five years. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.410 Franchise – Territory.

Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, a telecommunications franchise granted hereunder shall be limited to a specific geographic area of the city to be served by the franchise grantee, and the public rights-of-way necessary to serve such areas. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.420 Franchise – Fee.

Each franchise granted by the city is subject to the city’s right, which is expressly reserved, to fix a fair and reasonable compensation to be paid for the privileges granted; provided, nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the city and a grantee from agreeing to the compensation to be paid. The compensation shall be subject to the specific payment terms and conditions contained in the franchise agreement. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.430 Franchise – Amendment.

Conditions for amending a franchise:

A. A new application and grant shall be required of any telecommunications carrier that desires to extend or locate its telecommunications facilities in public rights-of-way of the city which are not included in a franchise previously granted under this chapter.

B. If ordered by the city to locate or relocate its telecommunications facilities in public rights-of-way not included in a previously granted franchise, the city shall grant an amendment without further application.

C. A new application and grant shall be required of any telecommunications carrier that desires to provide a service which was not included in a franchise previously granted under this chapter. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.440 Franchise – Renewal applications.

A grantee that desires to renew its franchise under this chapter shall, not less than 180 days before expiration of the current agreement, file an application with the city for renewal of its franchise which shall include the following information:

A. The information required pursuant to SMC 12.40.360.

B. Any information required pursuant to the franchise agreement between the city and the grantee. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.450 Franchise – Renewal determinations.

Within 90 days after receiving a complete application under SMC 12.40.440 hereof, the city shall issue a written determination granting or denying the renewal application in whole or in part, applying the following standards. If the renewal application is denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for nonrenewal.

A. The financial and technical ability of the applicant.

B. The legal ability of the applicant.

C. The continuing capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate the applicant’s existing and proposed facilities.

D. The applicant’s compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the franchise agreement.

E. Applicable federal, state and local telecommunications laws, rules and policies.

F. Such other factors as may demonstrate that the continued grant to use the public rights-of-way will serve the community interest. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.460 Franchise – Obligation to cure as a condition of renewal.

No franchise shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the grantee’s performance of the agreement, or of the requirements of this chapter, have been cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the grantee has been approved by the city. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.470 Franchise – Assignments or transfers of system or franchise.

Ownership or control of a majority interest in a telecommunications system or franchise may not, directly or indirectly, be transferred, assigned or disposed of by sale, lease, merger, consolidation or other act of the grantee, by operation of law or otherwise, without the prior consent of the city, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed, and then only on such reasonable conditions as may be prescribed in such consent.

A. Grantee and the proposed assignee or transferee of the franchise or system shall provide and certify the following information to the city not less than 120 days prior to the proposed date of transfer:

1. Complete information setting forth the nature, terms and condition of the proposed transfer or assignment;

2. All information required of a telecommunications franchise applicant pursuant to SMC 12.40.360 with respect to the proposed transferee or assignee;

3. Any other information reasonably required by the city.

B. No transfer shall be approved unless the assignee or transferee has the legal, technical, financial and other requisite qualifications to own, hold and operate the telecommunications system pursuant to this chapter.

C. Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, the grantee shall reimburse the city for all direct and indirect fees, costs, and expenses reasonably incurred by the city in considering a request to transfer or assign a telecommunications franchise.

D. Any transfer or assignment of a telecommunications franchise, system or integral part of a system without prior approval of the city under this section or pursuant to a franchise agreement shall be void and is cause for revocation of the franchise. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.480 Franchise – Revocation or termination.

A franchise to use or occupy public rights-of-way of the city may be revoked for the following reasons:

A. Construction or operation in the city or in the public rights-of-way of the city without a construction permit.

B. Construction or operation at an unauthorized location.

C. Failure to comply with SMC 12.40.470 with respect to sale, transfer or assignment of a telecommunications system or franchise.

D. Misrepresentation by or on behalf of a grantee in any application to the city.

E. Abandonment of telecommunications facilities in the public rights-of-way.

F. Failure to relocate or remove facilities as required in this chapter.

G. Failure to pay taxes, compensation, fees or costs when and as due the city.

H. Insolvency or bankruptcy of the grantee.

I. Violation of material provisions of this chapter.

J. Violation of the material terms of a franchise agreement. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.490 Franchise – Notice and duty to cure.

In the event that the city believes that grounds exist for revocation of a franchise, the city shall give the grantee written notice of the apparent violation or noncompliance, providing a short and concise statement of the nature and general facts of the violation or noncompliance, and providing the grantee a reasonable period of time not exceeding 30 days to furnish evidence:

A. That corrective action has been, or is being actively and expeditiously pursued, to remedy the violation or noncompliance.

B. That rebuts the alleged violation or noncompliance.

C. That it would be in the public interest to impose some penalty or sanction less than revocation. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.500 Franchise – Public hearing.

In the event that a grantee fails to provide evidence reasonably satisfactory to the city as provided in SMC 12.40.490, the city manager shall refer the apparent violation or noncompliance to the city council. The city council shall provide the grantee with notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard concerning the matter. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.510 Franchise – Standards for revocation or lesser sanctions.

If persuaded that the grantee has violated or failed to comply with material provisions of this chapter, or of a franchise agreement, the city council shall determine whether to revoke the franchise, or to establish some lesser sanction and cure, considering the nature, circumstances, extent and gravity of the violation as reflected by one or more of the following factors:

A. Whether the misconduct was egregious.

B. Whether substantial harm resulted.

C. Whether the violation was intentional.

D. Whether there is a history of prior violations of the same or other requirements.

E. Whether there is a history of overall compliance.

F. Whether the violation was voluntarily disclosed, admitted or cured. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.520 Franchise – Other city costs.

All grantees shall, within 30 days after written demand therefor, reimburse the city for all direct and indirect costs and expenses incurred by the city in connection with any modification, amendment, renewal or transfer of the franchise or any franchise agreement. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.530 General franchise terms – Facilities.

Each grantee shall provide the city with an accurate map or maps certifying the location of all telecommunications facilities within the public rights-of-way. Each grantee shall provide updated maps annually. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.540 General franchise terms – Damage to grantee’s facilities.

Unless directly and proximately caused by willful, intentional or malicious acts by the city, the city shall not be liable for any damage to or loss of any telecommunications facility within the public rights-of-way of the city as a result of or in connection with any public works, public improvements, construction, excavation, grading, filling, or work of any kind in the public rights-of-way by or on behalf of the city, or for any consequential losses resulting directly or indirectly therefrom. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.550 General franchise terms – Duty to provide information.

Within 10 days of a written request from the city, each grantee shall furnish the city with information sufficient to demonstrate:

A. That grantee has complied with all requirements of this chapter.

B. All books, records, maps and other documents, maintained by the grantee with respect to its facilities within the public rights-of-way shall be made available for inspection by the city at reasonable times and intervals. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.560 General franchise terms – Nondiscrimination.

A grantee shall make its telecommunications services available to any customer within its franchise area who shall request such service, without discrimination as to the terms, conditions, rates or charges for grantee’s services; provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a grantee from making any reasonable classifications among differently situated customers. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.570 General franchise terms – Service to the city.

If the city contracts for the use of telecommunication facilities, telecommunication services, installation, or maintenance from the grantee, the grantee shall charge the city the grantee’s most favorable rate offered at the time of the request charged to a similar user within Oregon for a similar volume of service, subject to any of grantee’s tariffs or price lists on file with the OPUC. With the city’s permission, the grantee may deduct the applicable charges from fee payments. Other terms and conditions of such services may be specified in a separate agreement between the city and grantee. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.580 General franchise terms – Compensation for city property.

If any right is granted, by lease, franchise or other manner, to use and occupy city property for the installation of telecommunications facilities, the compensation to be paid for such right and use shall be fixed by the city. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.590 General franchise terms – Cable franchise.

Telecommunication carriers providing cable service shall be subject to the cable franchise requirements in Ordinance 89-114, or such other franchise that shall be in effect. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.600 General franchise terms – Leased capacity.

A grantee shall have the right, without prior city approval, to offer or provide capacity or bandwidth to its customers; provided, that the grantee shall notify the city that such lease or agreement has been granted to a customer or lessee. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.610 General franchise terms – Grantee insurance.

Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, each grantee shall, as a condition of the grant, secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring both the grantee and the city, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents and employees as coinsured:

A. Comprehensive general liability insurance with limits not less than:

1. Three million dollars for bodily injury or death to each person;

2. Three million dollars for property damage resulting from any one accident; and,

3. Three million dollars for all other types of liability.

B. Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a limit of $1,000,000 for each person and $3,000,000 for each accident.

C. Worker’s compensation within statutory limits and employer’s liability insurance with limits of not less than $1,000,000.

D. Comprehensive form premises-operations, explosions and collapse hazard, underground hazard and products completed hazard with limits of not less than $3,000,000.

E. The liability insurance policies required by this section shall be maintained by the grantee throughout the term of the telecommunications franchise, and such other period of time during which the grantee is operating without a franchise hereunder, or is engaged in the removal of its telecommunications facilities. Each such insurance policy shall contain the following endorsement:

It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until 90 days after receipt by the City, by registered mail, of a written notice addressed to the Public Works of such intent to cancel or not to renew.

F. Within 60 days after receipt by the city of said notice, and in no event later than 30 days prior to said cancellation, the grantee shall obtain and furnish to the city evidence that the grantee meets requirements of this section. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.620 General franchise terms – General indemnification.

Each franchise agreement shall include, to the extent permitted by law, grantee’s express undertaking to defend, indemnify and hold the city and its officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against any and all damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney’s fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the grantee or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of its telecommunications facilities, and in providing or offering telecommunications services over the facilities or network, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter or by a franchise agreement made or entered into pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.630 General franchise terms – Performance surety.

Before a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter is effective, and as necessary thereafter, the grantee shall provide a performance bond, in form and substance acceptable to the city, as security for the full and complete performance of a franchise granted under this chapter, including any costs, expenses, damages or loss the city pays or incurs because of any failure attributable to the grantee to comply with the codes, ordinances, rules, regulations or permits of the city. This obligation is in addition to the performance bond required by SMC 12.40.290 for construction of facilities. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.640 General provisions – Governing law.

Any franchise granted under this chapter is subject to the provisions of the Constitution and laws of the United States, and the state of Oregon and the ordinances and Charter of the city. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.650 General provisions – Written agreement.

No franchise shall be granted hereunder unless the agreement is in writing. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.660 Nonexclusive grant.

No franchise granted under this chapter shall confer any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the public rights-of-way of the city for delivery of telecommunications services or any other purposes. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.670 Severability and preemption.

If any article, section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, term, provision, condition, covenant or portion of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, or superseded by state or federal legislation, rules, regulations or decision, the remainder of the chapter shall not be affected thereby but shall be deemed as a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof, and each remaining section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, provision, condition, covenant and portion of this chapter shall be valid and enforceable to the fullest extent permitted by law. In the event that federal or state laws, rules or regulations preempt a provision or limit the enforce-ability of a provision of this chapter, then the provision shall be read to be preempted to the extent and or the time required by law. In the event such federal or state law, rules or regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed so that the provision hereof that had been preempted is no longer preempted, such provision shall thereupon return to full force and effect, and shall thereafter be binding, without the requirement of further action on the part of the city, and any amendments hereto. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.680 Penalties.

Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000 for each offense. A separate and distinct offense shall be deemed committed each day on which a violation occurs. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.690 Other remedies.

Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any judicial remedies that the city may have, at law or in equity, for enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.700 Captions.

The captions to sections throughout this chapter are intended solely to facilitate reading and reference to the sections and provisions contained herein. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of this chapter. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.710 Compliance with laws.

Any grantee under this chapter shall comply with all federal and state laws and regulations, including regulations of any administrative agency thereof, as well as all ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the city heretofore or hereafter adopted or established during the entire term any franchise granted under this chapter, which are relevant and relate to the construction, maintenance and operation of a telecommunications system. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.720 Consent.

Wherever the consent of either the city or of the grantee is specifically required by this chapter or in a franchise granted, such consent will not be unreasonably withheld. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.730 Application to existing ordinance and agreements.

To the extent that this chapter is not in conflict with and can be implemented with existing ordinance and franchise agreements, this chapter shall apply to all existing ordinance and franchise agreements for use of the public right-of-way for telecommunications. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.740 Confidentiality.

The city agrees to use its best efforts to preserve the confidentiality of information as requested by a grantee, to the extent permitted by the Oregon Public Records Law. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.010 Purpose.

The purpose and intent of this chapter is to:

A. Comply with the provisions of the 1996 Telecommunications Act as they apply to local governments, telecommunications carriers and the services those carriers offer;

B. Promote competition on a competitively neutral basis in the provision of telecommunications services;

C. Encourage the provision of advanced and competitive telecommunications services on the widest possible basis to businesses institutions and residents of the city;

D. Permit and manage reasonable access to the public rights-of-way of the city for telecommunications purposes on a competitively neutral basis and conserve the limited physical capacity of those public rights-of-way held in trust by the city;

E. Assure that the city’s current and ongoing costs of granting and regulating private access to and the use of the public rights-of-way are fully compensated by the persons seeking such access and causing such costs;

F. Secure fair and reasonable compensation to the city and its residents for permitting private use of the public right-of-way;

G. Assure that all telecommunications carriers providing facilities and/or services within the city, or passing through the city, register and comply with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city;

H. Assure that the city can continue to fairly and responsibly protect the public health, safety and welfare of its citizens;

I. Enable the city to discharge its public trust consistent with the rapidly evolving federal and state regulatory policies, industry competition and technological development. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.030 Jurisdiction and management of the public rights-of-way.

A. The city has jurisdiction and exercises regulatory control over all public rights-of-way within the city under authority of the City Charter and state law.

B. Public rights-of-way include, but are not limited to, streets, roads, highways, bridges, alleys, sidewalks, trails, paths, public easements and all other public ways or areas, including the subsurface under and air space over these areas.

C. The city has jurisdiction and exercises regulatory control over each public right-of-way whether the city has a fee, easement, or other legal interest in the right-of-way. The city has jurisdiction and regulatory control over each right-of-way whether the legal interest in the right-of-way was obtained by grant, dedication, prescription, reservation, condemnation, annexation, foreclosure or other means.

D. No person may occupy or encroach on a public right-of-way without the permission of the city. The city grants permission to use rights-of-way by franchises and permits.

E. The exercise of jurisdiction and regulatory control over a public right-of-way by the city is not official acceptance of the right-of-way, and does not obligate the city to maintain or repair any part of the right-of-way.

F. The city retains the right and privilege to cut or move any telecommunications facilities located within the public rights-of-way of the city, as the city may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.040 Regulatory fees and compensation, not a tax.

A. The fees and costs provided for in this chapter, and any compensation charged and paid for use of the public rights-of-way provided for in this chapter, are separate from, and in addition to, any and all federal, state, local and city taxes as may be levied, imposed or due from a telecommunications carrier, its customers or subscribers, or on account of the lease, sale, delivery or transmission of telecommunications services.

B. The city has determined that any fee imposed by this chapter is not subject to the property tax limitations of Article XI, Sections 11 and 11b of the Oregon Constitution. These fees are not imposed on property or property owners. These fees are not new or increased fees. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.050 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number. The words “shall” and “will” are mandatory and “may” is permissive. Words not defined herein shall be given the meaning set forth in the Communications Policy Act of 1934, as amended, the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and the Telecommunications Act of 1996. If not defined there, the words shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.

A. “Aboveground facilities.” See “overhead facilities.”

B. “Affiliated interest” shall have the same meaning as ORS 759.010.

C. “Cable Act” shall mean the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. 521, et seq., as now and hereafter amended.

D. “Cable service” means the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming, or other programming service; and subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service.

E. “City” means the city of Silverton, an Oregon municipal corporation, and individuals authorized to act on the city’s behalf.

F. “City council” means the elected governing body of the city of Silverton, Oregon.

G. “Control” or “controlling interest” means actual working control in whatever manner exercised.

H. “City property” means and includes all real property owned by the city, other than public rights-of-way and utility easements as those are defined herein, and all property held in a proprietary capacity by the city, which are not subject to right-of-way franchising as provided in this chapter.

I. “Conduit” means any structure, or portion thereof, containing one or more ducts, conduits, manholes, handholes, bolts, or other facilities used for any telegraph, telephone, cable television, electrical, or communications conductors, or cable right-of-way, owned or controlled, in whole or in part, by one or more public utilities.

J. “Days” means calendar days unless otherwise specified.

K. “Duct” means a single enclosed raceway for conductors or cable.

L. “FCC” or “Federal Communications Commission” means the federal administrative agency, or its lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee telecommunications carriers, services and providers on a national level.

M. “Franchise” means an agreement between the city and a grantee which grants a privilege to use public right-of-way and utility easements within the city for a dedicated purpose and for specific compensation.

N. “Grantee” means the person to which a franchise is granted by the city.

O. “Oregon Public Utilities Commission” or “OPUC” means the statutorily created state agency in the state of Oregon responsible for licensing, regulation and administration of certain telecommunications carriers as set forth in Oregon law, or its lawful successor.

P. “Overhead (or aboveground) facilities” means utility poles, utility facilities and telecommunications facilities above the surface of the ground, including the underground supports and foundations for such facilities.

Q. “Person” means an individual, corporation, company, association, joint stock company or association, firm, partnership, or limited liability company.

R. “Private telecommunications network” means a system, including the construction, maintenance or operation of the system, for the provision of a service or any portion of a service, by a person for the exclusive use of that person and not for resale, directly or indirectly. “Private telecommunications network” includes services provided by the state of Oregon pursuant to ORS 190.240 and 283.140.

S. “Public rights-of-way” includes, but is not limited to, streets, roads, highways, bridges, alleys, sidewalks, trails, paths, public easements and all other public ways or areas, including the subsurface under and air space over these areas, but only to the extent of the city’s right, title, interest or authority to grant a franchise to occupy and use such streets and easements for telecommunications facilities. “Public rights-of-way” shall also include utility easements as defined below.

T. “State” means the state of Oregon.

U. “Telecommunications” means the transmission between and among points specified by the user, of information of the user’s choosing, without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received.

V. “Telecommunications Act” means the Communications Policy Act of 1934, as amended by subsequent enactments including the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (47 U.S.C. 151, et seq.) and as hereafter amended.

W. “Telecommunications carrier” means any provider of telecommunications services and includes every person that directly or indirectly owns, controls, operates or manages telecommunications facilities within the city.

X. “Telecommunications facilities” means the plant and equipment, other than customer premises equipment, used by a telecommunications carrier to provide telecommunications services.

Y. “Telecommunications service” means the offering of telecommunications for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used.

Z. “Telecommunications system.” See “telecommunications facilities.”

AA. “Telecommunications utility” has the same meaning as ORS 759.005(1).

BB. “Underground facilities” means utility and telecommunications facilities located under the surface of the ground, excluding the underground foundations or supports for “overhead facilities.”

CC. “Usable space” means all the space on a pole, except the portion below ground level, the 20 feet of safety clearance space above ground level, and the safety clearance space between communications and power circuits. There is a rebuttable presumption that six feet of a pole is buried below ground level.

DD. “Utility easement” means any easement granted to or owned by the city and acquired, established, dedicated or devoted for public utility purposes.

EE. “Utility facilities” means the plant, equipment and property, including but not limited to the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, cable, wires, plant and equipment located under, on, or above the surface of the ground within the public right-of-way of the city and used or to be used for the purpose of providing utility or telecommunications services. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.060 Registration of telecommunications carriers.

The purpose of registration is:

A. To assure that all telecommunications carriers who have facilities and/or provide services within the city comply with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city.

B. To provide the city with accurate and current information concerning the telecommunications carriers who offer to provide telecommunications services within the city, or that own or operate telecommunications facilities within the city.

C. To assist the city in the enforcement of this chapter and the collection of any city franchise fees or charges that may be due the city.

D. To assist the city in monitoring compliance with local, state and federal laws as they apply to grantees under this chapter. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.070 Registration required.

Except as provided in SMC 12.40.090, all telecommunications carriers having telecommunications facilities within the corporate limits of the city, and all telecommunications carriers that offer or provide telecommunications service to customer premises within the city, shall register with the city on forms to be provided by the public works department which shall include the following:

A. The identity and legal status of the registrant, including any affiliates.

B. The name, address and telephone number of the officer, agent or employee responsible for the accuracy of the registration statement.

C. A description of the registrant’s existing or proposed telecommunications facilities within the city.

D. A description of the telecommunications service that the registrant intends to offer or provide, or is currently offering or providing, to persons, firms, businesses or institutions within the city.

E. Information sufficient to determine whether the registrant is subject to public right-of-way franchising under this chapter.

F. Information sufficient to determine whether the transmission, origination or receipt of the telecommunications services provided or to be provided by the registrant constitutes an occupation or privilege subject to any business tax imposed by the city.

G. Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for and received any certificate of authority or permit required by the FCC or the OPUC to provide telecommunications services within the city.

H. Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for and received any construction permit, operating license or other approvals required by the FCC to have telecommunications facilities within the city.

I. If the registrant has applied for and received a city business license, list the license number.

J. Such other information as the city may reasonably require. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.080 Registration fee.

Each application for registration as a telecommunications carrier shall be accompanied by a non-refundable registration fee in an amount to be determined by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.090 Exceptions to registration.

The following telecommunications carriers are excepted from registration:

A. Telecommunications carriers that are owned and operated for its own use by the state or a political subdivision of this state.

B. A private telecommunications network; provided, that such network does not occupy any public rights-of-way of the city. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.100 Construction standards – Responsibility of owner.

The owner of the telecommunications facilities to be constructed and, if different, the grantee, is responsible for performance of and compliance with all provisions of SMC 12.40.100 through 12.40.280. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.110 Construction standards – Codes.

Telecommunications facilities shall be constructed, installed, operated and maintained in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local codes, rules and regulations including the National Electrical Code and the National Electrical Safety Code. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.120 Construction standards – General.

No person shall commence or continue with the construction, installation or operation of telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way except as provided in SMC 12.40.120 through 12.40.290. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.130 Construction standards – Construction permits.

No person shall construct or install any telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way without first obtaining a construction permit, and paying the construction permit fee established in SMC 12.40.180. No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way:

A. Unless the telecommunications carrier has first filed a registration statement with the city pursuant to SMC 12.40.060 through 12.40.090; and

B. Unless the telecommunications carrier has first applied for and received a franchise pursuant to SMC 12.40.350 through 12.40.420. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.140 Construction standards – Permit applications.

Applications for permits to construct telecommunications facilities shall be submitted upon forms to be provided by the city and shall be accompanied by drawings, plans and specifications in sufficient detail to demonstrate:

A. That the facilities will be constructed in accordance with all applicable codes, rules and regulations.

B. That the facilities will be constructed in accordance with the franchise agreement.

C. The location and route of all facilities to be installed underground.

D. The location and route of all facilities to be located under the surface of the ground, including the line and grade proposed for the burial at all points along the route which are within the public rights-of-way. Existing facilities shall be differentiated on the plans from new construction.

E. The location of all existing underground utilities, conduits, ducts, pipes, mains and installations which are within the public rights-of-way along the underground route proposed by the applicant. A cross section shall be provided showing new or existing facilities in relation to the street, curb, sidewalk or right-of-way.

F. The construction methods to be employed for protection of existing structures, fixtures, and facilities within or adjacent to the public rights-of-way.

G. The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and obstructions, if any, that applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove or relocate, together with a landscape plan for protecting, trimming, removing, replacing and restoring any trees or areas to be disturbed during construction. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.150 Construction standards – Engineer’s certification.

All permit applications shall be accompanied by the certification of a registered professional engineer that the drawings, plans and specifications submitted with the application comply with applicable technical codes, rules and regulations. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.160 Construction standards – Construction schedule.

All permit applications shall be accompanied by a written construction schedule, which shall include a deadline for completion of construction. The construction schedule is subject to approval by the public works department. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.170 Construction standards – Traffic control plan.

All permit applications shall be accompanied by a traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures and devices that will be employed, consistent with Uniform Manual of Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.180 Construction standards – Construction permit fee.

Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, prior to issuance of a construction permit, the applicant shall pay a permit fee in an amount to be determined by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.190 Construction standards – Issuance of permit.

If satisfied that the applications, plans and documents submitted comply with all requirements of this chapter and the franchise agreement, the public works department shall issue a permit authorizing construction of the facilities, subject to such further conditions, restrictions or regulations affecting the time, place and manner of performing the work as they may deem necessary or appropriate. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.200 Construction standards – Notice of construction.

The permittee shall notify the public works department not less than two working days in advance of any excavation or work in the public rights-of-way. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.210 Construction standards – Locates.

The permittee shall comply with the rules adopted by the Oregon Utility Notification Center regulating the notification and marking of underground facilities. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.220 Construction standards – Compliance with permit.

All construction practices and activities shall be in accordance with the permit and approved final plans and specifications for the facilities. The public works department and their representatives shall be provided access to the work site and such further information as they may require to ensure compliance with such requirements. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.230 Construction standards – Display of permit.

The permittee shall maintain a copy of the construction permit and approved plans at the construction site and shall display the permit. Plans shall be made available for inspection by the public works department or their representatives at all times when construction work is occurring. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.240 Construction standards – Noncomplying work.

Upon order of the public works department, all work which does not comply with the permit, the approved plans and specifications for the work, or the requirements of this chapter, shall be removed at the sole expense of the permittee. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.250 Construction standards – Completion of construction.

The permittee shall promptly complete all construction activities so as to minimize disruption of the city rights-of-way and other public and private property. All construction work within city rights-of-way, including restoration, must be completed within 120 days of the date of issuance of the construction permit unless an alternate schedule has been approved pursuant to the schedule submitted and approved by the appropriate city official as contemplated by SMC 12.40.160. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.260 Construction standards – As-built drawings.

Within 60 days after completion of construction, the permittee shall furnish the city with two complete sets of plans drawn to scale and certified to the city as accurately depicting the location of all telecommunications facilities constructed pursuant to the permit, in a format acceptable to the city engineer. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.270 Construction standards – Restoration of public rights-of-way and city property.

A. When a permittee, or any person acting on its behalf, does any work in or affecting any public rights-of-way or city property, it shall, at its own expense, promptly remove any obstructions therefrom and restore such ways or property to at least as good a condition as existed before the work was undertaken, unless otherwise directed by the city and as determined by the city engineer.

B. If weather or other conditions do not permit the complete restoration required by this section, the permittee shall temporarily restore the affected rights-of-way or property. Such temporary restoration shall be at the permittee’s sole expense and the permittee shall promptly undertake and complete the required permanent restoration when the weather or other conditions no longer prevent such permanent restoration. Any corresponding modification to the construction schedule shall be subject to approval by the city.

C. If the permittee fails to restore rights-of-way or property to at least as good a condition as existed before the work was undertaken, the city shall give the permittee written notice and provide the permittee a reasonable period of time not exceeding 30 days to restore the rights-of-way or property. If, after said notice, the permittee fails to restore the rights-of-way or property to as good a condition as existed before the work was undertaken, the city shall cause such restoration to be made at the expense of the permittee.

D. A permittee or other person acting in its behalf shall use suitable barricades, flags, flagging attendants, lights, flares and other measures as required for the safety of all members of the general public and to prevent injury or damage to any person, vehicle or property by reason of such work in or affecting such rights-of-way or property. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.280 Construction standards – Landscape restoration.

A. All trees, landscaping and grounds removed, damaged or disturbed as a result of the construction, installation, maintenance, repair or replacement of telecommunications facilities, whether such work is done pursuant to a franchise or permit shall be replaced or restored as nearly as may be practicable, to the condition existing prior to performance of work.

B. Any trees, shrubs or other landscaping that show substantial damage within 18 months of completion of the construction, which damage can be attributed to permittee’s construction activities, must be replaced at the sole expense of the permittee.

C. All restoration work within the public rights-of-way shall be done in accordance with landscape plans approved by the city. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.290 Construction standards – Performance and completion bond.

Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, a performance bond written by a corporate surety acceptable to the city, and authorized to transact business in Oregon, equal to at least 100 percent of the estimated cost of constructing permittee’s telecommunications facilities within the public rights-of-way of the city shall be deposited before construction is commenced.

A. The performance bond shall remain in force until 60 days after substantial completion of the work, as determined in writing by the city, including restoration of public rights-of-way and other property affected by the construction.

B. The performance bond shall guarantee, to the satisfaction of the city:

1. Timely completion of construction;

2. Construction in compliance with applicable plans, permits, technical codes and standards;

3. Proper location of the facilities as specified by the city;

4. Restoration of the public rights-of-way and other property affected by the construction;

5. The submission of “as-built” drawings after completion of the work as required by this chapter; and

6. Timely payment and satisfaction of all claims, demands or liens for labor, material or services provided in connection with the work. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.300 Location of facilities.

All facilities located within the public right-of-way shall be constructed, installed and located in accordance with the following terms and conditions, unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement:

A. Grantee shall install its telecommunications facilities underground unless the city specifically permits attachments to utility poles or other aboveground facilities.

B. Grantee shall install its telecommunications facilities within an existing underground duct or conduit whenever surplus capacity exists within such utility facility, unless grantee demonstrates to the satisfaction of the city that such installation is not feasible.

C. A grantee with permission to install overhead facilities shall install its telecommunications facilities on pole attachments to existing utility poles only, and then only if surplus space is available.

D. Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located underground within a public right-of-way of the city, a grantee with permission to occupy the same public right-of-way must also locate its telecommunications facilities underground.

E. Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities or telecommunications facilities are located or relocated underground within a public right-of-way of the city, a grantee that currently occupies the same public right-of-way shall relocate its facilities underground concurrently with the other affected utilities to minimize disruption of the public right-of-way, absent extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship as determined by the city and consistent with state law. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.310 Location of facilities – Interference with the public rights-of-way.

No grantee may locate or maintain its telecommunications facilities so as to unreasonably interfere with the use of the public rights-of-way by the city, by the general public or by other persons authorized to use or be present in or upon the public rights-of-way. All such facilities shall be moved by the grantee, temporarily or permanently, as determined by the city at the sole expense of the grantee. All use of public rights-of-way shall be consistent with city codes, ordinances and regulations. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.320 Location of facilities – Relocation or removal of facilities.

Within 30 days following written notice from the city, a grantee shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any telecommunications facilities within the public rights-of-way whenever the city shall have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary for:

A. The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any city or other public improvement in or upon the public rights-of-way.

B. The operations of the city or other governmental entity in or upon the public rights-of-way.

C. The public interest. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.330 Location of facilities – Removal of unauthorized facilities.

Within 30 days following written notice from the city, any grantee, telecommunications carrier, or other person that owns, controls or maintains any unauthorized telecommunications system, facility or related appurtenances within the public rights-of-way of the city shall, at its own expense, remove such facilities or appurtenances from the public rights-of-way of the city. A telecommunications system or facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances:

A. One year after the expiration or termination of the grantee’s telecommunications franchise.

B. Upon abandonment of a facility within the public rights-of-way of the city. A facility will be considered abandoned when it is deactivated, out of service, or not used for its intended and authorized purpose for a period of 90 days or longer. A facility will not be considered abandoned if it is temporarily out of service during performance of repairs or if the facility is being replaced.

C. If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a telecommunications franchise.

D. If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the prior issuance of a required construction permit.

E. If the system or facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the grantee’s telecommunications franchise or other legally sufficient permit. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.340 Location of facilities – Coordination of construction activities.

All grantees are required to cooperate with the city and with each other.

A. By January 1st of each year, grantees shall provide the city with a schedule of their proposed construction activities in, around or that may affect the public rights-of-way.

B. Each grantee shall meet with the city, other grantees and users of the public rights-of-way annually or as determined by the city to schedule and coordinate construction in the public rights-of-way.

C. All construction locations, activities and schedules shall be coordinated, as ordered by the city engineer, to minimize public inconvenience, disruption or damages. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.350 Telecommunications franchise.

A telecommunications franchise shall be required of any telecommunications carrier who desires to occupy public rights-of-way of the city. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.360 Franchise – Application.

Any person that desires a telecommunications franchise shall file an application with the public works department which includes the following information:

A. The identity of the applicant, including all affiliates of the applicant.

B. A description of the telecommunications services that are or will be offered or provided by the applicant over its telecommunications facilities.

C. A description of the transmission medium that is being used or will be used by the applicant to offer or provide such telecommunications services.

D. Engineering plans, specifications and a network map of the facilities located or to be located within the city, all in sufficient detail to identify:

1. The location and route requested for applicant’s proposed telecommunications facilities;

2. The location of all aboveground and underground public utility, telecommunication, cable, water, sewer, storm drainage and other facilities in the public rights-of-way along the proposed route;

3. The location(s), if any, for interconnection with the telecommunications facilities of other telecommunications carriers.

E. If applicant is proposing to install aboveground facilities, to the extent that they will be using utility poles, evidence that surplus space is available for locating its telecommunications facilities on existing utility poles along the proposed route.

F. If applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing ducts or conduits within the public rights-of-way, provide information in sufficient detail to identify:

1. The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits before installation of applicant’s telecommunications facilities;

2. The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of applicant’s telecommunications facilities.

G. If applicant is proposing an underground installation within new ducts or conduits to be constructed within the public rights-of-way:

1. The location proposed for the new ducts or conduits;

2. The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits after the installation of applicant’s telecommunications facilities.

H. The area or areas of the city the applicant desires to serve and a preliminary construction schedule for build-out to the entire franchise area.

I. Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles demonstrating the applicant’s financial ability to construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove the facilities.

J. Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant’s technical qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the telecommunications facilities and services described in the application.

K. Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities and to offer or provide the telecommunications services proposed.

L. Whether the applicant intends to provide cable service, video dialtone service or other video programming service.

M. An accurate map showing the location of any existing telecommunications facilities in the city that applicant intends to use or lease.

N. A description of any services or facilities that the applicant will offer or make available to the city and other public, educational and governmental institutions and at what cost.

O. A description of applicant’s access and line extension policies.

P. Such other information as may be requested by the city manager or their designee. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.370 Franchise – Application and review fee.

A. Applicant shall reimburse the city for such reasonable costs as the city incurs in entering into the franchise agreement.

B. An application and review fee of $2,000 shall be deposited with the city as part of the application filed pursuant to SMC 12.40.360. Expenses exceeding the deposit will be billed to the applicant or the unused portion of the deposit will be returned to the applicant following the determination granting or denying the franchise. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.380 Franchise – Determination by the city.

The city shall issue a written determination granting or denying the application in whole or in part, applying the standards listed below. If the application is denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for denial. The standards to be applied by city are:

A. The financial and technical ability of the applicant.

B. The legal capacity of the applicant.

C. The capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate the applicant’s proposed facilities.

D. The capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate additional utility and telecommunications facilities if the franchise is granted.

E. The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities, improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the franchise is granted.

F. The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of construction within the public rights-of-way.

G. The service that applicant will provide to the community and region.

H. The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare if the franchise is granted.

I. The availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the proposed facilities.

J. Applicable federal and state telecommunications laws, regulations and policies. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.390 Franchise – Rights granted.

No franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall convey any right, title or interest in the public rights-of-way, but shall be deemed a grant to use and occupy the public rights-of-way for the limited purposes and term stated in the franchise agreement. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.400 Franchise – Term of grant.

Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, a telecommunications franchise granted hereunder shall be in effect for a term of five years. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.410 Franchise – Territory.

Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, a telecommunications franchise granted hereunder shall be limited to a specific geographic area of the city to be served by the franchise grantee, and the public rights-of-way necessary to serve such areas. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.420 Franchise – Fee.

Each franchise granted by the city is subject to the city’s right, which is expressly reserved, to fix a fair and reasonable compensation to be paid for the privileges granted; provided, nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the city and a grantee from agreeing to the compensation to be paid. The compensation shall be subject to the specific payment terms and conditions contained in the franchise agreement. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.430 Franchise – Amendment.

Conditions for amending a franchise:

A. A new application and grant shall be required of any telecommunications carrier that desires to extend or locate its telecommunications facilities in public rights-of-way of the city which are not included in a franchise previously granted under this chapter.

B. If ordered by the city to locate or relocate its telecommunications facilities in public rights-of-way not included in a previously granted franchise, the city shall grant an amendment without further application.

C. A new application and grant shall be required of any telecommunications carrier that desires to provide a service which was not included in a franchise previously granted under this chapter. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.440 Franchise – Renewal applications.

A grantee that desires to renew its franchise under this chapter shall, not less than 180 days before expiration of the current agreement, file an application with the city for renewal of its franchise which shall include the following information:

A. The information required pursuant to SMC 12.40.360.

B. Any information required pursuant to the franchise agreement between the city and the grantee. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.450 Franchise – Renewal determinations.

Within 90 days after receiving a complete application under SMC 12.40.440 hereof, the city shall issue a written determination granting or denying the renewal application in whole or in part, applying the following standards. If the renewal application is denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for nonrenewal.

A. The financial and technical ability of the applicant.

B. The legal ability of the applicant.

C. The continuing capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate the applicant’s existing and proposed facilities.

D. The applicant’s compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the franchise agreement.

E. Applicable federal, state and local telecommunications laws, rules and policies.

F. Such other factors as may demonstrate that the continued grant to use the public rights-of-way will serve the community interest. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.460 Franchise – Obligation to cure as a condition of renewal.

No franchise shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the grantee’s performance of the agreement, or of the requirements of this chapter, have been cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the grantee has been approved by the city. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.470 Franchise – Assignments or transfers of system or franchise.

Ownership or control of a majority interest in a telecommunications system or franchise may not, directly or indirectly, be transferred, assigned or disposed of by sale, lease, merger, consolidation or other act of the grantee, by operation of law or otherwise, without the prior consent of the city, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed, and then only on such reasonable conditions as may be prescribed in such consent.

A. Grantee and the proposed assignee or transferee of the franchise or system shall provide and certify the following information to the city not less than 120 days prior to the proposed date of transfer:

1. Complete information setting forth the nature, terms and condition of the proposed transfer or assignment;

2. All information required of a telecommunications franchise applicant pursuant to SMC 12.40.360 with respect to the proposed transferee or assignee;

3. Any other information reasonably required by the city.

B. No transfer shall be approved unless the assignee or transferee has the legal, technical, financial and other requisite qualifications to own, hold and operate the telecommunications system pursuant to this chapter.

C. Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, the grantee shall reimburse the city for all direct and indirect fees, costs, and expenses reasonably incurred by the city in considering a request to transfer or assign a telecommunications franchise.

D. Any transfer or assignment of a telecommunications franchise, system or integral part of a system without prior approval of the city under this section or pursuant to a franchise agreement shall be void and is cause for revocation of the franchise. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.480 Franchise – Revocation or termination.

A franchise to use or occupy public rights-of-way of the city may be revoked for the following reasons:

A. Construction or operation in the city or in the public rights-of-way of the city without a construction permit.

B. Construction or operation at an unauthorized location.

C. Failure to comply with SMC 12.40.470 with respect to sale, transfer or assignment of a telecommunications system or franchise.

D. Misrepresentation by or on behalf of a grantee in any application to the city.

E. Abandonment of telecommunications facilities in the public rights-of-way.

F. Failure to relocate or remove facilities as required in this chapter.

G. Failure to pay taxes, compensation, fees or costs when and as due the city.

H. Insolvency or bankruptcy of the grantee.

I. Violation of material provisions of this chapter.

J. Violation of the material terms of a franchise agreement. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.490 Franchise – Notice and duty to cure.

In the event that the city believes that grounds exist for revocation of a franchise, the city shall give the grantee written notice of the apparent violation or noncompliance, providing a short and concise statement of the nature and general facts of the violation or noncompliance, and providing the grantee a reasonable period of time not exceeding 30 days to furnish evidence:

A. That corrective action has been, or is being actively and expeditiously pursued, to remedy the violation or noncompliance.

B. That rebuts the alleged violation or noncompliance.

C. That it would be in the public interest to impose some penalty or sanction less than revocation. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.500 Franchise – Public hearing.

In the event that a grantee fails to provide evidence reasonably satisfactory to the city as provided in SMC 12.40.490, the city manager shall refer the apparent violation or noncompliance to the city council. The city council shall provide the grantee with notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard concerning the matter. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.510 Franchise – Standards for revocation or lesser sanctions.

If persuaded that the grantee has violated or failed to comply with material provisions of this chapter, or of a franchise agreement, the city council shall determine whether to revoke the franchise, or to establish some lesser sanction and cure, considering the nature, circumstances, extent and gravity of the violation as reflected by one or more of the following factors:

A. Whether the misconduct was egregious.

B. Whether substantial harm resulted.

C. Whether the violation was intentional.

D. Whether there is a history of prior violations of the same or other requirements.

E. Whether there is a history of overall compliance.

F. Whether the violation was voluntarily disclosed, admitted or cured. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.520 Franchise – Other city costs.

All grantees shall, within 30 days after written demand therefor, reimburse the city for all direct and indirect costs and expenses incurred by the city in connection with any modification, amendment, renewal or transfer of the franchise or any franchise agreement. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.530 General franchise terms – Facilities.

Each grantee shall provide the city with an accurate map or maps certifying the location of all telecommunications facilities within the public rights-of-way. Each grantee shall provide updated maps annually. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.540 General franchise terms – Damage to grantee’s facilities.

Unless directly and proximately caused by willful, intentional or malicious acts by the city, the city shall not be liable for any damage to or loss of any telecommunications facility within the public rights-of-way of the city as a result of or in connection with any public works, public improvements, construction, excavation, grading, filling, or work of any kind in the public rights-of-way by or on behalf of the city, or for any consequential losses resulting directly or indirectly therefrom. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.550 General franchise terms – Duty to provide information.

Within 10 days of a written request from the city, each grantee shall furnish the city with information sufficient to demonstrate:

A. That grantee has complied with all requirements of this chapter.

B. All books, records, maps and other documents, maintained by the grantee with respect to its facilities within the public rights-of-way shall be made available for inspection by the city at reasonable times and intervals. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.560 General franchise terms – Nondiscrimination.

A grantee shall make its telecommunications services available to any customer within its franchise area who shall request such service, without discrimination as to the terms, conditions, rates or charges for grantee’s services; provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a grantee from making any reasonable classifications among differently situated customers. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.570 General franchise terms – Service to the city.

If the city contracts for the use of telecommunication facilities, telecommunication services, installation, or maintenance from the grantee, the grantee shall charge the city the grantee’s most favorable rate offered at the time of the request charged to a similar user within Oregon for a similar volume of service, subject to any of grantee’s tariffs or price lists on file with the OPUC. With the city’s permission, the grantee may deduct the applicable charges from fee payments. Other terms and conditions of such services may be specified in a separate agreement between the city and grantee. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.580 General franchise terms – Compensation for city property.

If any right is granted, by lease, franchise or other manner, to use and occupy city property for the installation of telecommunications facilities, the compensation to be paid for such right and use shall be fixed by the city. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.590 General franchise terms – Cable franchise.

Telecommunication carriers providing cable service shall be subject to the cable franchise requirements in Ordinance 89-114, or such other franchise that shall be in effect. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.600 General franchise terms – Leased capacity.

A grantee shall have the right, without prior city approval, to offer or provide capacity or bandwidth to its customers; provided, that the grantee shall notify the city that such lease or agreement has been granted to a customer or lessee. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.610 General franchise terms – Grantee insurance.

Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, each grantee shall, as a condition of the grant, secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring both the grantee and the city, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents and employees as coinsured:

A. Comprehensive general liability insurance with limits not less than:

1. Three million dollars for bodily injury or death to each person;

2. Three million dollars for property damage resulting from any one accident; and,

3. Three million dollars for all other types of liability.

B. Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a limit of $1,000,000 for each person and $3,000,000 for each accident.

C. Worker’s compensation within statutory limits and employer’s liability insurance with limits of not less than $1,000,000.

D. Comprehensive form premises-operations, explosions and collapse hazard, underground hazard and products completed hazard with limits of not less than $3,000,000.

E. The liability insurance policies required by this section shall be maintained by the grantee throughout the term of the telecommunications franchise, and such other period of time during which the grantee is operating without a franchise hereunder, or is engaged in the removal of its telecommunications facilities. Each such insurance policy shall contain the following endorsement:

It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until 90 days after receipt by the City, by registered mail, of a written notice addressed to the Public Works of such intent to cancel or not to renew.

F. Within 60 days after receipt by the city of said notice, and in no event later than 30 days prior to said cancellation, the grantee shall obtain and furnish to the city evidence that the grantee meets requirements of this section. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.620 General franchise terms – General indemnification.

Each franchise agreement shall include, to the extent permitted by law, grantee’s express undertaking to defend, indemnify and hold the city and its officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against any and all damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney’s fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the grantee or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of its telecommunications facilities, and in providing or offering telecommunications services over the facilities or network, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter or by a franchise agreement made or entered into pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.630 General franchise terms – Performance surety.

Before a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter is effective, and as necessary thereafter, the grantee shall provide a performance bond, in form and substance acceptable to the city, as security for the full and complete performance of a franchise granted under this chapter, including any costs, expenses, damages or loss the city pays or incurs because of any failure attributable to the grantee to comply with the codes, ordinances, rules, regulations or permits of the city. This obligation is in addition to the performance bond required by SMC 12.40.290 for construction of facilities. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.640 General provisions – Governing law.

Any franchise granted under this chapter is subject to the provisions of the Constitution and laws of the United States, and the state of Oregon and the ordinances and Charter of the city. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.650 General provisions – Written agreement.

No franchise shall be granted hereunder unless the agreement is in writing. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.660 Nonexclusive grant.

No franchise granted under this chapter shall confer any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the public rights-of-way of the city for delivery of telecommunications services or any other purposes. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.670 Severability and preemption.

If any article, section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, term, provision, condition, covenant or portion of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, or superseded by state or federal legislation, rules, regulations or decision, the remainder of the chapter shall not be affected thereby but shall be deemed as a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof, and each remaining section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, provision, condition, covenant and portion of this chapter shall be valid and enforceable to the fullest extent permitted by law. In the event that federal or state laws, rules or regulations preempt a provision or limit the enforce-ability of a provision of this chapter, then the provision shall be read to be preempted to the extent and or the time required by law. In the event such federal or state law, rules or regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed so that the provision hereof that had been preempted is no longer preempted, such provision shall thereupon return to full force and effect, and shall thereafter be binding, without the requirement of further action on the part of the city, and any amendments hereto. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.680 Penalties.

Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000 for each offense. A separate and distinct offense shall be deemed committed each day on which a violation occurs. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.690 Other remedies.

Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any judicial remedies that the city may have, at law or in equity, for enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.700 Captions.

The captions to sections throughout this chapter are intended solely to facilitate reading and reference to the sections and provisions contained herein. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of this chapter. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.710 Compliance with laws.

Any grantee under this chapter shall comply with all federal and state laws and regulations, including regulations of any administrative agency thereof, as well as all ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the city heretofore or hereafter adopted or established during the entire term any franchise granted under this chapter, which are relevant and relate to the construction, maintenance and operation of a telecommunications system. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.720 Consent.

Wherever the consent of either the city or of the grantee is specifically required by this chapter or in a franchise granted, such consent will not be unreasonably withheld. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.730 Application to existing ordinance and agreements.

To the extent that this chapter is not in conflict with and can be implemented with existing ordinance and franchise agreements, this chapter shall apply to all existing ordinance and franchise agreements for use of the public right-of-way for telecommunications. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


12.40.740 Confidentiality.

The city agrees to use its best efforts to preserve the confidentiality of information as requested by a grantee, to the extent permitted by the Oregon Public Records Law. (Ord. 99-101, 1999)


Chapter 12.44 CABLE REGULATIONS

Sections:

Article I. Introduction

12.44.010    Purpose.

12.44.020    Jurisdiction and management of the public rights-of-way.

12.44.030    Regulatory fees and compensation, not a tax.

12.44.040    Definitions.

Article II. Registration of Cable Providers

12.44.050    Purpose.

12.44.060    Registration required.

12.44.070    Registration fee.

12.44.080    Exceptions to registration.

Article III. Construction Standards

12.44.090    Responsibility of owner.

12.44.100    Construction codes.

12.44.110    General.

12.44.120    Construction permits.

12.44.130    Permit applications.

12.44.140    Engineer’s certification.

12.44.150    Construction schedule.

12.44.160    Traffic control plan.

12.44.170    Construction permit fee.

12.44.180    Issuance of permit.

12.44.190    Notice of construction.

12.44.200    Locates.

12.44.210    Compliance with permit.

12.44.220    Display of permit.

12.44.230    Noncomplying work.

12.44.240    Completion of construction.

12.44.250    As-built drawings.

12.44.260    Restoration of public rights-of-way and city property.

12.44.270    Landscape restoration.

12.44.280    Performance and completion bond.

Article IV. Location of Cable Facilities

12.44.290    Location of facilities.

12.44.300    Interference with the public rights-of-way.

12.44.310    Relocation or removal of facilities.

12.44.320    Removal of unauthorized facilities.

12.44.330    Coordination of construction activities.

Article V. Cable Franchise

12.44.340    Cable franchise.

12.44.350    Application.

12.44.360    Application and review fee.

12.44.370    Determination by the city.

12.44.380    Rights granted.

12.44.390    Term of grant.

12.44.400    Franchise territory.

12.44.410    Franchise fee.

12.44.420    Amendment of grant.

12.44.430    Renewal applications.

12.44.440    Renewal determinations.

12.44.450    Obligation to cure as a condition of renewal.

12.44.460    Assignments or transfers of system or franchise.

12.44.470    Sanction, revocation or termination of franchise.

12.44.480    Notice and duty to cure.

12.44.490    Public hearing.

12.44.500    Standards for revocation or lesser sanctions.

12.44.510    Other city costs.

Article VI. General Franchise Terms

12.44.520    Facilities.

12.44.530    Damage to grantee’s facilities.

12.44.540    Duty to provide information.

12.44.550    Nondiscrimination.

12.44.560    Service to the city.

12.44.570    Compensation for city property.

12.44.580    Cable franchise.

12.44.590    Leased capacity.

12.44.600    Grantee insurance.

12.44.610    General indemnification.

12.44.620    Performance surety.

Article VII. General Provisions

12.44.630    Governing law.

12.44.640    Written agreement.

12.44.650    Nonexclusive grant.

12.44.660    Severability and preemption.

12.44.670    Penalties.

12.44.680    Other remedies.

12.44.690    Captions.

12.44.700    Compliance with laws.

12.44.710    Consent.

12.44.720    Application to existing ordinance and agreements.

12.44.730    Confidentiality.


             

Article I. Introduction


Chapter 12.44 CABLE REGULATIONS

Sections:

Article I. Introduction

12.44.010    Purpose.

12.44.020    Jurisdiction and management of the public rights-of-way.

12.44.030    Regulatory fees and compensation, not a tax.

12.44.040    Definitions.

Article II. Registration of Cable Providers

12.44.050    Purpose.

12.44.060    Registration required.

12.44.070    Registration fee.

12.44.080    Exceptions to registration.

Article III. Construction Standards

12.44.090    Responsibility of owner.

12.44.100    Construction codes.

12.44.110    General.

12.44.120    Construction permits.

12.44.130    Permit applications.

12.44.140    Engineer’s certification.

12.44.150    Construction schedule.

12.44.160    Traffic control plan.

12.44.170    Construction permit fee.

12.44.180    Issuance of permit.

12.44.190    Notice of construction.

12.44.200    Locates.

12.44.210    Compliance with permit.

12.44.220    Display of permit.

12.44.230    Noncomplying work.

12.44.240    Completion of construction.

12.44.250    As-built drawings.

12.44.260    Restoration of public rights-of-way and city property.

12.44.270    Landscape restoration.

12.44.280    Performance and completion bond.

Article IV. Location of Cable Facilities

12.44.290    Location of facilities.

12.44.300    Interference with the public rights-of-way.

12.44.310    Relocation or removal of facilities.

12.44.320    Removal of unauthorized facilities.

12.44.330    Coordination of construction activities.

Article V. Cable Franchise

12.44.340    Cable franchise.

12.44.350    Application.

12.44.360    Application and review fee.

12.44.370    Determination by the city.

12.44.380    Rights granted.

12.44.390    Term of grant.

12.44.400    Franchise territory.

12.44.410    Franchise fee.

12.44.420    Amendment of grant.

12.44.430    Renewal applications.

12.44.440    Renewal determinations.

12.44.450    Obligation to cure as a condition of renewal.

12.44.460    Assignments or transfers of system or franchise.

12.44.470    Sanction, revocation or termination of franchise.

12.44.480    Notice and duty to cure.

12.44.490    Public hearing.

12.44.500    Standards for revocation or lesser sanctions.

12.44.510    Other city costs.

Article VI. General Franchise Terms

12.44.520    Facilities.

12.44.530    Damage to grantee’s facilities.

12.44.540    Duty to provide information.

12.44.550    Nondiscrimination.

12.44.560    Service to the city.

12.44.570    Compensation for city property.

12.44.580    Cable franchise.

12.44.590    Leased capacity.

12.44.600    Grantee insurance.

12.44.610    General indemnification.

12.44.620    Performance surety.

Article VII. General Provisions

12.44.630    Governing law.

12.44.640    Written agreement.

12.44.650    Nonexclusive grant.

12.44.660    Severability and preemption.

12.44.670    Penalties.

12.44.680    Other remedies.

12.44.690    Captions.

12.44.700    Compliance with laws.

12.44.710    Consent.

12.44.720    Application to existing ordinance and agreements.

12.44.730    Confidentiality.


             

Article I. Introduction


12.44.010 Purpose.

The purpose and intent of this chapter is to:

A. Comply with the provisions of the 1996 Telecommunications Act as they apply to local governments, cable television carriers and the services those carriers offer;

B. Promote competition on a competitively neutral basis in the provision of cable television services;

C. Encourage the provision of advanced and competitive cable television services on the widest possible basis to businesses institutions and residents of the city;

D. Permit and manage reasonable access to the public rights-of-way of the city for purposes of providing cable services on a competitively neutral basis and conserve the limited physical capacity of those public rights-of-way held in trust by the city;

E. Assure that the city’s current and ongoing costs of granting and regulating private access to and the use of the public rights-of-way are fully compensated by the persons seeking such access and causing such costs;

F. Secure fair and reasonable compensation to the city and its residents for permitting private use of the public right-of-way;

G. Assure that all cable carriers providing facilities and/or services within the city, or passing through the city, register and comply with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city;

H. Assure that the city can continue to fairly and responsibly protect the public health, safety and welfare of its citizens;

I. Enable the city to discharge its public trust consistent with the rapidly evolving federal and state regulatory policies, industry competition and technological development. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.020 Jurisdiction and management of the public rights-of-way.

A. The city has jurisdiction and exercises regulatory control over all public rights-of-way within the city under authority of the City Charter and state law.

B. Public rights-of-way include, but are not limited to, streets, roads, highways, bridges, alleys, sidewalks, trails, paths, public easements and all other public ways or areas, including the subsurface under and air space over these areas.

C. The city has jurisdiction and exercises regulatory control over each public right-of-way whether the city has a fee, easement, or other legal interest in the right-of-way. The city has jurisdiction and regulatory control over each right-of-way whether the legal interest in the right-of-way was obtained by grant, dedication, prescription, reservation, condemnation, annexation, foreclosure or other means.

D. No person may occupy or encroach on a public right-of-way without the permission of the city. The city grants permission to use rights-of-way by franchises and permits.

E. The exercise of jurisdiction and regulatory control over a public right-of-way by the city is not official acceptance of the right-of-way, and does not obligate the city to maintain or repair any part of the right-of-way.

F. The city retains the right and privilege to cut or move any cable facilities located within the public rights-of-way of the city, as the city may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.030 Regulatory fees and compensation, not a tax.

A. The fees and costs provided for in this chapter, and any compensation charged and paid for use of the public rights-of-way provided for in this chapter, are separate from, and in addition to, any and all federal, state, local and city taxes as may be levied, imposed or due from a cable provider, its customers or subscribers, or on account of the lease, sale, delivery or transmission of cable television services.

B. The city has determined that any fee imposed by this chapter is not subject to the property tax limitations of Article XI, Sections 11 and 11b of the Oregon Constitution. These fees are not imposed on property or property owners. These fees are not new or increased fees. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.040 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number. The words “shall” and “will” are mandatory and “may” is permissive. Words not defined herein shall be given the meaning set forth in the Communications Policy Act of 1934, as amended, the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and the Telecommunications Act of 1996. If not defined there, the words shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.

“Aboveground facilities.” See “overhead facilities.” 

“Affiliated interest” shall have the same meaning as ORS 759.010.

“Cable Act” shall mean the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. 521, et seq., as now and hereafter amended.

“Cable facilities” means the plant and equipment, other than customer premises equipment, used by a cable provider to provide cable television services.

“Cable provider” means any provider of cable television services and includes every person that directly or indirectly owns, controls, operates or manages cable facilities within the city.

“Cable service” means the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming, or other programming service, and subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service. 

“City” means the city of Silverton, an Oregon municipal corporation, and individuals authorized to act on the city’s behalf.

“City council” means the elected governing body of the city of Silverton, Oregon.

“Control” or “controlling interest” means actual working control in whatever manner exercised.

“City property” means and includes all real property owned by the city, other than public rights-of-way and utility easements as those are defined herein, and all property held in a proprietary capacity by the city, which are not subject to right-of-way franchising as provided in this chapter.

“Conduit” means any structure, or portion thereof, containing one or more ducts, conduits, manholes, handholes, bolts, or other facilities used for any telegraph, telephone, cable television, electrical, or communications conductors, or cable right-of-way, owned or controlled, in whole or in part, by one or more public utilities.

“Days” means calendar days unless otherwise specified.

“Duct” means a single enclosed raceway for conductors or cable.

“FCC” or “Federal Communications Commission” means the federal administrative agency, or its lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee cable providers, services and providers on a national level.

“Franchise” means an agreement between the city and a grantee which grants a privilege to use public right-of-way and utility easements within the city for a dedicated purpose and for specific compensation.

“Grantee” means the person to which a franchise is granted by the city.

“Oregon Public Utilities Commission” or “OPUC” means the statutorily created state agency in the state of Oregon responsible for licensing, regulation and administration of certain cable providers as set forth in Oregon law, or its lawful successor.

“Overhead or aboveground facilities” means utility poles, utility facilities and cable facilities above the surface of the ground, including the underground supports and foundations for such facilities.

“Person” means an individual, corporation, company, association, joint stock company or association, firm, partnership, or limited liability company.

“Public rights-of-way” include, but are not limited to, streets, roads, highways, bridges, alleys, sidewalks, trails, paths, public easements and all other public ways or areas, including the subsurface under and air space over these areas, but only to the extent of the city’s right, title, interest or authority to grant a franchise to occupy and use such streets and easements for cable facilities. “Public rights-of-way” shall also include utility easements as defined below. 

“State” means the state of Oregon.

“Telecommunications Act” means the Communications Policy Act of 1934, as amended by subsequent enactments including the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (47 U.S.C. 151, et seq.) and as hereafter amended.

“Telecommunications utility” has the same meaning as ORS 759.005(1).

“Underground facilities” means utility and cable facilities located under the surface of the ground, excluding the underground foundations or supports for “overhead facilities.”

“Usable space” means all the space on a pole, except the portion below ground level, the 20 feet of safety clearance space above ground level, and the safety clearance space between communications and power circuits. There is a rebuttable presumption that six feet of a pole is buried below ground level.

“Utility easement” means any easement granted to or owned by the city and acquired, established, dedicated or devoted for public utility purposes.

“Utility facilities” means the plant, equipment and property, including but not limited to the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, cable, wires, plant and equipment located under, on, or above the surface of the ground within the public right-of-way of the city and used or to be used for the purpose of providing utility or cable television services. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)

Article II. Registration of Cable Providers


12.44.050 Purpose.

The purpose of registration is:

A. To assure that all cable providers who have facilities and/or provide services within the city comply with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city.

B. To provide the city with accurate and current information concerning the cable providers who offer to provide cable television services within the city, or that own or operate cable facilities within the city.

C. To assist the city in the enforcement of this chapter and the collection of any city franchise fees or charges that may be due the city.

D. To assist the city in monitoring compliance with local, state and federal laws as they apply to grantees under this chapter. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.060 Registration required.

Except as provided in SMC 12.44.080, all cable providers having cable facilities within the corporate limits of the city, and all cable providers that offer or provide cable service to customer premises within the city, shall register with the city on forms to be provided by the public works department which shall include the following:

A. The identity and legal status of the registrant, including any affiliates.

B. The name, address and telephone number of the officer, agent or employee responsible for the accuracy of the registration statement.

C. A description of the registrant’s existing or proposed cable facilities within the city.

D. A description of the cable services that the registrant intends to offer or provide, or is currently offering or providing, to persons, firms, businesses or institutions within the city.

E. Information sufficient to determine whether the registrant is subject to public right-of-way franchising under this chapter.

F. Information sufficient to determine whether the transmission, origination or receipt of the cable television services provided or to be provided by the registrant constitutes an occupation or privilege subject to any business tax imposed by the city.

G. Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for and received any certificate of authority or permit required by the FCC or the OPUC to provide cable television services within the city.

H. Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for and received any construction permit, operating license or other approvals required by the FCC to have cable facilities within the city.

I. If the registrant has applied for and received a city business license, list the license number.

J. Such other information as the city may reasonably require. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.070 Registration fee.

Each application for registration as a cable provider shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable registration fee in an amount to be determined by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.080 Exceptions to registration.

The following cable providers are excepted from registration:

A. Cable providers that are owned and operated for its own use by the state or a political subdivision of this state. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)

Article III. Construction Standards


12.44.090 Responsibility of owner.

The owner of the cable facilities to be constructed and, if different, the grantee, is responsible for performance of and compliance with all provisions of SMC 12.44.100 through 12.44.280. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.100 Construction codes.

Cable facilities shall be constructed, installed, operated and maintained in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local codes, rules and regulations including the National Electrical Code and the National Electrical Safety Code. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.110 General.

No person shall commence or continue with the construction, installation or operation of cable facilities within a public right-of-way except as provided in SMC 12.44.120 through 12.44.290. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.120 Construction permits.

No person shall construct or install any cable facilities within a public right-of-way without first obtaining a construction permit, and paying the construction permit fee established in SMC 12.44.170. No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of cable facilities within a public right-of-way:

A. Unless the cable provider has first filed a registration statement with the city pursuant to SMC 12.44.060 through 12.44.080; and

B. Unless the cable provider has first applied for and received a franchise pursuant to SMC 12.44.350 through 12.44.420. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.130 Permit applications.

Applications for permits to construct cable facilities shall be submitted upon forms to be provided by the city and shall be accompanied by drawings, plans and specifications in sufficient detail to demonstrate:

A. That the facilities will be constructed in accordance with all applicable codes, rules and regulations.

B. That the facilities will be constructed in accordance with the franchise agreement.

C. The location and route of all facilities to be installed underground. 

D. The location and route of all facilities to be located under the surface of the ground, including the line and grade proposed for the burial at all points along the route which are within the public rights-of-way. Existing facilities shall be differentiated on the plans from new construction.

E. The location of all existing underground utilities, conduits, ducts, pipes, mains and installations which are within the public rights-of-way along the underground route proposed by the applicant. A cross section shall be provided showing new or existing facilities in relation to the street, curb, sidewalk or right-of-way.

F. The construction methods to be employed for protection of existing structures, fixtures, and facilities within or adjacent to the public rights-of-way.

G. The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and obstructions, if any, that applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove or relocate, together with a landscape plan for protecting, trimming, removing, replacing and restoring any trees or areas to be disturbed during construction. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.140 Engineer’s certification.

All permit applications shall be accompanied by the certification of a registered professional engineer that the drawings, plans and specifications submitted with the application comply with applicable technical codes, rules and regulations. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.150 Construction schedule.

All permit applications shall be accompanied by a written construction schedule, which shall include a deadline for completion of construction. The construction schedule is subject to approval by the public works department. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.160 Traffic control plan.

All permit applications shall be accompanied by a traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures and devices that will be employed, consistent with Uniform Manual of Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.170 Construction permit fee.

Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, prior to issuance of a construction permit, the applicant shall pay a permit fee in an amount to be determined by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.180 Issuance of permit.

If satisfied that the applications, plans and documents submitted comply with all requirements of this chapter and the franchise agreement, the public works department shall issue a permit authorizing construction of the facilities, subject to such further conditions, restrictions or regulations affecting the time, place and manner of performing the work as they may deem necessary or appropriate. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.190 Notice of construction.

The permittee shall notify the public works department not less than two working days in advance of any excavation or work in the public rights-of-way. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.200 Locates.

The permittee shall comply with the rules adopted by the Oregon Utility Notification Center regulating the notification and marking of underground facilities. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.210 Compliance with permit.

All construction practices and activities shall be in accordance with the permit and approved final plans and specifications for the facilities. The public works department and their representatives shall be provided access to the work site and such further information as they may require to ensure compliance with such requirements. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.220 Display of permit.

The permittee shall maintain a copy of the construction permit and approved plans at the construction site and shall display the permit. Plans shall be made available for inspection by the public works department or their representatives at all times when construction work is occurring. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.230 Noncomplying work.

Upon order of the public works department, all work which does not comply with the permit, the approved plans and specifications for the work, or the requirements of this chapter, shall be removed at the sole expense of the permittee. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.240 Completion of construction.

The permittee shall promptly complete all construction activities so as to minimize disruption of the city rights-of-way and other public and private property. All construction work within city rights-of-way, including restoration, must be completed within 120 days of the date of issuance of the construction permit unless an alternate schedule has been approved pursuant to the schedule submitted and approved by the appropriate city official as contemplated by SMC 12.44.150. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.250 As-built drawings.

Within 60 days after completion of construction, the permittee shall furnish the city with two complete sets of plans drawn to scale and certified to the city as accurately depicting the location of all cable facilities constructed pursuant to the permit, in a format acceptable to the city engineer. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.260 Restoration of public rights-of-way and city property.

A. When a permittee, or any person acting on its behalf, does any work in or affecting any public rights-of-way or city property, it shall, at its own expense, promptly remove any obstructions therefrom and restore such ways or property to at least as good a condition as existed before the work was undertaken, unless otherwise directed by the city and as determined by the city engineer.

B. If weather or other conditions do not permit the complete restoration required by this section, the permittee shall temporarily restore the affected rights-of-way or property. Such temporary restoration shall be at the permittee’s sole expense and the permittee shall promptly undertake and complete the required permanent restoration when the weather or other conditions no longer prevent such permanent restoration. Any corresponding modification to the construction schedule shall be subject to approval by the city.

C. If the permittee fails to restore rights-of-way or property to at least as good a condition as existed before the work was undertaken, the city shall give the permittee written notice and provide the permittee a reasonable period of time not exceeding 30 days to restore the rights-of-way or property. If, after said notice, the permittee fails to restore the rights-of-way or property to as good a condition as existed before the work was undertaken, the city shall cause such restoration to be made at the expense of the permittee.

D. A permittee or other person acting in its behalf shall use suitable barricades, flags, flagging attendants, lights, flares and other measures as required for the safety of all members of the general public and to prevent injury or damage to any person, vehicle or property by reason of such work in or affecting such rights-of-way or property. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.270 Landscape restoration.

A. All trees, landscaping and grounds removed, damaged or disturbed as a result of the construction, installation, maintenance, repair or replacement of cable facilities, whether such work is done pursuant to a franchise or permit shall be replaced or restored as nearly as may be practicable, to the condition existing prior to performance of work.

B. Any trees, shrubs or other landscaping that show substantial damage within 18 months of completion of the construction, which damage can be attributed to permittee’s construction activities, must be replaced at the sole expense of the permittee. 

C. All restoration work within the public rights-of-way shall be done in accordance with landscape plans approved by the city. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.280 Performance and completion bond.

Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, a performance bond written by a corporate surety acceptable to the city, and authorized to transact business in Oregon, equal to at least 100 percent of the estimated cost of constructing permittee’s cable facilities within the public rights-of-way of the city shall be deposited before construction is commenced.

A. The performance bond shall remain in force until 60 days after substantial completion of the work, as determined in writing by the city, including restoration of public rights-of-way and other property affected by the construction.

B. The performance bond shall guarantee, to the satisfaction of the city:

1. Timely completion of construction;

2. Construction in compliance with applicable plans, permits, technical codes and standards;

3. Proper location of the facilities as specified by the city;

4. Restoration of the public rights-of-way and other property affected by the construction;

5. The submission of “as-built” drawings after completion of the work as required by this chapter; and

6. Timely payment and satisfaction of all claims, demands or liens for labor, material or services provided in connection with the work. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)

Article IV. Location of Cable Facilities


12.44.290 Location of facilities.

All facilities located within the public right-of-way shall be constructed, installed and located in accordance with the following terms and conditions, unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement:

A. Grantee shall install its cable facilities underground unless the city specifically permits attachments to utility poles or other aboveground facilities.

B. Grantee shall install its cable facilities within an existing underground duct or conduit whenever surplus capacity exists within such utility facility, unless grantee demonstrates to the satisfaction of the city that such installation is not feasible. 

C. A grantee with permission to install overhead facilities shall install its cable facilities on pole attachments to existing utility poles only, and then only if surplus space is available.

D. Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or cable facilities are located underground within a public right-of-way of the city, a grantee with permission to occupy the same public right-of-way must also locate its cable facilities underground.

E. Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities or cable facilities are located or relocated underground within a public right-of-way of the city, a grantee that currently occupies the same public right-of-way shall relocate its facilities underground concurrently with the other affected utilities to minimize disruption of the public right-of-way, absent extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship as determined by the city and consistent with state law. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.300 Interference with the public rights-of-way.

No grantee may locate or maintain its cable facilities so as to unreasonably interfere with the use of the public rights-of-way by the city, by the general public or by other persons authorized to use or be present in or upon the public rights-of-way. All such facilities shall be moved by the grantee, temporarily or permanently, as determined by the city at the sole expense of the grantee. All use of public rights-of-way shall be consistent with city codes, ordinances and regulations. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.310 Relocation or removal of facilities.

Within 30 days following written notice from the city, a grantee shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any cable facilities within the public rights-of-way whenever the city shall have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary for:

A. The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any city or other public improvement in or upon the public rights-of-way.

B. The operations of the city or other governmental entity in or upon the public rights-of-way.

C. The public interest. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.320 Removal of unauthorized facilities.

Within 30 days following written notice from the city, any grantee, cable provider, or other person that owns, controls or maintains any unauthorized cable system, facility or related appurtenances within the public rights-of-way of the city shall, at its own expense, remove such facilities or appurtenances from the public rights-of-way of the city. A cable system or facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances: 

A. One year after the expiration or termination of the grantee’s cable franchise.

B. Upon abandonment of a facility within the public rights-of-way of the city. A facility will be considered abandoned when it is deactivated, out of service, or not used for its intended and authorized purpose for a period of 90 days or longer. A facility will not be considered abandoned if it is temporarily out of service during performance of repairs or if the facility is being replaced.

C. If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a cable franchise.

D. If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the prior issuance of a required construction permit.

E. If the system or facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the grantee’s cable franchise or other legally sufficient permit. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.330 Coordination of construction activities.

All grantees are required to cooperate with the city and with each other.

A. By January 1st of each year, grantees shall provide the city with a schedule of their proposed construction activities in, around or that may affect the public rights-of-way.

B. Each grantee shall meet with the city, other grantees and users of the public rights-of-way annually or as determined by the city to schedule and coordinate construction in the public rights-of-way.

C. All construction locations, activities and schedules shall be coordinated, as ordered by the city engineer, to minimize public inconvenience, disruption or damages. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)

Article V. Cable Franchise


12.44.340 Cable franchise.

A cable franchise shall be required of any cable provider who desires to occupy public rights-of-way of the city. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.350 Application.

Any person that desires a cable franchise shall file an application with public works department which includes the following information:

A. The identity of the applicant, including all affiliates of the applicant.

B. A description of the cable television services that are or will be offered or provided by the applicant over its cable facilities.

C. A description of the transmission medium that is being used or will be used by the applicant to offer or provide such cable television services.

D. Engineering plans, specifications and a network map of the facilities located or to be located within the city, all in sufficient detail to identify:

1. The location and route requested for applicant’s proposed cable facilities;

2. The location of all aboveground and underground public utility, telecommunication, cable, water, sewer, storm drainage and other facilities in the public rights-of-way along the proposed route;

3. The location(s), if any, for interconnection with the cable facilities of other cable providers.

E. If applicant is proposing to install aboveground facilities, to the extent that they will be using utility poles, evidence that surplus space is available for locating its cable facilities on existing utility poles along the proposed route.

F. If applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing ducts or conduits within the public rights-of-way, provide information in sufficient detail to identify:

1. The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits before installation of applicant’s cable facilities;

2. The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of applicant’s cable facilities.

G. If applicant is proposing an underground installation within new ducts or conduits to be constructed within the public rights-of-way:

1. The location proposed for the new ducts or conduits;

2. The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits after the installation of applicant’s cable facilities. 

H. The area or areas of the city the applicant desires to serve and a preliminary construction schedule for build-out to the entire franchise area.

I. Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles demonstrating the applicant’s financial ability to construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove the facilities.

J. Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant’s technical qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the cable facilities and services described in the application.

K. Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities and to offer or provide the cable television services proposed.

L. Whether the applicant intends to provide cable service, video dialtone service or other video programming service.

M. An accurate map showing the location of any existing cable facilities in the city that applicant intends to use or lease.

N. A description of any services or facilities that the applicant will offer or make available to the city and other public, educational and governmental institutions and at what cost.

O. A description of applicant’s access and line extension policies.

P. Such other information as may be requested by the city manager or their designee. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.360 Application and review fee.

A. Applicant shall reimburse the city for such reasonable costs as the city incurs in entering into the franchise agreement.

B. An application and review fee of $2,000 shall be deposited with the city as part of the application filed pursuant to SMC 12.44.350. Expenses exceeding the deposit will be billed to the applicant or the unused portion of the deposit will be returned to the applicant following the determination granting or denying the franchise. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.370 Determination by the city.

The city shall issue a written determination granting or denying the application in whole or in part, applying the standards listed below. If the application is denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for denial. The standards to be applied by city are:

A. The financial and technical ability of the applicant.

B. The legal capacity of the applicant.

C. The capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate the applicant’s proposed facilities.

D. The capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate additional utility and cable facilities if the franchise is granted.

E. The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities, improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the franchise is granted.

F. The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of construction within the public rights-of-way.

G. The service that applicant will provide to the community and region.

H. The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare if the franchise is granted.

I. The availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the proposed facilities.

J. Applicable federal and state laws, regulations and policies. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.380 Rights granted.

No franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall convey any right, title or interest in the public rights-of-way, but shall be deemed a grant to use and occupy the public rights-of-way for the limited purposes and term stated in the franchise agreement. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.390 Term of grant.

Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, a cable franchise granted hereunder shall be in effect for a term of five years. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.400 Franchise territory.

Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, a cable franchise granted hereunder shall be limited to a specific geographic area of the city to be served by the franchise grantee, and the public rights-of-way necessary to serve such areas. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.410 Franchise fee.

Each franchise granted by the city is subject to the city’s right, which is expressly reserved, to fix a fair and reasonable compensation to be paid for the privileges granted; provided, nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the city and a grantee from agreeing to the compensation to be paid. The compensation shall be subject to the specific payment terms and conditions contained in the franchise agreement. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.420 Amendment of grant.

Conditions for amending a franchise:

A. A new application and grant shall be required of any cable provider that desires to extend or locate its cable facilities in public rights-of-way of the city which are not included in a franchise previously granted under this chapter.

B. If ordered by the city to locate or relocate its cable facilities in public rights-of-way not included in a previously granted franchise, the city shall grant an amendment without further application.

C. A new application and grant shall be required of any cable provider that desires to provide a service which was not included in a franchise previously granted under this chapter. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.430 Renewal applications.

A grantee that desires to renew its franchise under this chapter shall, not less than 180 days before expiration of the current agreement, file an application with the city for renewal of its franchise which shall include the following information:

A. The information required pursuant to SMC 12.44.350.

B. Any information required pursuant to the franchise agreement between the city and the grantee. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.440 Renewal determinations.

Within 90 days after receiving a complete application under SMC 12.44.430, the city shall issue a written determination granting or denying the renewal application in whole or in part, applying the following standards. If the renewal application is denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for nonrenewal.

A. The financial and technical ability of the applicant.

B. The legal ability of the applicant.

C. The continuing capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate the applicant’s existing and proposed facilities.

D. The applicant’s compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the franchise agreement.

E. Applicable federal, state and local laws, rules and policies.

F. Such other factors as may demonstrate that the continued grant to use the public rights-of-way will serve the community interest. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.450 Obligation to cure as a condition of renewal.

No franchise shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the grantee’s performance of the agreement, or of the requirements of this chapter, have been cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the grantee has been approved by the city. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.460 Assignments or transfers of system or franchise.

Ownership or control of a majority interest in a cable system or franchise may not, directly or indirectly, be transferred, assigned or disposed of by sale, lease, merger, consolidation or other act of the grantee, by operation of law or otherwise, without the prior consent of the city, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed, and then only on such reasonable conditions as may be prescribed in such consent.

A. Grantee and the proposed assignee or transferee of the franchise or system shall provide and certify the following information to the city not less than 120 days prior to the proposed date of transfer:

1. Complete information setting forth the nature, terms and condition of the proposed transfer or assignment;

2. All information required of a cable franchise applicant pursuant SMC 12.44.350 with respect to the proposed transferee or assignee;

3. Any other information reasonably required by the city.

B. No transfer shall be approved unless the assignee or transferee has the legal, technical, financial and other requisite qualifications to own, hold and operate the cable system pursuant to this chapter.

C. Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, the grantee shall reimburse the city for all direct and indirect fees, costs, and expenses reasonably incurred by the city in considering a request to transfer or assign a cable franchise.

D. Any transfer or assignment of a cable franchise, system or integral part of a system without prior approval of the city under this section or pursuant to a franchise agreement shall be void and is cause for revocation of the franchise. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.470 Sanction, revocation or termination of franchise.

A franchise to use or occupy public rights-of-way of the city may be revoked or sanctions may be imposed for the following reasons:

A. Construction or operation in the city or in the public rights-of-way of the city without a construction permit.

B. Construction or operation at an unauthorized location.

C. Failure to comply with SMC 12.44.460 with respect to sale, transfer or assignment of a cable system or franchise.

D. Misrepresentation by or on behalf of a grantee in any application to the city.

E. Abandonment of cable facilities in the public rights-of-way.

F. Failure to relocate or remove facilities as required in this chapter.

G. Failure to pay taxes, compensation, fees or costs when and as due the city.

H. Insolvency or bankruptcy of the grantee.

I. Violation of material provisions of this chapter.

J. Violation of the material terms of a franchise agreement. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.480 Notice and duty to cure.

In the event that the city believes that grounds exist for revocation of a franchise or for sanctions, the city shall give the grantee written notice of the apparent violation or noncompliance, providing a short and concise statement of the nature and general facts of the violation or noncompliance, and providing the grantee a reasonable period of time not exceeding 30 days to furnish evidence:

A. That corrective action has been, or is being actively and expeditiously pursued, to remedy the violation or noncompliance.

B. That rebuts the alleged violation or noncompliance.

C. That it would be in the public interest to impose some penalty or sanction less than revocation. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.490 Public hearing.

In the event that a grantee fails to provide evidence reasonably satisfactory to the city as provided in SMC 12.44.480, the city manager shall refer the apparent violation or noncompliance to the city council. The city council shall provide the grantee with notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard concerning the matter. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.500 Standards for revocation or lesser sanctions.

If persuaded that the grantee has violated or failed to comply with material provisions of this chapter, or of a franchise agreement, the city council shall determine whether to revoke the franchise, or to establish some lesser sanction and cure, considering the nature, circumstances, extent and gravity of the violation as reflected by one or more of the following factors:

A. Whether the misconduct was egregious.

B. Whether substantial harm resulted.

C. Whether the violation was intentional.

D. Whether there is a history of prior violations of the same or other requirements.

E. Whether there is a history of overall compliance.

F. Whether the violation was voluntarily disclosed, admitted or cured. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.510 Other city costs.

All grantees shall, within 30 days after written demand therefor, reimburse the city for all direct and indirect costs and expenses incurred by the city in connection with any modification, amendment, renewal or transfer of the franchise or any franchise agreement. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)

Article VI. General Franchise Terms


12.44.520 Facilities.

Each grantee shall provide the city with an accurate map or maps certifying the location of all cable facilities within the public rights-of-way. Each grantee shall provide updated maps annually. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.530 Damage to grantee’s facilities.

Unless directly and proximately caused by willful, intentional or malicious acts by the city, the city shall not be liable for any damage to or loss of any cable facility within the public rights-of-way of the city as a result of or in connection with any public works, public improvements, construction, excavation, grading, filling, or work of any kind in the public rights-of-way by or on behalf of the city, or for any consequential losses resulting directly or indirectly therefrom. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.540 Duty to provide information.

Within 10 days of a written request from the city, each grantee shall furnish the city with information sufficient to demonstrate:

A. That grantee has complied with all requirements of this chapter.

B. All books, records, maps and other documents, maintained by the grantee with respect to its facilities within the public rights-of-way shall be made available for inspection by the city at reasonable times and intervals. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.550 Nondiscrimination.

A grantee shall make its cable television services available to any customer within its franchise area who shall request such service, without discrimination as to the terms, conditions, rates or charges for grantee’s services; provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a grantee from making any reasonable classifications among differently situated customers. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.560 Service to the city.

If the city contracts for the use of telecommunication facilities, telecommunication services, installation, or maintenance from the grantee, the grantee shall charge the city the grantee’s most favorable rate offered at the time of the request charged to a similar user within Oregon for a similar volume of service, subject to any of grantee’s tariffs or price lists on file with the OPUC. With the city’s permission, the grantee may deduct the applicable charges from fee payments. Other terms and conditions of such services may be specified in a separate agreement between the city and grantee. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.570 Compensation for city property.

If any right is granted, by lease, franchise or other manner, to use and occupy city property for the installation of cable facilities, the compensation to be paid for such right and use shall be fixed by the city. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.580 Cable franchise.

Telecommunication carriers providing cable service shall be subject to the cable franchise requirements in Ordinance 89-114, or such other franchise that shall be in effect. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.590 Leased capacity.

A grantee shall have the right, without prior city approval, to offer or provide capacity or bandwidth to its customers; provided, that the grantee shall notify the city that such lease or agreement has been granted to a customer or lessee. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.600 Grantee insurance.

Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, each grantee shall, as a condition of the grant, secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring both the grantee and the city, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents and employees as coinsured:

A. Comprehensive general liability insurance with limits not less than

1. Three million dollars for bodily injury or death to each person;

2. Three million dollars for property damage resulting from any one accident; and,

3. Three million dollars for all other types of liability.

B. Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a limit of $1,000,000 for each person and $3,000,000 for each accident.

C. Worker’s compensation within statutory limits and employer’s liability insurance with limits of not less than $1,000,000.

D. Comprehensive form premises-operations, explosions and collapse hazard, underground hazard and products completed hazard with limits of not less than $3,000,000.

E. The liability insurance policies required by this section shall be maintained by the grantee throughout the term of the cable franchise, and such other period of time during which the grantee is operating without a franchise hereunder, or is engaged in the removal of its cable facilities. Each such insurance policy shall contain the following endorsement:

It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until 90 days after receipt by the City, by registered mail, of a written notice addressed to the Public Works of such intent to cancel or not to renew. 

F. Within 60 days after receipt by the city of said notice, and in no event later than 30 days prior to said cancellation, the grantee shall obtain and furnish to the city evidence that the grantee meets requirements of this section. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.610 General indemnification.

Each franchise agreement shall include, to the extent permitted by law, grantee’s express undertaking to defend, indemnify and hold the city and its officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against any and all damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney’s fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the grantee or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of its cable facilities, and in providing or offering cable television services over the facilities or network, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter or by a franchise agreement made or entered into pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.620 Performance surety.

Before a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter is effective, and as necessary thereafter, the grantee shall provide a performance bond, in form and substance acceptable to the city, as security for the full and complete performance of a franchise granted under this chapter, including any costs, expenses, damages or loss the city pays or incurs because of any failure attributable to the grantee to comply with the codes, ordinances, rules, regulations or permits of the city. This obligation is in addition to the performance bond required by SMC 12.44.280 for construction of facilities. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)

Article VII. General Provisions


12.44.630 Governing law.

Any franchise granted under this chapter is subject to the provisions of the Constitution and laws of the United States, and the state of Oregon and the ordinances and Charter of the city. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.640 Written agreement.

No franchise shall be granted hereunder unless the agreement is in writing. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.650 Nonexclusive grant.

No franchise granted under this chapter shall confer any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the public rights-of-way of the city for delivery of cable television services or any other purposes. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.660 Severability and preemption.

If any article, section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, term, provision, condition, covenant or portion of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, or superseded by state or federal legislation, rules, regulations or decision, the remainder of the chapter shall not be affected thereby but shall be deemed as a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof, and each remaining section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, provision, condition, covenant and portion of this chapter shall be valid and enforceable to the fullest extent permitted by law. In the event that federal or state laws, rules or regulations preempt a provision or limit the enforceability of a provision of this chapter, then the provision shall be read to be preempted to the extent and or the time required by law. In the event such federal or state law, rules or regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed so that the provision hereof that had been preempted is no longer preempted, such provision shall thereupon return to full force and effect, and shall thereafter be binding, without the requirement of further action on the part of the city, and any amendments hereto. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.670 Penalties.

Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000 for each offense. A separate and distinct offense shall be deemed committed each day on which a violation occurs. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.680 Other remedies.

Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any judicial remedies that the city may have, at law or in equity, for enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.690 Captions.

The captions to sections throughout this chapter are intended solely to facilitate reading and reference to the sections and provisions contained herein. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of this chapter. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.700 Compliance with laws.

Any grantee under this chapter shall comply with all federal and state laws and regulations, including regulations of any administrative agency thereof, as well as all ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the city heretofore or hereafter adopted or established during the entire term any franchise granted under this chapter, which are relevant and relate to the construction, maintenance and operation of a cable system. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.710 Consent.

Wherever the consent of either the city or of the grantee is specifically required by this chapter or in a franchise granted, such consent will not be unreasonably withheld. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.720 Application to existing ordinance and agreements.

There are no existing franchises extant for cable services. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.730 Confidentiality.

The city agrees to use its best efforts to preserve the confidentiality of information as requested by a grantee, to the extent permitted by the Oregon Public Records Law. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.010 Purpose.

The purpose and intent of this chapter is to:

A. Comply with the provisions of the 1996 Telecommunications Act as they apply to local governments, cable television carriers and the services those carriers offer;

B. Promote competition on a competitively neutral basis in the provision of cable television services;

C. Encourage the provision of advanced and competitive cable television services on the widest possible basis to businesses institutions and residents of the city;

D. Permit and manage reasonable access to the public rights-of-way of the city for purposes of providing cable services on a competitively neutral basis and conserve the limited physical capacity of those public rights-of-way held in trust by the city;

E. Assure that the city’s current and ongoing costs of granting and regulating private access to and the use of the public rights-of-way are fully compensated by the persons seeking such access and causing such costs;

F. Secure fair and reasonable compensation to the city and its residents for permitting private use of the public right-of-way;

G. Assure that all cable carriers providing facilities and/or services within the city, or passing through the city, register and comply with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city;

H. Assure that the city can continue to fairly and responsibly protect the public health, safety and welfare of its citizens;

I. Enable the city to discharge its public trust consistent with the rapidly evolving federal and state regulatory policies, industry competition and technological development. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.020 Jurisdiction and management of the public rights-of-way.

A. The city has jurisdiction and exercises regulatory control over all public rights-of-way within the city under authority of the City Charter and state law.

B. Public rights-of-way include, but are not limited to, streets, roads, highways, bridges, alleys, sidewalks, trails, paths, public easements and all other public ways or areas, including the subsurface under and air space over these areas.

C. The city has jurisdiction and exercises regulatory control over each public right-of-way whether the city has a fee, easement, or other legal interest in the right-of-way. The city has jurisdiction and regulatory control over each right-of-way whether the legal interest in the right-of-way was obtained by grant, dedication, prescription, reservation, condemnation, annexation, foreclosure or other means.

D. No person may occupy or encroach on a public right-of-way without the permission of the city. The city grants permission to use rights-of-way by franchises and permits.

E. The exercise of jurisdiction and regulatory control over a public right-of-way by the city is not official acceptance of the right-of-way, and does not obligate the city to maintain or repair any part of the right-of-way.

F. The city retains the right and privilege to cut or move any cable facilities located within the public rights-of-way of the city, as the city may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.030 Regulatory fees and compensation, not a tax.

A. The fees and costs provided for in this chapter, and any compensation charged and paid for use of the public rights-of-way provided for in this chapter, are separate from, and in addition to, any and all federal, state, local and city taxes as may be levied, imposed or due from a cable provider, its customers or subscribers, or on account of the lease, sale, delivery or transmission of cable television services.

B. The city has determined that any fee imposed by this chapter is not subject to the property tax limitations of Article XI, Sections 11 and 11b of the Oregon Constitution. These fees are not imposed on property or property owners. These fees are not new or increased fees. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.040 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number. The words “shall” and “will” are mandatory and “may” is permissive. Words not defined herein shall be given the meaning set forth in the Communications Policy Act of 1934, as amended, the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and the Telecommunications Act of 1996. If not defined there, the words shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.

“Aboveground facilities.” See “overhead facilities.” 

“Affiliated interest” shall have the same meaning as ORS 759.010.

“Cable Act” shall mean the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. 521, et seq., as now and hereafter amended.

“Cable facilities” means the plant and equipment, other than customer premises equipment, used by a cable provider to provide cable television services.

“Cable provider” means any provider of cable television services and includes every person that directly or indirectly owns, controls, operates or manages cable facilities within the city.

“Cable service” means the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming, or other programming service, and subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service. 

“City” means the city of Silverton, an Oregon municipal corporation, and individuals authorized to act on the city’s behalf.

“City council” means the elected governing body of the city of Silverton, Oregon.

“Control” or “controlling interest” means actual working control in whatever manner exercised.

“City property” means and includes all real property owned by the city, other than public rights-of-way and utility easements as those are defined herein, and all property held in a proprietary capacity by the city, which are not subject to right-of-way franchising as provided in this chapter.

“Conduit” means any structure, or portion thereof, containing one or more ducts, conduits, manholes, handholes, bolts, or other facilities used for any telegraph, telephone, cable television, electrical, or communications conductors, or cable right-of-way, owned or controlled, in whole or in part, by one or more public utilities.

“Days” means calendar days unless otherwise specified.

“Duct” means a single enclosed raceway for conductors or cable.

“FCC” or “Federal Communications Commission” means the federal administrative agency, or its lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee cable providers, services and providers on a national level.

“Franchise” means an agreement between the city and a grantee which grants a privilege to use public right-of-way and utility easements within the city for a dedicated purpose and for specific compensation.

“Grantee” means the person to which a franchise is granted by the city.

“Oregon Public Utilities Commission” or “OPUC” means the statutorily created state agency in the state of Oregon responsible for licensing, regulation and administration of certain cable providers as set forth in Oregon law, or its lawful successor.

“Overhead or aboveground facilities” means utility poles, utility facilities and cable facilities above the surface of the ground, including the underground supports and foundations for such facilities.

“Person” means an individual, corporation, company, association, joint stock company or association, firm, partnership, or limited liability company.

“Public rights-of-way” include, but are not limited to, streets, roads, highways, bridges, alleys, sidewalks, trails, paths, public easements and all other public ways or areas, including the subsurface under and air space over these areas, but only to the extent of the city’s right, title, interest or authority to grant a franchise to occupy and use such streets and easements for cable facilities. “Public rights-of-way” shall also include utility easements as defined below. 

“State” means the state of Oregon.

“Telecommunications Act” means the Communications Policy Act of 1934, as amended by subsequent enactments including the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (47 U.S.C. 151, et seq.) and as hereafter amended.

“Telecommunications utility” has the same meaning as ORS 759.005(1).

“Underground facilities” means utility and cable facilities located under the surface of the ground, excluding the underground foundations or supports for “overhead facilities.”

“Usable space” means all the space on a pole, except the portion below ground level, the 20 feet of safety clearance space above ground level, and the safety clearance space between communications and power circuits. There is a rebuttable presumption that six feet of a pole is buried below ground level.

“Utility easement” means any easement granted to or owned by the city and acquired, established, dedicated or devoted for public utility purposes.

“Utility facilities” means the plant, equipment and property, including but not limited to the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, cable, wires, plant and equipment located under, on, or above the surface of the ground within the public right-of-way of the city and used or to be used for the purpose of providing utility or cable television services. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)

Article II. Registration of Cable Providers


12.44.050 Purpose.

The purpose of registration is:

A. To assure that all cable providers who have facilities and/or provide services within the city comply with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city.

B. To provide the city with accurate and current information concerning the cable providers who offer to provide cable television services within the city, or that own or operate cable facilities within the city.

C. To assist the city in the enforcement of this chapter and the collection of any city franchise fees or charges that may be due the city.

D. To assist the city in monitoring compliance with local, state and federal laws as they apply to grantees under this chapter. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.060 Registration required.

Except as provided in SMC 12.44.080, all cable providers having cable facilities within the corporate limits of the city, and all cable providers that offer or provide cable service to customer premises within the city, shall register with the city on forms to be provided by the public works department which shall include the following:

A. The identity and legal status of the registrant, including any affiliates.

B. The name, address and telephone number of the officer, agent or employee responsible for the accuracy of the registration statement.

C. A description of the registrant’s existing or proposed cable facilities within the city.

D. A description of the cable services that the registrant intends to offer or provide, or is currently offering or providing, to persons, firms, businesses or institutions within the city.

E. Information sufficient to determine whether the registrant is subject to public right-of-way franchising under this chapter.

F. Information sufficient to determine whether the transmission, origination or receipt of the cable television services provided or to be provided by the registrant constitutes an occupation or privilege subject to any business tax imposed by the city.

G. Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for and received any certificate of authority or permit required by the FCC or the OPUC to provide cable television services within the city.

H. Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for and received any construction permit, operating license or other approvals required by the FCC to have cable facilities within the city.

I. If the registrant has applied for and received a city business license, list the license number.

J. Such other information as the city may reasonably require. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.070 Registration fee.

Each application for registration as a cable provider shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable registration fee in an amount to be determined by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.080 Exceptions to registration.

The following cable providers are excepted from registration:

A. Cable providers that are owned and operated for its own use by the state or a political subdivision of this state. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)

Article III. Construction Standards


12.44.090 Responsibility of owner.

The owner of the cable facilities to be constructed and, if different, the grantee, is responsible for performance of and compliance with all provisions of SMC 12.44.100 through 12.44.280. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.100 Construction codes.

Cable facilities shall be constructed, installed, operated and maintained in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local codes, rules and regulations including the National Electrical Code and the National Electrical Safety Code. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.110 General.

No person shall commence or continue with the construction, installation or operation of cable facilities within a public right-of-way except as provided in SMC 12.44.120 through 12.44.290. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.120 Construction permits.

No person shall construct or install any cable facilities within a public right-of-way without first obtaining a construction permit, and paying the construction permit fee established in SMC 12.44.170. No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of cable facilities within a public right-of-way:

A. Unless the cable provider has first filed a registration statement with the city pursuant to SMC 12.44.060 through 12.44.080; and

B. Unless the cable provider has first applied for and received a franchise pursuant to SMC 12.44.350 through 12.44.420. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.130 Permit applications.

Applications for permits to construct cable facilities shall be submitted upon forms to be provided by the city and shall be accompanied by drawings, plans and specifications in sufficient detail to demonstrate:

A. That the facilities will be constructed in accordance with all applicable codes, rules and regulations.

B. That the facilities will be constructed in accordance with the franchise agreement.

C. The location and route of all facilities to be installed underground. 

D. The location and route of all facilities to be located under the surface of the ground, including the line and grade proposed for the burial at all points along the route which are within the public rights-of-way. Existing facilities shall be differentiated on the plans from new construction.

E. The location of all existing underground utilities, conduits, ducts, pipes, mains and installations which are within the public rights-of-way along the underground route proposed by the applicant. A cross section shall be provided showing new or existing facilities in relation to the street, curb, sidewalk or right-of-way.

F. The construction methods to be employed for protection of existing structures, fixtures, and facilities within or adjacent to the public rights-of-way.

G. The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and obstructions, if any, that applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove or relocate, together with a landscape plan for protecting, trimming, removing, replacing and restoring any trees or areas to be disturbed during construction. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.140 Engineer’s certification.

All permit applications shall be accompanied by the certification of a registered professional engineer that the drawings, plans and specifications submitted with the application comply with applicable technical codes, rules and regulations. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.150 Construction schedule.

All permit applications shall be accompanied by a written construction schedule, which shall include a deadline for completion of construction. The construction schedule is subject to approval by the public works department. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.160 Traffic control plan.

All permit applications shall be accompanied by a traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures and devices that will be employed, consistent with Uniform Manual of Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.170 Construction permit fee.

Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, prior to issuance of a construction permit, the applicant shall pay a permit fee in an amount to be determined by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.180 Issuance of permit.

If satisfied that the applications, plans and documents submitted comply with all requirements of this chapter and the franchise agreement, the public works department shall issue a permit authorizing construction of the facilities, subject to such further conditions, restrictions or regulations affecting the time, place and manner of performing the work as they may deem necessary or appropriate. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.190 Notice of construction.

The permittee shall notify the public works department not less than two working days in advance of any excavation or work in the public rights-of-way. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.200 Locates.

The permittee shall comply with the rules adopted by the Oregon Utility Notification Center regulating the notification and marking of underground facilities. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.210 Compliance with permit.

All construction practices and activities shall be in accordance with the permit and approved final plans and specifications for the facilities. The public works department and their representatives shall be provided access to the work site and such further information as they may require to ensure compliance with such requirements. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.220 Display of permit.

The permittee shall maintain a copy of the construction permit and approved plans at the construction site and shall display the permit. Plans shall be made available for inspection by the public works department or their representatives at all times when construction work is occurring. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.230 Noncomplying work.

Upon order of the public works department, all work which does not comply with the permit, the approved plans and specifications for the work, or the requirements of this chapter, shall be removed at the sole expense of the permittee. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.240 Completion of construction.

The permittee shall promptly complete all construction activities so as to minimize disruption of the city rights-of-way and other public and private property. All construction work within city rights-of-way, including restoration, must be completed within 120 days of the date of issuance of the construction permit unless an alternate schedule has been approved pursuant to the schedule submitted and approved by the appropriate city official as contemplated by SMC 12.44.150. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.250 As-built drawings.

Within 60 days after completion of construction, the permittee shall furnish the city with two complete sets of plans drawn to scale and certified to the city as accurately depicting the location of all cable facilities constructed pursuant to the permit, in a format acceptable to the city engineer. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.260 Restoration of public rights-of-way and city property.

A. When a permittee, or any person acting on its behalf, does any work in or affecting any public rights-of-way or city property, it shall, at its own expense, promptly remove any obstructions therefrom and restore such ways or property to at least as good a condition as existed before the work was undertaken, unless otherwise directed by the city and as determined by the city engineer.

B. If weather or other conditions do not permit the complete restoration required by this section, the permittee shall temporarily restore the affected rights-of-way or property. Such temporary restoration shall be at the permittee’s sole expense and the permittee shall promptly undertake and complete the required permanent restoration when the weather or other conditions no longer prevent such permanent restoration. Any corresponding modification to the construction schedule shall be subject to approval by the city.

C. If the permittee fails to restore rights-of-way or property to at least as good a condition as existed before the work was undertaken, the city shall give the permittee written notice and provide the permittee a reasonable period of time not exceeding 30 days to restore the rights-of-way or property. If, after said notice, the permittee fails to restore the rights-of-way or property to as good a condition as existed before the work was undertaken, the city shall cause such restoration to be made at the expense of the permittee.

D. A permittee or other person acting in its behalf shall use suitable barricades, flags, flagging attendants, lights, flares and other measures as required for the safety of all members of the general public and to prevent injury or damage to any person, vehicle or property by reason of such work in or affecting such rights-of-way or property. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.270 Landscape restoration.

A. All trees, landscaping and grounds removed, damaged or disturbed as a result of the construction, installation, maintenance, repair or replacement of cable facilities, whether such work is done pursuant to a franchise or permit shall be replaced or restored as nearly as may be practicable, to the condition existing prior to performance of work.

B. Any trees, shrubs or other landscaping that show substantial damage within 18 months of completion of the construction, which damage can be attributed to permittee’s construction activities, must be replaced at the sole expense of the permittee. 

C. All restoration work within the public rights-of-way shall be done in accordance with landscape plans approved by the city. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.280 Performance and completion bond.

Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, a performance bond written by a corporate surety acceptable to the city, and authorized to transact business in Oregon, equal to at least 100 percent of the estimated cost of constructing permittee’s cable facilities within the public rights-of-way of the city shall be deposited before construction is commenced.

A. The performance bond shall remain in force until 60 days after substantial completion of the work, as determined in writing by the city, including restoration of public rights-of-way and other property affected by the construction.

B. The performance bond shall guarantee, to the satisfaction of the city:

1. Timely completion of construction;

2. Construction in compliance with applicable plans, permits, technical codes and standards;

3. Proper location of the facilities as specified by the city;

4. Restoration of the public rights-of-way and other property affected by the construction;

5. The submission of “as-built” drawings after completion of the work as required by this chapter; and

6. Timely payment and satisfaction of all claims, demands or liens for labor, material or services provided in connection with the work. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)

Article IV. Location of Cable Facilities


12.44.290 Location of facilities.

All facilities located within the public right-of-way shall be constructed, installed and located in accordance with the following terms and conditions, unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement:

A. Grantee shall install its cable facilities underground unless the city specifically permits attachments to utility poles or other aboveground facilities.

B. Grantee shall install its cable facilities within an existing underground duct or conduit whenever surplus capacity exists within such utility facility, unless grantee demonstrates to the satisfaction of the city that such installation is not feasible. 

C. A grantee with permission to install overhead facilities shall install its cable facilities on pole attachments to existing utility poles only, and then only if surplus space is available.

D. Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or cable facilities are located underground within a public right-of-way of the city, a grantee with permission to occupy the same public right-of-way must also locate its cable facilities underground.

E. Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities or cable facilities are located or relocated underground within a public right-of-way of the city, a grantee that currently occupies the same public right-of-way shall relocate its facilities underground concurrently with the other affected utilities to minimize disruption of the public right-of-way, absent extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship as determined by the city and consistent with state law. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.300 Interference with the public rights-of-way.

No grantee may locate or maintain its cable facilities so as to unreasonably interfere with the use of the public rights-of-way by the city, by the general public or by other persons authorized to use or be present in or upon the public rights-of-way. All such facilities shall be moved by the grantee, temporarily or permanently, as determined by the city at the sole expense of the grantee. All use of public rights-of-way shall be consistent with city codes, ordinances and regulations. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.310 Relocation or removal of facilities.

Within 30 days following written notice from the city, a grantee shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any cable facilities within the public rights-of-way whenever the city shall have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary for:

A. The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any city or other public improvement in or upon the public rights-of-way.

B. The operations of the city or other governmental entity in or upon the public rights-of-way.

C. The public interest. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.320 Removal of unauthorized facilities.

Within 30 days following written notice from the city, any grantee, cable provider, or other person that owns, controls or maintains any unauthorized cable system, facility or related appurtenances within the public rights-of-way of the city shall, at its own expense, remove such facilities or appurtenances from the public rights-of-way of the city. A cable system or facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances: 

A. One year after the expiration or termination of the grantee’s cable franchise.

B. Upon abandonment of a facility within the public rights-of-way of the city. A facility will be considered abandoned when it is deactivated, out of service, or not used for its intended and authorized purpose for a period of 90 days or longer. A facility will not be considered abandoned if it is temporarily out of service during performance of repairs or if the facility is being replaced.

C. If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a cable franchise.

D. If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the prior issuance of a required construction permit.

E. If the system or facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the grantee’s cable franchise or other legally sufficient permit. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.330 Coordination of construction activities.

All grantees are required to cooperate with the city and with each other.

A. By January 1st of each year, grantees shall provide the city with a schedule of their proposed construction activities in, around or that may affect the public rights-of-way.

B. Each grantee shall meet with the city, other grantees and users of the public rights-of-way annually or as determined by the city to schedule and coordinate construction in the public rights-of-way.

C. All construction locations, activities and schedules shall be coordinated, as ordered by the city engineer, to minimize public inconvenience, disruption or damages. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)

Article V. Cable Franchise


12.44.340 Cable franchise.

A cable franchise shall be required of any cable provider who desires to occupy public rights-of-way of the city. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.350 Application.

Any person that desires a cable franchise shall file an application with public works department which includes the following information:

A. The identity of the applicant, including all affiliates of the applicant.

B. A description of the cable television services that are or will be offered or provided by the applicant over its cable facilities.

C. A description of the transmission medium that is being used or will be used by the applicant to offer or provide such cable television services.

D. Engineering plans, specifications and a network map of the facilities located or to be located within the city, all in sufficient detail to identify:

1. The location and route requested for applicant’s proposed cable facilities;

2. The location of all aboveground and underground public utility, telecommunication, cable, water, sewer, storm drainage and other facilities in the public rights-of-way along the proposed route;

3. The location(s), if any, for interconnection with the cable facilities of other cable providers.

E. If applicant is proposing to install aboveground facilities, to the extent that they will be using utility poles, evidence that surplus space is available for locating its cable facilities on existing utility poles along the proposed route.

F. If applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing ducts or conduits within the public rights-of-way, provide information in sufficient detail to identify:

1. The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits before installation of applicant’s cable facilities;

2. The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of applicant’s cable facilities.

G. If applicant is proposing an underground installation within new ducts or conduits to be constructed within the public rights-of-way:

1. The location proposed for the new ducts or conduits;

2. The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits after the installation of applicant’s cable facilities. 

H. The area or areas of the city the applicant desires to serve and a preliminary construction schedule for build-out to the entire franchise area.

I. Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles demonstrating the applicant’s financial ability to construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove the facilities.

J. Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant’s technical qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the cable facilities and services described in the application.

K. Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities and to offer or provide the cable television services proposed.

L. Whether the applicant intends to provide cable service, video dialtone service or other video programming service.

M. An accurate map showing the location of any existing cable facilities in the city that applicant intends to use or lease.

N. A description of any services or facilities that the applicant will offer or make available to the city and other public, educational and governmental institutions and at what cost.

O. A description of applicant’s access and line extension policies.

P. Such other information as may be requested by the city manager or their designee. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.360 Application and review fee.

A. Applicant shall reimburse the city for such reasonable costs as the city incurs in entering into the franchise agreement.

B. An application and review fee of $2,000 shall be deposited with the city as part of the application filed pursuant to SMC 12.44.350. Expenses exceeding the deposit will be billed to the applicant or the unused portion of the deposit will be returned to the applicant following the determination granting or denying the franchise. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.370 Determination by the city.

The city shall issue a written determination granting or denying the application in whole or in part, applying the standards listed below. If the application is denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for denial. The standards to be applied by city are:

A. The financial and technical ability of the applicant.

B. The legal capacity of the applicant.

C. The capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate the applicant’s proposed facilities.

D. The capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate additional utility and cable facilities if the franchise is granted.

E. The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities, improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the franchise is granted.

F. The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of construction within the public rights-of-way.

G. The service that applicant will provide to the community and region.

H. The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare if the franchise is granted.

I. The availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the proposed facilities.

J. Applicable federal and state laws, regulations and policies. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.380 Rights granted.

No franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall convey any right, title or interest in the public rights-of-way, but shall be deemed a grant to use and occupy the public rights-of-way for the limited purposes and term stated in the franchise agreement. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.390 Term of grant.

Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, a cable franchise granted hereunder shall be in effect for a term of five years. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.400 Franchise territory.

Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, a cable franchise granted hereunder shall be limited to a specific geographic area of the city to be served by the franchise grantee, and the public rights-of-way necessary to serve such areas. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.410 Franchise fee.

Each franchise granted by the city is subject to the city’s right, which is expressly reserved, to fix a fair and reasonable compensation to be paid for the privileges granted; provided, nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the city and a grantee from agreeing to the compensation to be paid. The compensation shall be subject to the specific payment terms and conditions contained in the franchise agreement. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.420 Amendment of grant.

Conditions for amending a franchise:

A. A new application and grant shall be required of any cable provider that desires to extend or locate its cable facilities in public rights-of-way of the city which are not included in a franchise previously granted under this chapter.

B. If ordered by the city to locate or relocate its cable facilities in public rights-of-way not included in a previously granted franchise, the city shall grant an amendment without further application.

C. A new application and grant shall be required of any cable provider that desires to provide a service which was not included in a franchise previously granted under this chapter. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.430 Renewal applications.

A grantee that desires to renew its franchise under this chapter shall, not less than 180 days before expiration of the current agreement, file an application with the city for renewal of its franchise which shall include the following information:

A. The information required pursuant to SMC 12.44.350.

B. Any information required pursuant to the franchise agreement between the city and the grantee. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.440 Renewal determinations.

Within 90 days after receiving a complete application under SMC 12.44.430, the city shall issue a written determination granting or denying the renewal application in whole or in part, applying the following standards. If the renewal application is denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for nonrenewal.

A. The financial and technical ability of the applicant.

B. The legal ability of the applicant.

C. The continuing capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate the applicant’s existing and proposed facilities.

D. The applicant’s compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the franchise agreement.

E. Applicable federal, state and local laws, rules and policies.

F. Such other factors as may demonstrate that the continued grant to use the public rights-of-way will serve the community interest. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.450 Obligation to cure as a condition of renewal.

No franchise shall be renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the grantee’s performance of the agreement, or of the requirements of this chapter, have been cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the grantee has been approved by the city. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.460 Assignments or transfers of system or franchise.

Ownership or control of a majority interest in a cable system or franchise may not, directly or indirectly, be transferred, assigned or disposed of by sale, lease, merger, consolidation or other act of the grantee, by operation of law or otherwise, without the prior consent of the city, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed, and then only on such reasonable conditions as may be prescribed in such consent.

A. Grantee and the proposed assignee or transferee of the franchise or system shall provide and certify the following information to the city not less than 120 days prior to the proposed date of transfer:

1. Complete information setting forth the nature, terms and condition of the proposed transfer or assignment;

2. All information required of a cable franchise applicant pursuant SMC 12.44.350 with respect to the proposed transferee or assignee;

3. Any other information reasonably required by the city.

B. No transfer shall be approved unless the assignee or transferee has the legal, technical, financial and other requisite qualifications to own, hold and operate the cable system pursuant to this chapter.

C. Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, the grantee shall reimburse the city for all direct and indirect fees, costs, and expenses reasonably incurred by the city in considering a request to transfer or assign a cable franchise.

D. Any transfer or assignment of a cable franchise, system or integral part of a system without prior approval of the city under this section or pursuant to a franchise agreement shall be void and is cause for revocation of the franchise. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.470 Sanction, revocation or termination of franchise.

A franchise to use or occupy public rights-of-way of the city may be revoked or sanctions may be imposed for the following reasons:

A. Construction or operation in the city or in the public rights-of-way of the city without a construction permit.

B. Construction or operation at an unauthorized location.

C. Failure to comply with SMC 12.44.460 with respect to sale, transfer or assignment of a cable system or franchise.

D. Misrepresentation by or on behalf of a grantee in any application to the city.

E. Abandonment of cable facilities in the public rights-of-way.

F. Failure to relocate or remove facilities as required in this chapter.

G. Failure to pay taxes, compensation, fees or costs when and as due the city.

H. Insolvency or bankruptcy of the grantee.

I. Violation of material provisions of this chapter.

J. Violation of the material terms of a franchise agreement. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.480 Notice and duty to cure.

In the event that the city believes that grounds exist for revocation of a franchise or for sanctions, the city shall give the grantee written notice of the apparent violation or noncompliance, providing a short and concise statement of the nature and general facts of the violation or noncompliance, and providing the grantee a reasonable period of time not exceeding 30 days to furnish evidence:

A. That corrective action has been, or is being actively and expeditiously pursued, to remedy the violation or noncompliance.

B. That rebuts the alleged violation or noncompliance.

C. That it would be in the public interest to impose some penalty or sanction less than revocation. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.490 Public hearing.

In the event that a grantee fails to provide evidence reasonably satisfactory to the city as provided in SMC 12.44.480, the city manager shall refer the apparent violation or noncompliance to the city council. The city council shall provide the grantee with notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard concerning the matter. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.500 Standards for revocation or lesser sanctions.

If persuaded that the grantee has violated or failed to comply with material provisions of this chapter, or of a franchise agreement, the city council shall determine whether to revoke the franchise, or to establish some lesser sanction and cure, considering the nature, circumstances, extent and gravity of the violation as reflected by one or more of the following factors:

A. Whether the misconduct was egregious.

B. Whether substantial harm resulted.

C. Whether the violation was intentional.

D. Whether there is a history of prior violations of the same or other requirements.

E. Whether there is a history of overall compliance.

F. Whether the violation was voluntarily disclosed, admitted or cured. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.510 Other city costs.

All grantees shall, within 30 days after written demand therefor, reimburse the city for all direct and indirect costs and expenses incurred by the city in connection with any modification, amendment, renewal or transfer of the franchise or any franchise agreement. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)

Article VI. General Franchise Terms


12.44.520 Facilities.

Each grantee shall provide the city with an accurate map or maps certifying the location of all cable facilities within the public rights-of-way. Each grantee shall provide updated maps annually. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.530 Damage to grantee’s facilities.

Unless directly and proximately caused by willful, intentional or malicious acts by the city, the city shall not be liable for any damage to or loss of any cable facility within the public rights-of-way of the city as a result of or in connection with any public works, public improvements, construction, excavation, grading, filling, or work of any kind in the public rights-of-way by or on behalf of the city, or for any consequential losses resulting directly or indirectly therefrom. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.540 Duty to provide information.

Within 10 days of a written request from the city, each grantee shall furnish the city with information sufficient to demonstrate:

A. That grantee has complied with all requirements of this chapter.

B. All books, records, maps and other documents, maintained by the grantee with respect to its facilities within the public rights-of-way shall be made available for inspection by the city at reasonable times and intervals. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.550 Nondiscrimination.

A grantee shall make its cable television services available to any customer within its franchise area who shall request such service, without discrimination as to the terms, conditions, rates or charges for grantee’s services; provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a grantee from making any reasonable classifications among differently situated customers. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.560 Service to the city.

If the city contracts for the use of telecommunication facilities, telecommunication services, installation, or maintenance from the grantee, the grantee shall charge the city the grantee’s most favorable rate offered at the time of the request charged to a similar user within Oregon for a similar volume of service, subject to any of grantee’s tariffs or price lists on file with the OPUC. With the city’s permission, the grantee may deduct the applicable charges from fee payments. Other terms and conditions of such services may be specified in a separate agreement between the city and grantee. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.570 Compensation for city property.

If any right is granted, by lease, franchise or other manner, to use and occupy city property for the installation of cable facilities, the compensation to be paid for such right and use shall be fixed by the city. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.580 Cable franchise.

Telecommunication carriers providing cable service shall be subject to the cable franchise requirements in Ordinance 89-114, or such other franchise that shall be in effect. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.590 Leased capacity.

A grantee shall have the right, without prior city approval, to offer or provide capacity or bandwidth to its customers; provided, that the grantee shall notify the city that such lease or agreement has been granted to a customer or lessee. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.600 Grantee insurance.

Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, each grantee shall, as a condition of the grant, secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring both the grantee and the city, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents and employees as coinsured:

A. Comprehensive general liability insurance with limits not less than

1. Three million dollars for bodily injury or death to each person;

2. Three million dollars for property damage resulting from any one accident; and,

3. Three million dollars for all other types of liability.

B. Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a limit of $1,000,000 for each person and $3,000,000 for each accident.

C. Worker’s compensation within statutory limits and employer’s liability insurance with limits of not less than $1,000,000.

D. Comprehensive form premises-operations, explosions and collapse hazard, underground hazard and products completed hazard with limits of not less than $3,000,000.

E. The liability insurance policies required by this section shall be maintained by the grantee throughout the term of the cable franchise, and such other period of time during which the grantee is operating without a franchise hereunder, or is engaged in the removal of its cable facilities. Each such insurance policy shall contain the following endorsement:

It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until 90 days after receipt by the City, by registered mail, of a written notice addressed to the Public Works of such intent to cancel or not to renew. 

F. Within 60 days after receipt by the city of said notice, and in no event later than 30 days prior to said cancellation, the grantee shall obtain and furnish to the city evidence that the grantee meets requirements of this section. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.610 General indemnification.

Each franchise agreement shall include, to the extent permitted by law, grantee’s express undertaking to defend, indemnify and hold the city and its officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against any and all damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney’s fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the grantee or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of its cable facilities, and in providing or offering cable television services over the facilities or network, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter or by a franchise agreement made or entered into pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.620 Performance surety.

Before a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter is effective, and as necessary thereafter, the grantee shall provide a performance bond, in form and substance acceptable to the city, as security for the full and complete performance of a franchise granted under this chapter, including any costs, expenses, damages or loss the city pays or incurs because of any failure attributable to the grantee to comply with the codes, ordinances, rules, regulations or permits of the city. This obligation is in addition to the performance bond required by SMC 12.44.280 for construction of facilities. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)

Article VII. General Provisions


12.44.630 Governing law.

Any franchise granted under this chapter is subject to the provisions of the Constitution and laws of the United States, and the state of Oregon and the ordinances and Charter of the city. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.640 Written agreement.

No franchise shall be granted hereunder unless the agreement is in writing. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.650 Nonexclusive grant.

No franchise granted under this chapter shall confer any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the public rights-of-way of the city for delivery of cable television services or any other purposes. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.660 Severability and preemption.

If any article, section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, term, provision, condition, covenant or portion of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, or superseded by state or federal legislation, rules, regulations or decision, the remainder of the chapter shall not be affected thereby but shall be deemed as a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof, and each remaining section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, provision, condition, covenant and portion of this chapter shall be valid and enforceable to the fullest extent permitted by law. In the event that federal or state laws, rules or regulations preempt a provision or limit the enforceability of a provision of this chapter, then the provision shall be read to be preempted to the extent and or the time required by law. In the event such federal or state law, rules or regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed so that the provision hereof that had been preempted is no longer preempted, such provision shall thereupon return to full force and effect, and shall thereafter be binding, without the requirement of further action on the part of the city, and any amendments hereto. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.670 Penalties.

Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000 for each offense. A separate and distinct offense shall be deemed committed each day on which a violation occurs. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.680 Other remedies.

Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any judicial remedies that the city may have, at law or in equity, for enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.690 Captions.

The captions to sections throughout this chapter are intended solely to facilitate reading and reference to the sections and provisions contained herein. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of this chapter. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.700 Compliance with laws.

Any grantee under this chapter shall comply with all federal and state laws and regulations, including regulations of any administrative agency thereof, as well as all ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the city heretofore or hereafter adopted or established during the entire term any franchise granted under this chapter, which are relevant and relate to the construction, maintenance and operation of a cable system. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.710 Consent.

Wherever the consent of either the city or of the grantee is specifically required by this chapter or in a franchise granted, such consent will not be unreasonably withheld. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.720 Application to existing ordinance and agreements.

There are no existing franchises extant for cable services. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


12.44.730 Confidentiality.

The city agrees to use its best efforts to preserve the confidentiality of information as requested by a grantee, to the extent permitted by the Oregon Public Records Law. (Ord. 00-119 § 1, 2000)


Chapter 12.48 CITY PARK REGULATIONS1

Sections:

12.48.010    Purpose – Fees.

12.48.020    Motorized vehicles.

12.48.030    Fire.

12.48.040    Garbage and other refuse.

12.48.050    Permit for use of designated area.

12.48.060    Sound.

12.48.070    Hours of use – Sleeping and camping.

12.48.080    Hours of park closure.

12.48.090    Liability.

12.48.100    Wildlife/hunting.

12.48.110    Flora.

12.48.120    Marking, injuring, or disturbing any structure.

12.48.125    Smoking prohibited.

12.48.127    Prohibited activities in marine parks.

12.48.128    Exclusion from parks.

12.48.130    Authority of city manager.

12.48.140    Penalty.


12.48.010 Purpose – Fees.

A. The parks of this city are established and maintained as areas of recreation, relaxation, and enjoyment for the public. It is intended that they shall be regulated and used to permit enjoyment by a maximum number of people engaged in widely diverse interests and activities as may be practical within the limits of space, design, and accommodations available in each park unit. Limitations may be required to insure the use of park areas in safety and to protect the rights of others in surrounding areas.

B. A park fee is hereby created and imposed, the amount of which is to be set by council resolution. The revenue from the park fee shall be used to pay the cost of construction, operation and maintenance of the city’s parks and marine parks. The park fee shall be paid by the responsible party for each billing unit on developed property in the city. The park fee is premised on the direct and indirect use of or benefit derived from use of city parks and is neither a property tax nor subject to the limitations of Article XI, Section 11 of the Oregon Constitution.

C. Definitions. As used in this chapter and any resolution adopted under this chapter, the following phrases have the following meaning:

1. “Billing unit” means any structure(s) or discrete portion thereof lawfully capable of being occupied as either residential or nonresidential property. For example, in multifamily residential property each separate dwelling unit is considered a separate billing unit. Each separate and distinct business outlet in a shopping center is considered a separate billing unit. A “billing unit” may include one or more structure(s) if all are used in a common purpose or operation. For example, nonresidential property being used as an industrial or commercial site having several structures forming or being used for an integrated commercial or industrial purpose constitutes one billing unit.

2. “City” means the city of Silverton, Oregon.

3. “City utility service” means both the city’s water and sanitary sewer utility(ies).

4. “Developed property” means improved legally identifiable lots located in the city containing one or more billing units. The phrase “developed property” does not include property owned or controlled by the city or federal governmental bodies. 

5. “Improved” means real property with residential or nonresidential buildings or structures (habitable or otherwise).

6. “Marijuana items” means cannabinoid concentrates, cannabinoid extracts, cannabinoid products and marijuana.

7. “Marine park” means a fishing park, swimming area, boat launch, aquatic recreation area or any other area in the city owned or used by the city, and designated by city council resolution for active or passive marine recreation.

8. “Nonresidential property” means all developed property not used or intended as residential property.

9. “Park” means any publicly or privately owned real property placed under the jurisdiction of, granted to, or owned by the city, including marine parks, buildings, facilities, playing fields, and other areas used or designated for park or recreational purposes.

10. “Residential property” means developed property used or intended primarily as personal domestic domicile(s) (along with related improvements) including single-family, multifamily and group homes, but not including properties used for transient (i.e., less than 30 days) occupancies such as hotels, resorts or motels.

11. “Responsible party” means person(s) who is either by ownership or occupancy of developed property with one billing unit, or, pursuant to contract, responsible for payment of city utility services provided to that property. For any developed property with one billing unit not otherwise required to pay for city utility services, “responsible party” shall mean the owner of that property or the person(s) legally entitled to occupancy of that property, unless a person/party other than an occupant or owner has agreed to pay for the city’s utility services, in which case, they would be the responsible party. For developed property with more than one billing unit, the “responsible party” for each billing unit shall be responsible for the payment of a park fee. For example, each of the 20 billing units in a 20-unit apartment complex will be billed for and pay the park fee.

12. “Smoking” means any of the following:

a. Smoking, burning, inhaling, or exhaling of any kind of plant material including but not limited to tobacco, nicotine, marijuana items, tobacco-like products that are intended or capable of being inhaled or smoked in a heated or lighted cigar, cigarette, hookah, pipe, or any other kind of lighted smoking equipment;

b. The use of an e-cigarette which creates a vapor, in any manner or in any form; or

c. The use of any oral smoking device for the purpose of circumventing the smoking prohibition.

D. Determination of Amount, Billing and Collection of Fee. The council resolution establishing the amount of the park fee may also establish other policies and procedures for calculating, billing and collecting the park fee. The park fee will be collected from the responsible party of each billing unit on developed property in the city in a manner similar to the process used for collection of utility bills for city utility services. The city’s finance director, under the direction of the city manager, shall be responsible for the calculation and collection of the park fee. The park fee shall be billed to and collected monthly from the responsible party. This billing shall be included as part of utility bills issued for city utility services. If any particular developed property does not have city utility services, a separate monthly bill for that property will be sent the responsible party. All of these bills shall become due and payable on the same schedule as the bills issued for city utility services. Payments on any utility bill that includes a park fee charge will be applied consistent with the terms of SMC 13.200.040(E). An account is delinquent if the park fee is not paid by the due date shown on the utility bill. The city may follow the procedures for collection of delinquent accounts for any such bill, including termination of water and/or sewer services.

E. Dedicated Fund. All park fee monies shall be deposited to a dedicated fund the proceeds of which are to be used for the construction, including design, engineering, land acquisition, and site development, operation and/or maintenance of city parks and marine parks.

F. Administrative Provisions.

1. The city manager, in consultation with the public works director and finance director, has the authority to interpret all terms, provisions and requirements of this chapter, including this subsection and determine the appropriate charges thereunder.

2. A responsible party may request reconsideration of any determination on any issue by submission of a written application to the city manager. The application shall be submitted in sufficient detail to enable the city manager to render a decision on the issue presented.

3. Within 30 days of the submission of a complete application requesting reconsideration, the city manager shall issue a decision thereon. The decision of the city manager is final but reviewable consistent with ORS 34.010 to 34.100. (Ord. 18-01 § 1 (Exh. A-1), 2018; Ord. 13-05 § 1, 2013; Ord. 01-118 § 1, 2001)


12.48.020 Motorized vehicles.

Motorized vehicles, such as autos, trucks, motorcycles, mopeds, motor scooters, go-carts, etc., shall operate, stop, or park only upon designated roadways or within designated parking areas. Exceptions will include:

A. Maintenance equipment when operated by authorized personnel;

B. The loading and unloading of materials, supplies, or equipment as authorized by the parks department. (Ord. 01-118 § 1, 2001)


12.48.030 Fire.

No person shall build or maintain any fire in a park except in fire rings or fireplaces as provided by the city, or in a stove or barbecue unit where picnic areas are provided. No person shall take firewood from any park for personal use unless authorized by park officials. (Ord. 01-118 § 1, 2001)


12.48.040 Garbage and other refuse.

A. No person shall discard or dispose of any garbage or other refuse in a park except in a receptacle provided for such garbage and other refuse.

B. No person shall take any garbage or other refuse into a public park for the purpose of discarding or disposing of such garbage or other refuse. (Ord. 01-118 § 1, 2001)


12.48.050 Permit for use of designated area.

The city manager is authorized to issue permits for public use of a designated area in a park pursuant to the permit process set forth under Chapter 12.55 SMC. (Ord. 18-05 § 3 (Exh. B), 2018; Ord. 01-118 § 1, 2001)


12.48.060 Sound.

A. No person shall disturb the peace in any park between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. For purposes of this subsection, disturbing the peace is defined as including, but not being limited to, the following:

1. Playing a musical instrument;

2. Playing a radio;

3. Shouting;

4. Engaging in any organized games.

B. No person shall use any device to amplify sound in any park unless a valid permit has been issued by the city manager under this chapter.

C. The city manager may issue a sound permit authorizing the use of one or more designated devices to amplify sound by one or more designated persons in a designated area of a park on a designated date between specific hours if, according to his or her reasonable discretion, the number of persons to be entertained or served by the use of sound can be adequately and reasonably served only by the amplification of sound. The city manager may include conditions in such a permit which she or he deems reasonable, and may revoke a permit if the terms of the permit are violated, or may deny a permit to a person or group of persons who have violated the terms of a permit within the previous year.

D. No person who holds a valid sound permit issued by the city manager shall amplify sound within a park in violation of any conditions stated in that permit. (Ord. 01-118 § 1, 2001)


12.48.070 Hours of use – Sleeping and camping.

A. No person shall sleep in any park between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., except as provided in subsection (C) of this section.

B. No person shall use any tent, shelter-half, motor home, vehicle, camper, or trailer as a shelter for housing or sleeping in any park area, except as provided in subsection (C) of this section.

C. The city manager may, in his or her reasonable discretion, issue permits or designate areas for the use of tents, shelter-half, motor homes, vehicles, campers, or trailers as shelters for housing or sleeping in parks for any overnight sleeping in parks between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. The city manager may also allow park hosts of marine parks as defined under SMC 12.48.010 to stay overnight in marine parks. (Ord. 18-01 § 1 (Exh. A-1), 2018; Ord. 01-118 § 1, 2001)


12.48.080 Hours of park closure.

No person shall enter or use any park during posted hours of closure without a permit to do so from the city manager. (Ord. 01-118 § 1, 2001)


12.48.090 Liability.

All persons to whom an exclusive use permit has been granted must agree in writing to hold the city harmless and indemnify the city from any and all liability from injury to persons or property occurring as a result of the activities sponsored by permittee. The person shall be liable to the city for any and all damages to park facilities and buildings owned by the city which result from the activity of permittee or is caused by any participant in the activity. (Ord. 01-118 § 1, 2001)


12.48.100 Wildlife/hunting.

No person, without the written permission of the city manager, shall trap, harm, or destroy any wildlife inhabiting or found in a park area. It is unlawful for any person to hunt or pursue wildlife at any time, or to use, carry or possess firearms, air rifles, spring guns, bows and arrows, slings or any other form of weapon potentially harmful to wildlife and/or human safety, or any instrument that can be loaded with and fire blank cartridges or any kind of trapping device, or any weapon designated as dangerous by the laws of the state of Oregon in a city park. This section shall not apply to duly authorized city employees in the performance of their duties. (Ord. 18-01 § 1 (Exh. A-1), 2018; Ord. 01-118 § 1, 2001)


12.48.110 Flora.

No person other than a duly authorized city employee in the performance of his or her duty or persons participating in city-approved activities shall dig, remove, destroy, injure, mutilate or cut any trees, plants, shrubs, blooms, or flowers or any portion thereof growing in any park. (Ord. 01-118 § 1, 2001)


12.48.120 Marking, injuring, or disturbing any structure.

No person other than a duly authorized city employee in the performance of his or her duty shall:

A. Cut, break, injure, deface, or disturb any rock, building, cage, pen, monument, sign, fence, bench, structure, apparatus, equipment, or property in a park;

B. Mark or place any mark, writing, or printing on any rock, building, cage, pen, monument, sign, fence, bench, structure, apparatus, equipment, or property in a park;

C. Attach any sign, card, display, or similar device to any rock, building, cage, pen, monument, sign, fence, bench, structure, apparatus, equipment, or property in a park, except as authorized by permit issued by the city manager. (Ord. 01-118 § 1, 2001)


12.48.125 Smoking prohibited.

Smoking is prohibited on and around all city parks and recreation areas except for those areas as designated by the city manager or designee. This includes but is not limited to adjacent parking lots and adjacent sidewalks. (Ord. 18-01 § 1 (Exh. A-1), 2018)


12.48.127 Prohibited activities in marine parks.

In addition to other prohibitions listed in this chapter, the following activities are prohibited in marine parks:

A. Use of Alcoholic Beverages. It is unlawful for any person to possess or consume any alcoholic beverage in a marine park.

B. Sale, Possession, Use and Discharge of Fireworks. It is unlawful for any person to sell, keep or offer for sale, expose for sale, possess, use, explode or have exploded any fireworks in any marine park.

C. Swimming. No person shall swim in any area posted as a no swimming area. No person shall use a public dock for the purpose of ingress or egress while swimming in the marine park.

D. Personal Abuse. No person shall blow, spread or place any nasal or other bodily discharge or spit, urinate or defecate on the floors, walls, partitions, furniture, fittings or any portion of a public convenience station located in any marine park in the city, or in any place in such station, excepting directly into the particular fixture provided for that purpose.

E. Abuse of Plumbing. No person shall place a bottle, can, cloth, rag or metal, wood or stone substance in the plumbing fixtures in such public convenience stations.

F. Boating. It is unlawful for any person to navigate, direct or handle any boat in such a manner as to unjustifiably or unnecessarily annoy or frighten or endanger the occupants of any other boat or swimmer. (Ord. 18-01 § 1 (Exh. A-1), 2018)


12.48.128 Exclusion from parks.

A police officer may exclude any person who violates a provision of this chapter from a park for a period of not more than one year.

A. Written notice shall be given to a person excluded from the parks. The notice shall specify the dates of exclusion and shall be signed by the issuing officer. Warning of consequences for failure to comply shall be prominently displayed on the notice.

B. If a person excluded from a park is found therein during the exclusion period, that person is subject to immediate arrest for criminal trespass pursuant to state law. (Ord. 18-01 § 1 (Exh. A-1), 2018)


12.48.130 Authority of city manager.

A. Whenever this chapter makes reference to the exercise of reasonable discretion of the city manager, she or he shall take into account the use and enjoyment of the parks for the maximum number of people.

B. The city manager is authorized to establish and revise fees for permits issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

C. The city manager is authorized to establish and revise fees for recreation programs. 


12.48.140 Penalty.

A violation of this chapter is punishable in accordance with the general penalty provisions of SMC 1.08.010. (Ord. 18-01 § 1 (Exh. A-1), 2018; Ord. 01-118 § 1, 2001)1

Code reviser’s note: This chapter has been editorially renumbered to avoid conflict with an earlier Chapter 12.44. 


Chapter 12.50 CITY MARINE PARKS

(Repealed by Ord. 18-01)


Chapter 12.55 USE OF CITY PROPERTY FOR SPECIAL EVENTS

Sections:

12.55.010    Definitions.

12.55.020    Special event permit required.

12.55.030    Permit application.

12.55.040    Issuance of permit.

12.55.050    Special event insurance, indemnification, and liability.

12.55.060    Criteria for issuance of permit.

12.55.070    Permit exemptions.

12.55.080    Permit denial.

12.55.090    Permit revocation.

12.55.100    Appeal to city council.


12.55.010 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following definitions apply:

A. “Applicant” means a person who files a written application for a special events permit.

B. “City manager” means the Silverton city manager or designee. 

C. “Person” means an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or other entity. 

D. “Plan” is a drawing detailing any closures and must include (at a minimum) streets to be closed, alternative streets to be used by vehicles and pedestrians to allow unrestricted access, fire hydrant locations, impacted residents along with addresses, visitor parking plan and any other information relevant to the street closure request. 

E. “Public property” for the purposes of this chapter means any city-owned park or facility including but not limited to public right-of-way. 

F. “Reimbursable costs” means those costs and expenses incurred by the city associated with the granting of a permit including, without limitation, the following:

1. Utility services provided for the event including all costs of installation, maintenance, connection, and removal;

2. Repair, maintenance, and removal of facilities in the event of a failure of the applicant to comply with the permit requirements;

3. Repair of streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks, facilities, and other public property resulting from the event;

4. Garbage cleanup and disposal resulting from the fault of applicant to clean up the area after the event;

5. Other direct and indirect costs associated with issuance of the special event permit.

G. “Special event” means any temporary or ongoing activity that occurs on public property that affects the ordinary use of public property including but not limited to public streets, rights-of-way, sidewalks, city-owned facilities, and other public property that is reasonably expected to cause or result in more than 50 people gathering on public property; is reasonably expected to have an uncommon impact on such public property; and/or is reasonably expected to require the provision of public services. 

H. “Special event permit” means written approval from the city manager to hold a special event. (Ord. 18-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018)


12.55.020 Special event permit required. 

A. A person desiring to hold a special event shall apply for a special event permit by filing a written application with the city manager upon a form available from the city for such purpose. It is unlawful for a person to hold or conduct a special event in the city for any purpose unless such person has obtained and has in full force and effect a permit to do so, issued by the city. 

B. The deadline for submittal of a special event permit is no less than 45 calendar days prior to the proposed day of the special event. A special event application submitted less than 45 calendar days may be denied as untimely. The city manager has discretion as to whether an application deemed untimely shall be approved. 

C. There shall be a permit fee set by city council resolution. (Ord. 18-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018)


12.55.030 Permit application. 

In addition to the application requirements, the following requirements apply and control:

A. City code requirements, including but not limited to noise and nuisance laws, remain applicable at all times. 

B. An unobstructed access lane with a width of at least 12 feet must be available for emergency vehicle access to any closed portions of streets at all times. Access may be restricted at city manager’s discretion.

C. All affected public property and public rights-of-way including the roadway must be cleaned and left free of litter and debris immediately after the break-down times as set forth in the special event application. 

D. The applicant will be required to notify affected and adjoining residents in the area which will be impacted by the special event. (Ord. 18-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018)


12.55.040 Issuance of permit.

A. The city manager is not required to take final action on an incomplete or untimely special event permit application.

B. The city manager is not required to process more than one application for a special event per organizer/applicant during any six-month period. 

C. The issuance of a special event permit does not relieve any person involved in the special event from meeting any requirements or obligations imposed by other local, state or federal laws. (Ord. 18-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018)


12.55.050 Special event insurance, indemnification, and liability. 

A. The applicant will also be responsible for providing required certificates of insurance and endorsements for general liability insurance naming the city, its elected officials, officers and employees as additional insureds and providing coverage in an amount necessary to cover any and all damage that may occur and to restore city property to its pre-event condition. 

B. Applicant shall agree to defend and hold harmless the city, its elected officials, officers and employees from any and all claims or lawsuits for personal injury or property damage arising from or in any way connected to the event. 

C. This chapter shall not be construed as imposing upon the city, its elected officials, officers or employees any liability or responsibility for any injury or damage to any person in any way connected to the use for which a permit has been issued. The city and its elected officials, officers and employees shall not be deemed to have assumed any liability or responsibility by reasons of inspections performed, the issuance of any permit, or the approval of any use of right-of-way. (Ord. 18-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018)


12.55.060 Criteria for issuance of permit.

A. Upon receipt of a completed application, the city manager or designee may forward a copy thereof to the fire marshal, police chief, community development, and public works departments (or any other impacted city department) for their review and comment. Those departments may recommend approval, approval with conditions or denial of the application. 

B. All permits issued under this chapter shall be issued by the city manager or designee. A permit may be denied by the city manager taking into account any of the following:

1. The proposed special event must not intrude into or over any portion of a public right-of-way open to vehicle or pedestrian travel in such a manner as to create a likelihood of endangering vehicles or pedestrians;

2. Provision for adequate vehicle and pedestrian access and circulation shall be shown on the plan which shall be reviewed and approved by the city. The plan will show how the access requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) are to be met; 

3. In the case of special events such as fun runs, marathons, etc., or in the case of any street use which requires the closure of any public street or walkway, the proposed event must not require closure for a period longer than that established by the city manager;

4. The proposed event must not unreasonably compound impacts of other activities such as events or construction on the date(s) requested;

5. The proposed event location must not have been unreasonably impacted by the number of events in a one-year period;

6. City personnel and resources must be available to assist with the special event as deemed necessary by the city manager; 

7. The proposed special event must not violate public health or safety regulations;

8. The applicant must not have failed to comply with conditions of previously issued special event permits;

9. The applicant must not have failed to submit all the necessary information as required for the special event permit application; or

10. Such other conditions as the city manager deems necessary to reasonably ensure that the proposed special event does not in any way create a likelihood of endangering those who may participate or be spectators. (Ord. 18-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018)


12.55.070 Permit exemptions. 

The following activities that otherwise comply with city, state and federal laws are exempt from having to obtain a special event permit:

A. Special events that are sponsored or conducted by the city of Silverton;

B. Funeral procession by a licensed mortuary;

C. Garage, estate, or yard sales, lemonade stands, and fundraising car washes; and

D. Closure of streets as a result of construction or utility work which must be applied for through a separate city process under Chapter 12.32 SMC. (Ord. 18-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018)


12.55.080 Permit denial.

The city manager may deny an application if:

A. A permit has been granted for another event at or near the same place and at or near the same time;

B. The special event will occupy road(s) not under the sole jurisdiction of the city or will violate local, state, or federal law;

C. A street closure may disrupt the orderly flow of vehicular and other traffic and no reasonable alternative means of addressing the disruption is, in the opinion of the city manager, available;

D. Applicant fails to provide assurances satisfactory to the city manager that they will be able to provide for protection of participants, maintenance of public order, crowd security, and/or emergency vehicle access;

E. Applicant makes a false statement of material facts on an application;

F. Applicant fails to provide proof that they have obtained all applicable license(s) or permit(s) required for conduct of the event or activities associated therewith;

G. Applicant has had a special event permit revoked within the preceding 18 months or has failed to pay outstanding reimbursable costs to the city for prior event(s);

H. Applicant is unable to obtain indemnification and insurance consistent with SMC 12.55.050. (Ord. 18-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018)


12.55.090 Permit revocation.

The city manager may revoke a permit if:

A. The applicant fails to comply with the terms of any condition(s) imposed on the permit including any applicable no parking/barricade requirements, the street closure is in violation of any provision of the Silverton Municipal Code, creates a hazardous condition, or any other applicable law;

B. The permit holder made a false statement of material fact on an application;

C. An unforeseen circumstance occurs prior to or during the special event that diminishes the safety and security of the proposed event. This could include, but is not limited to, inclement weather such as a snowstorm, flood, or windstorm, natural hazard, or a fire, public safety, public works or other event. (Ord. 18-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018)


12.55.100 Appeal to city council.

A decision of the city manager made concerning the application, denial, or revocation of a special event permit may be appealed to the city council. An applicant may appeal by filing with the city clerk a written statement of appeal within five working days of the date of the decision or action being appealed. The city clerk shall schedule a hearing before the city council no later than the second regular session following the filing and shall notify the applicant of the date and time for the hearing. The council may take such action(s) as it deems appropriate concerning the appeal, consistent with the limitations imposed by this chapter for issuance of special event permits. (Ord. 18-05 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018)


Title 13 UTILITIES

Chapters:

Division I. Utility Code

13.01    City Authority Regarding Utilities

13.02    Definitions

13.04    Utility Fees, Charges, Billing and Collection

13.06    Utility Enforcement, Inspections and Penalties

13.08    Utility Design Standards

13.10    Utility Services and Use

13.12    Utility Service Connections

13.16    Utility Use Regulations

13.20    Cross-Connections

13.40    Alternate Sewage Disposal

13.44    Building Sewers and Connections

13.52    Restricted Discharges and Pretreatment

Division II. System Development Charges

13.70    System Development Charges

Division III. Equivalent Assessment

13.90    Equivalent Assessment Connection Charge

Division IV. Street Maintenance Fee

13.100    Street Maintenance Fee

Division V. Stormwater System Fee

13.200    Stormwater System Fee


Chapter 13.01 CITY AUTHORITY REGARDING UTILITIES

Sections:

13.01.010    Utility code.

13.01.020    Exclusive control of utility systems and services by city.

13.01.030    Agreements with other utility service providers.


13.01.010 Utility code.

Chapters 13.01 through 13.52 SMC shall be known as the “utility code.” (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.01.020 Exclusive control of utility systems and services by city.

The city of Silverton has exclusive control of the water, sewer and stormwater management utility systems and services within the city limits, including all connections and contributions to the utility systems. It is prohibited for any person to install any service, connect to any system, discharge sewer or stormwater into the system, provide utility service or otherwise tamper or interfere with any part of the system without authorization from the city. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.01.030 Agreements with other utility service providers.

The city may provide utility service to or receive utility service from any other utility service provider pursuant to an agreement authorized by the city council. Such agreements may include, but are not limited to:

A. Sale or purchase of surplus water to or from any other municipal corporation, special district or utility company.

B. Sale or purchase of treatment services to or from any other municipal corporation, special district or utility company.

C. Provision of utility service within the city limits by any other municipal corporation, special district or utility company. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


Chapter 13.02 DEFINITIONS

Sections:

13.02.010    Definitions generally.


13.02.010 Definitions generally.

Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in the utility code are as follows: 

“Air gap” means the unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture or other device, and the flood level rim of such vessel. All approved air gaps shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe, measured vertically, above the top of the rim of the vessel, and in no case less than one inch. When an air gap is used at the service connection to prevent the contamination or pollution of the public potable water system, an emergency bypass shall be installed around the air gap system, and an approved reduced pressure principle device shall be installed in the bypass system. 

“Alternative sewage disposal system” means alternative wastewater treatment process(es) and technique(s) which are proven methods providing for the reclaiming and reuse of water and productively recycled wastewater constituents, or otherwise eliminate the discharge of pollutants. (See Appendix E of the Innovative and Alternative Technology Guidelines, EPA Innovative and Alternative Technology Assessment Manual, MCD53.) 

“ASTM” means the standard specifications or methods of the American Society for Testing Materials of the serial designation indicated by the number, and, unless otherwise stated, all references refer to the latest adopted revision of such specification or method. 

“Auxiliary water supply” means any water supply on or available to the premises, other than the city’s approved public potable water supply. These auxiliary waters may include water from another provider’s public potable water supply, or any natural source(s) such as a well, spring, river, stream, harbor, etc., or “used waters” or “industrial fluids.” These waters may be polluted or contaminated, or they may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over which the city does not have sanitary control.

“Back-siphonage” means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distributing pipes of a potable water supply system, from any source other than its intended source, caused by the sudden reduction of pressure in the potable water supply system.

“Backflow” means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances under pressure into the distributing pipes of a potable water supply from any source or sources other than its intended source. 

“Backflow preventer” means a device or means designed to prevent backflow or back-siphonage.

“BOD (biochemical oxygen demand)” means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees centigrade, expressed in milligrams/liter (mg/l). (EPA Standard Methods 5210(B) shall be used for any tests of BOD.)

“Building drain” means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building, and conveys it to the building sewers, beginning five feet (one and one-half meters) outside the inner face of the building walls. 

“Building service line” means all water service piping on the customer’s side of the main service meter where the meter is within the public right-of-way or easement. Also, all other service connection piping between the meter and the main located on private property (excluding water meters) where the city does not have existing agreements to maintain and replace such piping. 

“Building sewer” means that part of the horizontal piping of a drainage system which extends from the end of the building drain and which receives the discharge of the building drain and conveys it to a public sewer, private sewer, individual sewage disposal system, or other point of disposal. 

“Business day” or “working day” means Monday through Friday from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., excluding any city-recognized holidays. 

“COD (chemical oxygen demand)” means the quantity of oxygen, expressed in milligram per liter, utilized by decomposition of organic and inorganic contaminants, dissolved or suspended in water, during a two-hour oxidation test. (EPA Standard Methods 5220(D) shall be used for any tests of COD.)

“Commercial business” means a business establishment which furnishes goods or services to either the general public or other commercial operations. 

“Controlled cross-connections” means a connection between a potable water system and a nonpotable water system, with an approved backflow-prevention device properly installed that will continuously afford the protection commensurate with the degree of hazard.

“Cross-connection” means any physical connection or arrangement of piping or fixtures between two otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the other nonpotable water or industrial fluids of questionable safety, through which, or because of which, backflow or back-siphonage may occur into the potable water system. Other types of cross-connections include but are not limited to connectors such as swing connections, removable sections, four-way plug valves, spools, dummy sections of pipe, swivel or changeover devices, sliding multiport tube, and solid connections. 

“Customer” means the owner, agent, tenant or other authorized representative responsible for occupancy of the premises that is served by a city utility system. A person, corporation, association or agency which rents or leases premises shall be considered an agent of the property owner; also a “user.” 

“Developer” means any person, company or corporation who purchases or holds an interest in real property with the intent to increase the value thereof by the installation of utilities, construction of a building or buildings, grading, ditching, improving or enhancing the ground or structures for the purpose of resale. 

“Domestic flow” means volume used during peak-hour usage at a minimum residual gauge pressure of 20 psi. 

“Domestic wastewater” means wastewater of the type commonly introduced into a treatment works by residential users.

“Double-check valve assembly” means an assembly of two independently operating approved check valves with tightly closing shutoff valves on each side of the check valves, plus properly located test cocks for the testing of each check valve. The entire assembly shall meet the design and performance specifications and approval of a recognized and city-approved testing agency for backflow-prevention devices. To be approved, these devices must be readily accessible for the in-line maintenance and testing. 

“Garbage” means the solid animal and vegetable waste from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from handling, storage and sale of produce. 

“Industrial facility” means an establishment primarily engaged in manufacturing, processing or fabrication of goods. 

“Industrial user” means any nongovernmental, nonresidential user of a publicly owned treatment works which is identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented, under one of the following divisions:

Division A – Agricultural, Forestry and Fishing. 

Division B – Mining.

Division D – Manufacturing.

Division E – Transportation, Communication, Electric, Gas and Sanitary Services.

Division I – Services.

“Living unit” means any of the following:

A. A single-family dwelling;

B. A habitable unit of multifamily dwelling(s), including an apartment; or 

C. A condominium. 

“Mains” means distribution pipelines that are part of the city water system. 

“Multi-user” means a customer supplied with water service to more than one living unit, commercial business or industrial facility, or combination thereof, from one water service connection. 

“Natural outlet” means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 

“Nonpotable water” means water that is not safe for human consumption, or which is of questionable potability. 

“Operation and maintenance” means activities required to assure the dependable and economical function of the treatment works.

A. “Operation” means control of the unit processes and equipment which make up the treatment works. This includes financial and personnel management, records, laboratory control, process control, safety and emergency operation planning.

B. “Maintenance” means preservation of functional integrity and efficiency of equipment and structures. This includes preventive maintenance, corrective maintenance and replacement of equipment as needed. 

“Person” means any individual, firm, company, association, society, group or corporation. 

“pH” means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 

“Potable water” means any water which, according to recognized standards, is safe for human consumption. 

“Premises” means the integral property or area, including improvements thereon, to which water service is or will be provided. 

“Private sewer” means a privately owned and maintained lateral sewer system normally six or eight inches in diameter, installed to serve multi-unit structures on single-ownership properties, which cannot legally be further divided, such as apartments, mobile home parks, schools and condominiums. 

“Properly shredded garbage” means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and disposing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 

“Property owner” means the owner of the premises who is also the ultimate responsible party for all customer charges and fees. The property owner may also be the customer for any given premises.

“Public sewer” means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and which is controlled by public authority. 

“Reduced pressure principle device” means an assembly of two independently operating approved check valves with an automatically operating differential relief valve between the two check valves, tightly closing shutoff valves on either side of the check valves, plus properly located test cocks for the testing of the check and relief valves. The entire assembly shall meet the design and performance specifications and approval of a recognized and city-approved testing agency for backflow-prevention assemblies. The device shall operate to maintain the pressure in the zone between the two check valves at a level less than the pressure on the public water supply side of the device. These devices must be readily accessible for in-line maintenance and testing, and be installed in a location where no part of the device will be submerged. 

“Replacement” means expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and constructed. The term “operation and maintenance” includes replacement. 

“Sanitary sewer” means a conduit intended to carry liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with minor quantities of groundwater, stormwater and surface water that are not admitted intentionally. 

“Service connection” means a water connection or sewer connection as the context indicates.

“Service connection charge” means the fee levied to pay for the cost of labor, materials and any inspection required during the construction of a utility service line from the water or sewer main to the property that is to be served, with the charges to be itemized on a standard city billing form. 

Sewage, Sewerage, or Sewer Water. See “wastewater.”

“Sewage treatment plant” means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treatment of sewage. 

“Sewage works” means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposition of sewage. 

“Sewer” means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 

“Sewer connection” means a public sewer that has been constructed to the property line or right-of-way line from a public main for the sole purpose of providing a connection for the building sewer.

“Slug” means any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average 24-hour concentration of flows during normal operation. 

“Stormwater” means a sewer designed to carry only stormwaters, surface runoff and street wash waters, and drainage.

“Surface water” means all natural water whose surface is exposed to the atmosphere, including natural drainage ways, stream corridors, rivers, ponds, wetlands, and impoundments. 

“System development charge” means the fee or charge assessed to each commercial business, industry or living unit for the right to connect to the city’s sewer or water system, and which is used for expansion of those systems. 

“Temporary service” means service of limited duration. 

“TSS (total suspended solids)” means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and that is removable by laboratory filtering. (EPA Standard Methods 2450(D) shall be used for any tests for TSS.) 

“Useful life” means the period during which a treatment works is planned and designed to be operated. 

User. See “customer.”

“User service charge” means a charge levied on customers that may be a combination of a base fee, a usage fee and a fixed fee as set by resolution and/or ordinance. 

“Utility” or “utility system” means sewer, water and stormwater management services provided by the city of Silverton.

“Utility rate” is the rate established by city council to cover the cost of providing utility system services. 

“Utility service” means services provided for water, stormwater and sewer.

“Wastewater” means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such incidental groundwater, surface water and stormwater as may be present. 

“Water connection” means the pipe, valves, fittings and meter by means of which the city conducts water from its main to and through a meter(s), but not including piping from the meter to the premises served. 

“Water main” means water pipe and all necessary valves, fittings, hydrant connections and other appurtenances used for the distribution of water. 

“Water system” means all municipally owned facilities of the city used to supply, process and distribute drinking-quality water to each customer service connection or temporary service. 

“Watercourse” means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


Chapter 13.04 UTILITY FEES, CHARGES, BILLING AND COLLECTION

Sections:

13.04.010    Fees, rates and charges – Council authority.

13.04.015    Fees, rates and charges set by resolution.

13.04.017    Application for service.

13.04.020    Deposit requirements.

13.04.060    Bulk water.

13.04.070    Reserved.

13.04.080    Garden meters – Rates and charges.

13.04.090    Multi-use meters.

13.04.100    Meter size changes.

13.04.110    Reserved.

13.04.120    Outside-city rates.

13.04.130    Charges for restoration of service.

13.04.140    Construction – Engineering and inspection fees.

13.04.150    Construction – Bonding and insurance.

13.04.160    Computation and collection of charges.

13.04.170    Revenues – Deposit and use.

13.04.180    Billing – Mailing address.

13.04.190    Billing – Payment responsibility.

13.04.200    Billing – Time and payment date.

13.04.210    Adjustment of accounts – Nonleaks.

13.04.212    Adjustments of accounts – No service provided.

13.04.215    Adjustment of accounts – Leaks.

13.04.220    Delinquent accounts.

13.04.230    Liens.

13.04.240    Appeal procedures.

13.04.255    User classifications.


13.04.010 Fees, rates and charges – Council authority.

All fees, rates and charges stated within the utility code may be changed at any time by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.04.015 Fees, rates and charges set by resolution.

The city council will establish the fees, rates and charges for the city’s utilities by resolution in an amount reasonable and necessary to fund the administration, debt, planning, design, construction, operation, maintenance and repair of the city’s utility systems. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.04.017 Application for service.

The following criteria must be met regarding application for utility service:

A. The city will not provide utility service without a signed application on a form provided by the city. If a customer is a tenant seeking utility service, the city may provide a copy of the application to the property owner, landlord or property manager.

B. Two or more parties who join to make application for service are jointly and individually liable, and will be sent a single billing.

C. Any person 18 years of age or older who receives utility services at a premises is liable for the services provided. 

D. Contracts, other than applications, may be required prior to service where, in the opinion of the city, special circumstances exist.

E. If a premises is connected to the city utility system without application, the city will disconnect the premises. Before a new connection is made, the applicant must pay double the rate of the estimated charges for the unpaid services during the period of non-city-approved connection.

F. In no case will utility service be allowed until the customer has complied with the terms of this section and all appropriate fees and charges have been paid. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.04.020 Deposit requirements.

A. Before the city will provide utility service to a new or discontinued service connection, the applicant for service must pay the required deposit and any other applicable fees. The city may require additional deposits for customers whose utility service has been shut off for failure to pay or who has had an account with a delinquent status for more than three continuous months.

B. The city will hold the deposit as a guarantee of payment for utility services and for protection of the city against damage to the service installation. Whenever the customer has timely paid bills for at least one year, or has otherwise established satisfactory credit in the municipality, the finance director, or the finance director’s designee, will waive or refund the customer’s deposit.

C. Refunds of the deposit to accounts that have established satisfactory credit will be applied to the account.

D. Refund of the deposit to accounts that have been terminated will be applied to the account, and the city will return the deposit less any outstanding balances and/or charges for damage to the system.

E. If the return of a deposit remains unclaimed for one year after termination of the service, it will be presumed abandoned. The city will report it and deliver it to the Division of State Lands, as provided in ORS Chapter 98. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.04.060 Bulk water.

The city will make bulk water available at the discretion of the city manager, public works director or the director’s designee. Bulk water rates will be at twice the rate for residential customers. The customer may only use water from an authorized meter or designated fire hydrant provided by the public works department. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.04.070 Reserved.

(Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.04.080 Garden meters – Rates and charges.

Metered water from a garden meter will be charged at the current rate for the appropriate classification. Before receiving a garden meter, customers must pay the full amount of all installation charges, including all materials and labor for installation and connection to the water main by the city. Garden meters require a turn-on fee at the beginning of each water season, with the fee set by resolution. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.04.090 Multi-use meters.

A. When two or more user classifications (residential, commercial, etc.) apply to the same meter use, the higher use rate for the utility service will apply to the services being received.

B. When two or more billing units are connected to the same meter, all utility service charges will be the responsibility of the property owner or property manager. All service charges will be billed and mailed to the address specified on the service application of the property owner or property manager. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.04.100 Meter size changes.

A customer must pay all installation charges when a change in the size of a meter and service is required or requested. In addition, if the meter size is increased, the customer must pay the difference in system development charges for each meter size. If the replaced meter remains usable, a trade-in value will be credited on the installation charges. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.04.110 Reserved.

(Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.04.120 Outside-city rates.

User service charges for utility customers located outside the city limits will be billed at rates necessary to ensure the financial viability of the utility system as determined by a rate study and established by resolution. User service charges will include both base rate charges and metered usage charges. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.04.130 Charges for restoration of service.

A. The city will charge a fee to a customer for restoration of utility service when service has been discontinued under the provisions of the utility code.

B. This charge does not apply to newly installed service connections unless the applicant has outstanding charges on another account.

C. The city may require a deposit, or require a larger deposit, before it will restore utility service based on prior payment history. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.04.140 Construction – Engineering and inspection fees.

A. Engineering fees shall be paid by all persons requesting engineering services of the city for the construction of utility mains and appurtenances. Engineering services by the city are subject to staff availability. Fees are due and payable upon completion of the installation and prior to any connection permit approval.

B. Engineering fees are determined as follows:

1. Design services, six percent of total construction cost;

2. Contract administration services, three percent of total construction cost;

3. Construction inspection service, three percent of total construction cost.

C. The construction inspection services and fee is mandatory and not subject to request by the property owner. All construction costs must be verified from actual invoices and receipts when the city is not responsible for contract administration. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015) 


13.04.150 Construction – Bonding and insurance.

Bonding and insurance for utility construction will be as provided in the Silverton Municipal Code or the public works design standards adopted pursuant to Chapter 13.08 SMC. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.04.160 Computation and collection of charges.

The finance department will collect all user service charges. User service charges are computed and payable as provided in the utility code. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.04.170 Revenues – Deposit and use.

The finance director is directed to deposit in the appropriate fund all the gross revenues received from charges, rates and penalties collected for the use of the utility systems. The revenues deposited in the appropriate fund must be used exclusively for administration, planning, design, construction, improvements, operation, maintenance, debt payments and repair of the city’s utility systems. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.04.180 Billing – Mailing address.

The city will mail bills for user service charges to the address specified on the application for services unless a different owner or customer has requested to the finance director that services be placed in their name and has agreed in writing to be responsible for the user service charges. When user charges are not related to water or sewer or are for a multi-use meter, the user service charges will be billed to the owner of the property. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.04.190 Billing – Payment responsibility.

A. The property owner of record is ultimately responsible for payment of all charges prescribed in the utility code, regardless of any agreement the property owner may have with a third party and regardless of whether the customer’s bills were in a tenant’s name. 

B. A customer who is a tenant continues to be responsible for delinquent utility charges until paid regardless of relocation to premises different from the premises at which the tenant accrued delinquent charges. The city may refuse to provide service to such tenant at any new address, and/or may terminate utility service until the delinquent bill is paid. The city may also pursue any action available under the laws of the city or state of Oregon to recover payment. 

C. Multi-metered accounts must be in the property owner’s name. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.04.200 Billing – Time and payment date.

A. Water and sewer service charges will include a base charge and a usage charge. Utility service shall be billed monthly.

B. Payment of all service charges is due and payable on the sixteenth day of the month following the month that services were billed.

C. The city will read meters at regular monthly intervals for the preparation of monthly bills and as required for the preparation of opening and closing and special bills. Meter readings will be averaged during any period when it is impossible or impractical to read meters on regular reading times.

D. Each meter on a customer’s premises will be billed separately, and readings of two or more meters will not be combined unless necessary for the city’s operating convenience. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.04.210 Adjustment of accounts – Nonleaks.

A. A customer’s account will be adjusted if the customer receives less than one month of service. Customers receiving less than one month of service will be billed on a pro rata basis for base and fixed charges.

B. The city may bill the customer for utility services while the meter is not registering. The bill will be at an amount determined by the finance department to closely reflect what would have been billed had the meter been functioning. This may be based on the prior year’s usage during the same time period, if available, or the prior two months’ usage. 

C. Adjustments will be in the form of credits on future bills unless the customer no longer has an active account with the city, in which case the city will issue a refund. Eligibility for an adjustment on an account will end 90 days after the date a final bill was issued for that account.

D. In no event may an adjustment be made for more than 12 consecutive months’ worth of billing. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.04.212 Adjustments of accounts – No service provided.

If a customer pays for utility services not actually received as a result of the city’s error, the city will refund the amount paid for services not received, but only for a period not to exceed three years from the date the customer notified the city. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.04.215 Adjustment of accounts – Leaks.

A. The city may adjust a customer’s utility billing to reduce charges resulting from a verified leak when:

1. The customer notifies the city in writing of the leak;

2. The customer makes a reasonable effort to locate the leak and initiates repairs within 30 days of discovering the leak;

3. The city verifies a leak exists, and the leak was caused by either a broken pipe or pipe connection;

4. The customer (or a contractor hired by the customer) fully repairs the leak within 30 days of notice to the city of the leak; and

5. The customer provides proof of the fixed leak to the city on a form and manner as prescribed by the finance department, including, but not limited to, receipts and other verification of repairs or costs.

B. If the city determines the customer meets the conditions in subsection (A) of this section, the city will adjust the billing by reducing the affected monthly usage by the excess over the user’s normal amount. Adjustments to the bill may not exceed two months from the date before the customer fixes the leak. The city will add a leak adjustment fee to the customer’s bill for any adjusted billings due to leaks.

C. Faulty valves or similar devices of the customer are not grounds for the adjustment of a utility bill. In addition, obvious neglect or improper installation by the customer is not grounds for adjustment of a utility billing.

D. The city will not adjust an account balance resulting from a leak if the same leak occurred within the last two years and the customer has already received an adjustment based on that leak. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.04.220 Delinquent accounts.

A. Utility bills are delinquent if not paid by the due date. A late fee and monthly interest charge will be added to delinquent accounts. All fees and interest rates for delinquent utility accounts shall be set by resolution of the city council. 

B. Water service for delinquent utility accounts may be turned off after the city provides the customer with written notice:

1. The city will send written notice to the occupant and person responsible for the account (if they are different) stating that water service will be discontinued unless the delinquent account balance is paid by 5:00 p.m. on the date specified in the delinquent notice. The city must mail the notice at least 10 business days before the shut off date. Water services will not be turned off after 3:00 p.m. nor will water services be turned off on Fridays, weekends, or the day before a regular holiday.

2. The notice shall indicate that the property owner is responsible for payment of any unpaid balance and that the unpaid balance will remain a lien against the premises as authorized by the utility code.

C. If the full payment of the delinquent amount is not made by the date designated on the turn-off notice, the water may be immediately turned off. At the time water service is turned off, a notice will be posted on the premises indicating the water service has been turned off and it may be restored by payment of the delinquent amount, a restoration fee, and/or an additional deposit as set forth in SMC 13.04.130.

D. Before restoration of service by the city, the delinquent bill and administrative fee must be paid, unless the finance director or director’s designee approves a deferred payment schedule.

E. Delinquent utility accounts totaling less than $25.00 will not be turned off unless circumstances indicate the service has been abandoned. (Ord. 19-04 § 1 (Exh. A), 2019; Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.04.230 Liens.

Utility service charges become a lien against the premises served from and after the date of billing and entry on city records pertaining to the utility system. Such records are accessible for inspection by anyone interested to ascertain the amount of such charges against the property. Whenever a bill for utility service remains unpaid for 90 days after billing, the lien thereby created may be foreclosed in a manner provided for in Oregon Revised Statutes, or in any other manner provided for by law or by city ordinance. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.04.240 Appeal procedures.

A. A utility customer who asserts that a fee or charge is unjust or inequitable as applied to the customer’s premises may make a written appeal to the city manager requesting a review of the fee or charge.

B. Staff will review the request to determine if it is substantiated or not. If the city manager denies the customer’s appeal, the customer may then appeal to the city council no later than 60 days after the city manager’s denial. 

C. If the city council substantiates the request, the city will recompute the fee or charge for that customer based on the approved, revised flow. The council has the final responsibility for determining equitability of charges where special circumstances are found and for the adjusting of such charges in a consistent and equitable manner. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.04.255 User classifications.

User classifications shall be comprised of, but not limited to, the following:

A. Residential.

1. Single-family (per living unit);

2. Multiple-family (per living unit);

3. Mobile home park (per living unit); and

4. Bed and breakfast; shall be considered one living unit, unless the property is clearly divided into multiple living units.

B. Commercial I.

1. Barbershops and beauty shops (each);

2. Car dealers (each);

3. Churches (each, without garbage disposal);

4. Department stores (each);

5. Drive-in restaurants (each, without garbage disposal);

6. Fraternal clubs (each, without food service);

7. Grocery stores (each, without meat cutting);

8. Hardware stores (each);

9. Hotels and motels (each);

10. Laundromats (each);

11. Light industrial (each, flow less than 25,000 gpd, BOD less than 400 mg/l, SS less than 450 mg/l);

12. Medical, dental and veterinary clinics (each);

13. Pharmacies (each);

14. Print shops (each);

15. Professional offices (each business);

16. Schools (each, without food preparation);

17. Service stations (each);

18. Taverns (each); without food service;

19. Warehouses (each); and

20. Travel trailer park (per living unit).

C. Commercial II.

1. Churches (each, with garbage disposal);

2. Drive-in restaurants (each, with garbage disposal);

3. Full-service restaurants and fraternal clubs (each, with food service, no garbage disposal, with grease trap); and

4. Institutions (each, hospitals, schools, nursing homes).

D. Commercial III.

1. Bakeries (each);

2. Full-service restaurants, taverns, and fraternal clubs (each, with food service, with garbage disposal, without grease trap);

3. Grocery stores (each, with meat cutting and/or bakery); and

4. Meat markets (each).

E. Commercial IV.

1. Septic haulers (each).

F. Industrial.

1. Any facility that discharges effluent to the sanitary sewer for any 24-hour period which equals or exceeds any one of the following criteria:

a. Flow greater than 25,000 gpd;

b. BOD greater than 1,500 mg/l;

c. SS greater than 1,500 mg/l;

d. pH greater than 9.0;

e. pH less than 6.0.

G. Where two or more user classifications apply to the same water meter usage, then the higher usage rate shall apply. (Ord. 16-02 § 1, 2016)


Chapter 13.06 UTILITY ENFORCEMENT, INSPECTIONS AND PENALTIES

Sections:

13.06.010    Right of entry to premises.

13.06.020    Violation – Penalty.

13.06.030    Violation – Continuing offenses.

13.06.040    Violation – Liability for loss or damage.


13.06.010 Right of entry to premises.

With proper identification and during reasonable hours, the city or its duly authorized agents have the right to enter or leave the customer’s premises for a purpose properly connected with utility service to the premises. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.06.020 Violation – Penalty.

A. With the exception of SMC 13.16.160, any person who violates any provision of the utility code shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit, but in no event longer than 30 days, for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender must permanently cease all violations within the period of time stated in such notice.

B. Violation of SMC 13.10.020 is punishable by fines as set forth by resolution adopted by the city council. (Ord. 16-18 § 2, 2016; Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.06.030 Violation – Continuing offenses.

Any person who continues any violation of the utility code beyond the time limit provided for in this chapter is guilty of a violation and will be fined in an amount not exceeding $500.00 for each violation. Each day in which any such violation continues is deemed a separate offense. In addition, the city reserves the right to alleviate or correct the alleged violation with the cost to be borne by the violator. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.06.040 Violation – Liability for loss or damage.

Any person violating any provision of the utility code is liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage to the city, its facilities or personnel, by reason of such violation. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


Chapter 13.08 UTILITY DESIGN STANDARDS

Sections:

13.08.010    Public works design standards – Adoption and annual review.

13.08.020    Approval of alternative materials and methods by public works director.

13.08.030    Special design problems.

13.08.040    Plan submission.

13.08.050    As-built plan requirements.


13.08.010 Public works design standards – Adoption and annual review.

A. The public works director is authorized to adopt, maintain, modify and enforce public works design standards (“design standards” or “standards”) for use in and throughout the city to govern all construction, modification and upgrading of public facilities in the city and work within the city’s service areas. All construction, design, detail, workmanship and materials are to be done and completed consistent with the then most current edition of the design standards. As used herein and elsewhere in this chapter, the term “public facilities” means improvements either intended by the city to be or which are city-owned, maintained, used or controlled including sewer, stormwater and water distribution facilities and equipment.

B. The city council shall adopt the standards by resolution and thereafter shall be provided at least annually a written update from the public works director or the director’s designee as to all substantive changes or alterations made to the standards by the director during the prior year. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.08.020 Approval of alternative materials and methods by public works director.

A. Persons seeking approval of alternate materials or methods shall make application in writing to the public works director and shall pay all fees associated therewith as the same may be set by council resolution. Approval of any deviation from the standards must be in writing and issued by the director.

B. Any alternate material or method must either meet or exceed the minimum requirements set in the design standards for the most analogous or comparable material or method.

C. The written application is to include (but is not limited to) the manufacturer’s specifications and testing results, design drawings, calculations, reason and justification for the proposed alternative material or method.

D. Any deviations or special problems will be reviewed by the public works director on a case-by-case basis and approved in writing by the director. When requested by the public works director, full design calculations shall be submitted for the director’s review/analysis as part of any application. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.08.030 Special design problems.

A. The use of items, methods or materials not covered within the design standards requires review and approval by the public works director prior to any use. The applicant must submit full design calculations, supplemental drawings and information as required by the director.

B. Applications requiring special review include but are not limited to the following:

1. Water distribution pump stations;

2. Relining of existing water mains;

3. Water pressure regulating devices;

4. Energy dissipaters;

5. Water reservoirs;

6. Water treatment plants;

7. Water flow measurement/monitoring devices. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.08.040 Plan submission.

Construction plans for all privately financed public works facility improvements shall be submitted to the public works director in a format determined by the director and as specified in the design standards. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.08.050 As-built plan requirements.

For all public facility improvements where plans were approved for construction, the design engineer shall submit to the director for the city’s records certified “as-built” drawings in a form approved by the director. “As-built” survey notes may be required by the director if any discrepancy is noted. Along with “as-built” drawings, the design engineer shall submit a statement certifying that all work for which plans were approved has been completed consistent with the city’s design standards. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


Chapter 13.10 UTILITY SERVICES AND USE

Sections:

13.10.010    Service – Interruption conditions.

13.10.020    Use restrictions during shortages.

13.10.030    Service – Denial and discontinuance conditions.


13.10.010 Service – Interruption conditions.

Temporary shutdowns may be resorted to by the city for improvements and repairs. Whenever possible, and as time permits, the city will notify customers affected prior to a shutdown. However, the city is not liable for damage incurred on private property as a result of an interruption in service. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.10.020 Use restrictions during shortages.

The council, by resolution, may adopt a water curtailment plan to be implemented by the city during periods of water shortage caused by drought, infrastructure failure (mechanical, electrical), natural disaster, or from any other cause. (Ord. 16-18 § 1, 2016; Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.10.030 Service – Denial and discontinuance conditions.

Service may be denied or discontinued to any person who has left an unpaid utility bill at another service location until such previous bill is paid. Service may be denied to any person until restitution has been made for damage or any loss of revenue to the city resulting from tampering with or bypassing water meters or locking devices. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


Chapter 13.12 UTILITY SERVICE CONNECTIONS

Sections:

13.12.010    Separate service connection requirements.

13.12.020    Reserved.

13.12.030    Regular utility service – Rules and regulations.

13.12.040    Water main extensions.

13.12.045    Construction of sewers permitted when.

13.12.046    Extensions – Specifications and costs.

13.12.047    Extensions – Completion conditions.

13.12.048    Disconnection and reconnection procedures.

13.12.050    Fire-protection service.

13.12.060    Water service outside city limits.

13.12.070    Temporary water service.


13.12.010 Separate service connection requirements.

A. Every single-ownership property which cannot legally be further subdivided, and which was constructed after February 6, 1984, must have a separate sewer and water connection. These properties include, but are not limited to, multiple-family apartments, condominiums, mobile home parks and commercial or industrial establishments. 

B. Multi-users with more than one unit located in common ownership on a single parcel of property shall also comply with the Oregon State Plumbing Specialty Code. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.12.020 Reserved.

(Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.12.030 Regular utility service – Rules and regulations.

A. The city shall furnish and install a utility service connection of such size and location as a customer requests; provided, that the request is reasonable and is in compliance with provisions of the Oregon State Plumbing Specialty Code, the city’s design standards, and the utility code.

B. The city will install the water service from the main to a point between the curb line and the property line of the premises, if the main is in the street, or to a point in a city right-of-way or easement.

C. The customer or property owner must furnish, install and keep in good and safe condition equipment that may be required for receiving, controlling, applying and utilizing any city utility, and the customer or property owner must do so at their own risk and expense.

D. The city is not responsible for loss or damage caused by the improper installation of the equipment used for receiving a city utility service, or the negligence, want of proper care, or wrongful act of the customer or customer’s agent in installing, maintaining, using, operating or interfering with the equipment.

E. The city is not responsible for damage to property caused by a spigot, faucet, valve or other equipment that is open when water service is turned on at the meter.

F. A customer making any material change in the size, character or extent of the equipment or operation utilizing water service, or whose change in operations results in a large increase in the use of water, shall immediately give the city written notice of the nature of the change and, if requested, amend the customer’s application.

G. Any utility service connection, whether located on public or private property, is the property of the city, and the city reserves the right to repair, maintain and/or replace it.

H. The customer may not install booster pumps for the purpose of increasing water pressure or delivery without the express written permission of the public works director. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.12.040 Water main extensions.

Whenever a public improvement is to construct or extend a water main, the following shall apply:

A. Extension of all lines will be to the farthest edge of the property requesting service, unless otherwise authorized by the city engineer.

B. A minimum six-inch line shall be used on all extensions, unless a smaller line is approved by the city engineer.

C. The city will share in the cost of water lines larger than six inches in diameter by paying the difference in cost between a six-inch line and the larger size, except:

1. When a new development requires a larger line to provide adequate service, as determined by the city engineer;

2. Only pipe and fitting materials will be paid by the city unless the line size is greater than 10 inches in diameter.

D. The property owner requesting the extension must pay the cost for extending new water lines (see Chapter 12.08 SMC, Public Improvements). If a property owner requests service from a portion of the water line provided by the original developer, then the city shall collect a proportionate share of the water line cost, and reimburse the original developer or assignee that amount, less administrative costs. This reimbursement policy shall continue for 10 years from the date of line construction, and then end.

E. When service is requested by a developer from an existing line less than six inches in diameter, the city engineer will determine if both fire protection or domestic flow are adequate.

1. If fire protection is not adequate to either the new structure or neighboring structures, but domestic flow is adequate, then service will be allowed. However, an advance assessment or waiver of remonstrance for the cost of future upgrading of the line will be collected or obtained before any service connections are completed.

2. If both fire protection and domestic flow are inadequate, the developer must replace all lines necessary to adequately supply both fire and domestic flows as determined by the city engineer; however, in no case will the line be replaced to a size less than six inches in diameter. If the property or properties were previously assessed by the city for an undersized line, a credit will be given toward construction of a new line. The developer shall initiate the request for credit, and shall provide written documentation to the satisfaction of the city manager that the assessment is valid. Upon construction of the new line, the developer shall have the right of reimbursement from new water users on the new line. The right to reimbursement shall continue for a period of 10 years and then end.

F. Costs of any construction pursuant to the utility code shall include not only the water line, but also the cost of replacing street paving, sidewalks, driveways, and other improvements damaged during construction. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.12.045 Construction of sewers permitted when.

The city council, within its judgment, may provide that persons within the city not now served by the public sewer system and desiring to be served by a public sewer be allowed to construct the sewer on such properties all in accordance with plans and specifications as approved by the public works director and the DEQ. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.12.046 Extensions – Specifications and costs.

All extensions of city sewer lines shall adhere to the applicable provisions of the Silverton public improvement ordinance (see Chapter 12.08 SMC) and the public works design standards. In addition, such sewer extensions shall conform to the following:

A. Extensions of all lines will be to the far end of the property requesting service. If, however, the terrain or other physical features prevent future extensions of the sewer line beyond the property, then the sewer extension may terminate at a point perpendicular to the last possible developable site.

B. A minimum of eight-inch sewer line size shall be used on all extensions; however, the last nonextendable 250 feet of sewer line may be six inches in diameter. In all cases, the public works director will determine the size.

C. Sewer service will be required from the fronting street unless both natural terrain prohibits and the public works director determines a minimum of three properties will be better served from a main to be constructed through a permanent public utility easement. All such easements shall be of adequate dimensions to allow for all repair and replacement with conventional equipment.

D. The city will share in the cost of a sewer line larger than eight inches in diameter by paying the difference in cost between an eight-inch line and the larger size, subject to the following conditions:

1. Participation shall be governed by limits placed on the city budget.

2. The city will not in any case share in costs for lines larger than eight inches if the new development requesting service requires the larger line for its own use.

3. When the line size is greater than eight inches in diameter, but not greater than 10 inches, only the difference between eight-inch and the larger pipe and fitting material costs may be paid by the city. When the line size is greater than 10 inches in diameter, pipe and fitting material costs above that for an eight-inch line may be paid by the city. In addition, when the line size is greater than 10 inches in diameter, normal installation costs (i.e., excavation, bedding, backfill and surfacing above that for 10-inch line) may be paid by the city. In all cases where a developer is requesting city cost-sharing, records and receipts shall be provided to the satisfaction of the public works director. The director will determine if the request is justified and authorize or deny reimbursement accordingly.

E. The cost for extending new sewer lines shall be the responsibility of the owner requesting service. If a newly developed property requires service from a portion of the sewer line paid for by the original developer, then the city shall collect a proportionate share of the sewer line cost and reimburse the original property owner or assignee that amount, less administration costs. This reimbursement policy shall continue for 10 years from the date of line construction and then end.

F. When service is requested by a new development fronting a sewer line less than eight inches in diameter, the public works director will determine whether average peak hydraulic capacity will be exceeded with the additional inflow. If the capacity will be exceeded, then the developer will be required to pay for the replacement of all undersized lines, including manholes and cleanouts, necessary to correct hydraulic deficiency.

1. Upon replacement of any undersized line, at the property owner’s expense, the owner or the owner’s assignee may be eligible for city cost-sharing and reimbursement by other developers in a manner similar to new sewer line extensions.

2. Also, if the city previously assessed the property for the undersized line, a credit of the original assessment amount will be given toward construction of a new line. The property owner shall initiate any request for such credit and shall provide written documentation to the satisfaction of the city manager that the assessment is valid.

G. The requesting property owner(s) must pay an engineering fee to the city, based on services provided for design, inspection and/or contract administration. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.12.047 Extensions – Completion conditions.

A. When a sewer extension is to be completed by a private contractor under supervision of the public works director, the city and the person(s) doing the work shall agree as to the time within which the sewer extension work shall be completed.

B. Upon completion and acceptance of the work by the public works director, all sewer mains, laterals and service connections shall become the property of the city free and clear of any and all expenses for the construction and installation thereof. The person completing the work shall, prior to turning over the work to the city, provide a plat showing all of the property served by the completed construction and lots, parts of lots or parcels of ground actually connected to the sewer extension, and where connected.

C. Each of the owners of such lots, parts of lots or parcels of land shall, when connecting to the sewer, pay to the city a system development charge and service connection charge for the type of property served.

D. The person completing the work shall provide a one-year bond or other suitable security which will indemnify the city against loss should the sewer extension prove faulty. In addition, prior to acceptance of the work by the city, the person completing the work shall be required to televise the sewer extension one year from the date of completion of the work. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.12.048 Disconnection and reconnection procedures.

A. When any structure connected to the sewer system is destroyed by an act of God, is removed or is torn down, and/or no longer usable, it shall be required to disconnect from the sewer. The owner shall advise the city, stating the date of destruction or removal of the structure, and pay all user service charges to the date of destruction or removal, and thereafter no user service charge shall be made to the property until new improvements, if any, are placed on the property.

B. When the property is relieved from user charges and then reconnected to the sewer, the city shall determine whether the property had paid into the sewer fund the amount required while the property was using the sewer. If the property had paid user service charges equal to the amount required under sewer rates that were in effect at the time of disconnecting from the sewer, no additional charges will be levied.

C. In addition, when a building with sewer service is destroyed, or relocated to a different property and thereafter replaced by a new building within three years from the date of destruction or removal, the city shall not levy a system development charge for the new building unless the new building constitutes an increase in use under the system development charge schedule currently in effect. If the replacement building requires a greater system development charge when compared to the destroyed or relocated building previously on the same site, then a credit will be given on the replacement building system development charge equal to that of the previous building fee, and when the above provisions of this section are met.

D. The current system development charge schedule will be used for all comparisons and credit determinations under this section.

E. When a destroyed or relocated building is not replaced by a new building within five years of the date of destruction, then any replacement building shall pay the difference in system development charges in effect at the time of application for sewer service and the date of destruction or relocation of the building. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.12.050 Fire-protection service.

Fire-protection facilities and their use shall be allowed or required under the following conditions:

A. When a building has a fire-protection service which is separate from the regular service to the building, an approved proportional meter or detector check may be required. The owner of the building shall agree in writing that water supplied through this service will not be used for any purpose except for extinguishing a fire. An authorized city inspector shall be allowed to enter all premises with fire-protection services, for the purpose of determining any irregularities in proper use of the fire-protection facilities. If the city engineer determines a fire-protection facility within the bounds of a private property has been used for purposes other than extinguishing a fire, the city engineer may require immediate installation of an approved proportional meter or detector check, or disconnection of the fire-protection facilities from the city water system. All unauthorized use of fire-protection facilities shall be considered a violation of the utility code.

B. Water shall only be obtained from public fire hydrants under the direction of the fire department or department of public works.

C. The fire chief may require installation of fire-protection facilities to any new development which is not readily serviced from a hydrant located on the public right-of-way. The developer shall bear the full cost of installing all fire-protection facilities, including system development charges, inspection fees, and user fees required by the utility code. In addition, all unmetered fire lines shall be subject to construction standards adopted by the city, and require full inspection by the public works director or the director’s designee. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.12.060 Water service outside city limits.

The following conditions apply to providing water outside city limits:

A. Existing Customers. Customers outside the city limits will continue to receive city water until such time as the public works director determines that it is no longer cost-effective to maintain the existing line(s). The city manager must approve the public works director’s determination.

1. As long as the city continues to supply water to existing customers, the city is not liable for the pressure and quantity of water outside city limits.

2. The city has no liability for failure to provide service, or for any failure of the system.

3. Any customer being served with water outside city limits must comply with the provisions of the utility code.

B. New Customers. New water service outside city limits is not allowed unless the property owner and the city first agree to annexation. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.12.070 Temporary water service.

A. Temporary water service connections shall be disconnected and terminated within six months after installation, unless the public works director grants an extension of time.

B. Charges for water furnished through a temporary service connection shall be at the established rates for other customers of the same classification.

C. The temporary service customer is required:

1. To pay to the city, in advance, the estimated cost of installing and removing the facilities to furnish the service;

2. To deposit an amount sufficient to cover bills for water during the entire period temporary service may be used, or to establish credit approved by the city manager or manager’s designee;

3. To deposit with the city an amount equal to the value of equipment loaned by the city. This deposit shall be refundable under the terms of subsection (D) of this section.

D. The customer must use all possible care to prevent damage to the meter or other equipment loaned, which equipment is involved in furnishing the temporary service by the city from the time it is installed until it is removed, or until two business days after the applicant/customer gives notice in writing to the city that the contractor or other authorized person has no further need of the equipment. If the meter or other equipment is damaged, the customer must pay the cost of making repairs. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


Chapter 13.16 UTILITY USE REGULATIONS

Sections:

13.16.010    Water control valve required.

13.16.020    Water meter requirements.

13.16.030    Garden water meters.

13.16.050    Water apparatus on customer’s property.

13.16.060    Service discontinuance at customer request.

13.16.070    Abandoned and non-revenue-producing services.

13.16.080    Disconnection from water system – Destroyed or removed structures.

13.16.090    Disconnection from water system – Reuse of old facilities.

13.16.100    Discontinuance – For customer noncompliance.

13.16.110    Discontinuance – Wasting water.

13.16.120    Discontinuance – Fraud and abuse.

13.16.130    Unauthorized water turn-on prohibited.

13.16.140    Resale of water prohibited.

13.16.150    Illegal taps prohibited.

13.16.160    Injuring or destroying structures or equipment.

13.16.170    Liability for damages.

13.16.180    Installation of toilets and sewers required when.

13.16.190    Privies, cesspools and septic tanks prohibited.

13.16.200    Dumping excrement or other waste prohibited.

13.16.210    Discharging wastes to watercourses prohibited.

13.16.220    Use of public sewers required.

13.16.230    Maintenance of septic systems required.

13.16.240    Changing of septic systems facilities limited.


13.16.010 Water control valve required.

A customer must install a suitable valve on the building service line as close to the meter location as practical, the operation of which will control the entire water supply for the service. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.16.020 Water meter requirements.

A. It is unlawful for any person to obtain water from a city main except through a meter, unless water is sold in bulk by authorized city personnel.

B. All meters shall be furnished and owned by the city; however, the meter shall be paid for by the customer and maintained by the city.

C. The city may seal meters at the time of installation, and no seal may be altered or broken except by one of the city’s authorized agents.

D. The city may require additional submeters on the building supply to facilitate calculation of sewer service charges which are based either wholly or in part on water consumption. The customer shall pay for any such submeters. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.16.030 Garden water meters.

A. At the request of an existing water customer, the city shall furnish and install a garden water meter.

B. The city will only install a garden meter on building lots with an existing water service connection.

C. An account with a garden meter may only be used to provide water to gardens, lawns, landscaping, and similar outdoor plantings.

D. A customer requesting a garden meter must pay all fees and charges as provided in the utility code for a regular service connection. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.16.050 Water apparatus on customer’s property.

A. The city may refuse to furnish water and may discontinue service to a premises where an apparatus, appliance or other equipment using water is dangerous, unsafe, or is being used in violation of laws, ordinances or legal regulations.

B. The city does not assume liability for inspecting apparatus on the customer’s property. However, the city reserves the right of inspection if there is reason to believe that unsafe or illegal apparatus is in use. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.16.060 Service discontinuance at customer request.

A. A customer may have utility service discontinued by notifying the city at least five days in advance of the desired date of discontinuance.

B. If the customer does not give notice, the customer must pay for utility service until the date the city has learned the customer has vacated the premises or a new customer has requested service. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.16.070 Abandoned and non-revenue-producing services.

A. The city may remove a utility service connection to a premises that has been abandoned or not used for a period of one year or longer.

B. The city will only begin new utility service when the city receives a new customer application and payment for the new connection. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.16.080 Disconnection from water system – Destroyed or removed structures.

A. When any structure connected to the water system is destroyed by an act of God, is removed, or is torn down, and/or no longer usable, it shall be required to disconnect from the water system. The owner must advise the city of the destruction, stating the date of destruction or removal of the structure, and pay all user service charges to the date of destruction or removal, and thereafter no water or sewer user service charge will be made to the property until new improvements, if any, are placed on the property. However, the customer must continue to pay other fees, including street, stormwater and park fees.

B. When the property is relieved from user service charges and then reconnected to the utility system, the city will determine whether the property had paid into the appropriate utility fund the amount required while the property was using city utilities. If the property had paid user service charges equal to the amount required under the utility rates that were in effect at the time of the disconnection from the utility system, the city will not levy any additional charges.

C. In addition, when a building with water service is destroyed or is relocated to a different property and thereafter replaced by a new building within three years after the date of destruction or removal, the city shall not levy a system development charge for the new building, unless the new building constitutes an increase in use under the system development charge schedule currently in effect. If the replacement building requires a greater system development charge than compared to the destroyed or relocated building previously on the same site, then a credit will be given on the replacement building’s system development charge equal to that of the previous building fee, and when the above provisions of this section and SMC 13.16.070 are met.

D. The current system development charge schedule shall be used for all comparisons and credit determinations under SMC 13.16.070 through 13.16.090. When a destroyed or relocated building is not replaced by a new building within three years of the date of destruction, then the owner of any replacement building must pay the full system development charge in effect at the time of application for water service. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.16.090 Disconnection from water system – Reuse of old facilities.

A. Before the city will issue a moving or wrecking permit, city personnel must shut off the building water service. If a new building permit is not issued for the site within six months of the old building removal date, city personnel may remove the meter and cap the water service.

B. In addition, when a building with water service is destroyed or relocated to a different property and is not replaced by a new building within three years from the date of destruction or removal, the public works director or director’s designee may inspect the water service to determine whether it is in usable condition and is to be reused. If the water service is found unusable, the property owner is required to pay all costs for replacement of the water service connection. In addition, the city will charge a new water meter to any service abandoned or disconnected more than three years. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.16.100 Discontinuance – For customer noncompliance.

A. Except where the utility code stipulates a lesser period, the city may discontinue utility service to a customer for noncompliance with a city utility regulation if the customer fails to comply with the regulation within five days after receiving written notice of the city’s intention to discontinue service.

B. If such noncompliance affects matters of health or safety, or other conditions warrant such action, the city may discontinue utility service immediately.

C. It is unlawful for any person or persons to occupy, reside in, or permit the occupancy of a living unit, structure or other premises when such premises, living unit or structure is not connected to a private or public sewer system and does not have water service.

D. The penalty for a violation of this section shall be as set forth in Chapter 1.08 SMC. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.16.110 Discontinuance – Wasting water.

Where wasteful or negligent water use seriously affects the general service, the city may discontinue the service if such conditions are not corrected within five days after the customer is given written notice. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.16.120 Discontinuance – Fraud and abuse.

The city has the right to refuse or to discontinue utility service to a premises to protect itself against fraud, abuse or unauthorized use. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.16.130 Unauthorized water turn-on prohibited.

Except for an authorized city employee, no person may lawfully turn on a water service connection that the city has turned off. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.16.140 Resale of water prohibited.

Except by knowledge and consent of the city, customers may not resell water received by the customer from the city, nor may water be delivered to premises other than those specified in the application for service. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.16.150 Illegal taps prohibited.

All unauthorized taps on the city water or sewer system are designated as illegal taps and subject to removal and fine. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.16.160 Injuring or destroying structures or equipment.

No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment that is a part of the city’s utility system. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.16.170 Liability for damages.

A customer is liable for any damage to a meter or other equipment or property owned by the city which is caused by an act of the customer, or agent thereof. The customer must reimburse the city for such damage on presentation of a bill. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.16.180 Installation of toilets and sewers required when.

The owner of any house, building, or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purpose, situated within the city, and abutting on any street, alley, easement or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a sanitary sewer of the city is hereby required at owner’s expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 90 days after date of official notice to do so; provided, that the public sewer system is within 300 feet of the property, that the public sewer can be extended to serve the property, and that the public sewer system is physically available. The requirements of this section can be deferred upon demonstration to the city that the property’s alternate sewage disposal system is properly working, does not require replacement or upgrade, and does not pose any threat to the public’s health, safety or welfare. The alternate sewage disposal system may not be upgraded, repaired or replaced once the city has given notice that connection to the public sewer system is required. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.16.190 Privies, cesspools and septic tanks prohibited.

It is unlawful to construct or expand any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.16.200 Dumping excrement or other waste prohibited.

It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.16.210 Discharging wastes to watercourses prohibited.

It is unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of Division II of this title. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.16.220 Use of public sewers required.

No person shall cause or permit any sewage, septage, or industrial waste generated, resulting, or occurring from any activity or industry located inside or outside the city, to flow or be discharged inside the city except flow or discharge into a public sewer, unless the discharge is authorized under this chapter or state law. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.16.230 Maintenance of septic systems required.

Septic systems that have been established pursuant to a county permit prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section shall be maintained in good working order at all times. In the event that a septic system is determined by the public works director to not be in good working condition, it must be repaired within 30 days by the owner. Failure to repair the system within the time specified herein shall constitute a waiver and abandonment of the septic system. If a septic system has been abandoned, and a use of the structure continues, then the structure shall be in violation of SMC 13.16.050. The maintenance of a use in violation of SMC 13.16.050 shall constitute a nuisance and the public works director shall order the abatement thereof. An appeal of any order from the director abating the nuisance shall be filed with the municipal judge with a fee of $200.00. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.16.240 Changing of septic systems facilities limited.

Septic systems that have been established pursuant to a county permit prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section may be changed only if the applicant complies with the provisions of Oregon Administrative Rules governing sanitary septic system expansion. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


Chapter 13.20 CROSS-CONNECTIONS

Sections:

13.20.010    Protection from contamination – Requirements.

13.20.020    Inspection of premises for compliance.

13.20.030    Backflow-prevention device – When required.

13.20.040    Backflow-prevention device – Types required.

13.20.050    Backflow-prevention device – Specifications.

13.20.060    Tests and certified inspections.

13.20.070    Existing protection devices – When permitted.

13.20.080    Existing protection devices – Discontinuance.


13.20.010 Protection from contamination – Requirements.

The public works director or designee is responsible for the protection of the public potable water distribution system from contamination or pollution due to the backflow or back-siphonage of contaminants or pollutants through the water service connection. If, in the judgment of the public works director or designee, an approved backflow-prevention device is required at the city’s water service connection to any customer’s premises for the safety of the water system, the public works director or designee will give notice in writing to the customer to install such an approved backflow-prevention device at each service connection to the customer’s premises. The customer must immediately install such approved device or devices at the customer’s own expense, and failure, refusal or inability on the part of the customer to install the device or devices immediately constitutes a ground for discontinuing water service to the premises until such device or devices have been properly installed. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.20.020 Inspection of premises for compliance.

The customer’s system should be open for inspection at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of the city to determine whether cross-connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including violations of these regulations, exist. When such a condition becomes known, the public works director or designee shall deny or immediately discontinue service to the premises by providing a physical break in the service line until the customer has corrected the condition(s) in conformance with the state and city statutes relating to plumbing and water supplies, and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.20.030 Backflow-prevention device – When required.

An approved backflow-prevention device shall be installed on each service line to a customer’s water system at or near the property line, or immediately inside the building served, but in all cases before the first branch line leading off the service line whenever the following conditions exist:

A. In case of premises having an auxiliary water supply which is not or may not be of safe bacteriological or chemical quality and which is not acceptable as an additional source by the public works director or designee, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing a backflow-prevention device in the service line appropriate to the degree of hazard.

B. In the case of premises on which any industrial fluid or any other objectionable substance is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing a backflow-prevention device in the service line appropriate to the degree of hazard. This shall include the handling of process waters and waters originating from the utility system which have been subject to deterioration in quality.

C. In the case of premises having (1) internal cross-connections that cannot be permanently controlled, or (2) intricate plumbing and piping arrangements, or where entry to all portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or impossible to ascertain whether or not dangerous cross-connections exist, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing a backflow-prevention device in the service line. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.20.040 Backflow-prevention device – Types required.

The type of protection device required under SMC 13.20.030(A), (B) and (C) shall depend upon the degree of hazard which exists, as follows:

A. An approved air gap or an approved RP device shall be installed where the substance which could backflow is hazardous to health, e.g., sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, chemical manufacturing plants, plating plants, hospitals, mortuaries, carwashes, and medical clinics.

B. An approved double check valve assembly shall be installed where the substance which could backflow is objectionable but does not pose an unreasonable risk to health.

C. An approved testable pressure vacuum breaker shall only be installed where the substance which could backflow is objectionable, but does not pose an unreasonable risk to health and where there is no possibility of back-pressure in the downstream piping. A shutoff valve may be installed on the line downstream of a pressure vacuum breaker. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.20.050 Backflow-prevention device – Specifications.

A. Any backflow-prevention device required herein shall be of a model and size approved by the public works director or designee.

B. The term “approved backflow-prevention device” means a device that has been manufactured in full conformance with the standards established by the American Water Works Association, entitled: “AWWA C506-78 Standards for Reduced Pressure Principle and Double Check Valve Backflow Prevention Devices,” and have met completely the laboratory and field performance specifications of the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research of the University of Southern California, established by: “Specifications of Backflow Prevention Devices – No. 69-2,” dated March 1969, or the most current issue.

Said AWWA and FCCC&HR standards and specifications have been adopted by the city. Final approval shall be evidenced by a certificate of approval issued by an approved testing laboratory certifying full compliance with said AWWA standards and FCCC&HR specifications.

C. The following testing laboratory has been qualified by the public works director or designee to test and certify backflow preventers:

Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and  Hydraulic Research  University of Southern California  University Park  Los Angeles, California 90007

D. Testing laboratories other than the laboratory listed above will be added to an approved list as they are qualified by the public works director or designee.

E. Backflow preventers which may be subjected to back-pressure or back-siphonage that have been fully tested and have been granted a certificate of approval by said qualified laboratory and are listed on the laboratory’s current list of approved devices may be used without further test or qualification. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.20.060 Tests and certified inspections.

A. It shall be the duty of the customer at any premises where backflow-prevention devices are installed to have certified inspections and operational tests made at least once per year. Copies of the original test and repair reports shall be forwarded to the public works director or designee within 10 days of the date for the test/repair and no later than June 1st of each year. In those instances where the public works director or designee deems the hazard to be great enough, the public works director or designee may require certified inspections at more frequent intervals. These inspections and tests shall be at the expense of the water user, and shall be performed by a certified tester approved by the Oregon State Health Division. The customer-user shall notify the public works director or designee in advance when the tests are to be undertaken so that the public works director or the director’s designee may witness the tests if so desired.

B. The city will mail one notice informing the customer of the required reporting, testing and due date. These devices shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced at the expense of the customer-user whenever the devices are found to be defective. Records of such tests, repairs and overhaul shall be kept, and an original copy shall be sent to the public works director or designee in a timely manner. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.20.070 Existing protection devices – When permitted.

All presently installed backflow-prevention devices which do not meet the requirements of this chapter, but were approved devices for the purposes described herein at the time of installation, and which have been properly maintained, shall, except for the inspection and maintenance requirements under SMC 13.20.060, be excluded from the requirements of these rules so long as the public works director or designee is assured that they will satisfactorily protect the utility system. Whenever the existing device is moved from the present location, or requires more than minimum maintenance, or when the public works director or designee finds that the maintenance constitutes a hazard to health, the unit shall be replaced by a backflow-prevention device on the most current list of approved testable-device assemblies maintained by the Oregon State Health Authority, and in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.20.080 Existing protection devices – Discontinuance.

If an existing backflow device required by this chapter is not tested and maintained, or it is found that a backflow-prevention device has been removed or bypassed, service will be discontinued until such conditions or defects are corrected. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


Chapter 13.40 ALTERNATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL

Sections:

13.40.010    Connection to system – Permitted when.

13.40.020    Permit to connect – Requirements.

13.40.030    Permit to connect – Application and plans.

13.40.040    Permit to connect – Inspection conditions.

13.40.050    Location, capacity and other specifications.

13.40.060    Operation and maintenance.

13.40.070    Public sewer connection requirements.

13.40.080    Additional requirements.


13.40.010 Connection to system – Permitted when.

Where a public sewer is not available under the provisions of SMC 13.12.010, the building sewer may be connected to an alternate sewage disposal system. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.40.020 Permit to connect – Requirements.

Before commencement of construction of an alternate sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain written permission from the public works director and must agree to sign a waiver of the right to remonstrate against future public improvements prior to the issuance of a building permit. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.40.030 Permit to connect – Application and plans.

Upon approval of the public works director, a permit application shall be made on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as deemed necessary by the public works director. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.40.040 Permit to connect – Inspection conditions.

A permit for an alternate sewage disposal system does not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the public works director. The director shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction, and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the director when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall, when practicable, be made within 48 hours of the receipt of notice by the director. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.40.050 Location, capacity and other specifications.

The type, capacities, location and layout of an alternative sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the Department of Environmental Quality (“DEQ”) of the state, and the Marion County health department. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.40.060 Operation and maintenance.

The owner shall operate and maintain the alternate sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.40.070 Public sewer connection requirements.

At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by an alternate sewage disposal system, as provided in SMC 13.12.010, a direct connection may be made to the public sewer. Property which can be served by a public sewer system shall connect to the public sewer system if the alternate sewage disposal system requires replacement or upgrade. At the time of any connection to a public sewer, any septic tanks, cesspools or other alternate sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned, pumped clean of sludge, and filled with clean, bank-run gravel or sand. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.40.080 Additional requirements.

No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Department of Environmental Quality or other proper authority. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


Chapter 13.44 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS

Sections:

13.44.010    Construction specifications.

13.44.020    Permit – Required for sewer work.

13.44.030    Permit – Classes designated – Application.

13.44.040    Costs of installation and connection.

13.44.050    Cleanout specifications.

13.44.060    Separate sewers for each building.

13.44.070    Private sewer restrictions.

13.44.080    Leaks and extraneous discharges – Monitoring procedures.

13.44.090    Capping and inspection prior to abandonment.


13.44.010 Construction specifications.

All building sewers shall be constructed in compliance with the Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code, except where higher standards apply within the utility code. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.44.020 Permit – Required for sewer work.

No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city engineer. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.44.030 Permit – Classes designated – Application.

A. There are two classes of building sewer permits:

1. For residential and commercial service;

2. For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.

B. In either case, the owner or the owner’s agent shall make application on a form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent, in the judgment of the city engineer. No permit shall be issued until all required fees have been paid. Permit fees shall be established and revised by council resolution. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.44.040 Costs of installation and connection.

All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, lessee or occupant of a building to maintain the building sanitary sewer or private collection system in a free-flowing and watertight condition, from the structure served to the public sewer. All existing private sewers shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.44.050 Cleanout specifications.

At the connection with the public sewer and the building sewer, there shall be a cleanout of the same material as the service connection pipe furnished by the owner. The cleanout shall extend vertically to within six inches of the finished ground surface and shall be sealed with an approved cap or plug. This riser shall be used for inserting a test plug for water or air testing the building sewer, and as an auxiliary cleanout. Backfilling around the riser shall be done in such a manner as not to damage the pipe. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.44.060 Separate sewers for each building.

Every building sewer shall be separate and independent of any other building, whether connecting to a public or private sewer. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.44.070 Private sewer restrictions.

Private sewer lines shall only be allowed where the building or buildings affected are located on a single parcel of land. Private sewers shall be subject to the same design and construction standards as public sewers of the city, and shall be subject to complete review and approval by the public works director. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.44.080 Leaks and extraneous discharges – Monitoring procedures.

A. New and existing private sewers, building drains and building sewers will be monitored for leaks or discharges of extraneous water. This monitoring may take the form of, but is not limited to:

1. Direct visual observation;

2. Indirect measurement;

3. Tele-inspection; or

4. Air or water pressure tests, smoke tests, or exfiltration tests.

B. If, in the opinion of the public works director, such monitoring shows a sewer to be defective, no further proof is needed for the director to require the sewer to be repaired to current standards.

C. Existing sewer exceeding a maximum allowable infiltration/inflow rate of more than 300 gallons per day per single detached living unit, or 1,200 gallons per acre per day, are deemed unsafe and unsanitary and shall be repaired.

D. Those users who do not comply with these infiltration/inflow regulations shall have a period of time, as determined by the public works director, but not to exceed six months, to reach compliance with the regulations. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.44.090 Capping and inspection prior to abandonment.

A. Before a moving or wrecking permit is allowed to be issued, evidence must be presented showing the sewer has been properly capped and inspected. No exceptions will be allowed. All building sanitary sewer shall be capped at the public main in an approved manner by the applicant or the applicant’s contractor, and inspected by city forces prior to closure of the excavation.

B. Exception. If adequate proof can be given showing a sewer service is in usable condition and is to be reused, the inspector may allow the service to be capped at the property line. It is the applicant’s responsibility to ensure that no other structure is connected to the sewer service being abandoned. If the line abandoned is serving more than one structure, a service connection for the structure(s) still using the service must be provided. If the city engineer determines that capping at the main will cause undue hazard to the public, or if a street has been recently resurfaced, a variance to this section may be granted to require that the sewer be capped as close to the main as practical. The city will chemically seal the service at its expense. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


Chapter 13.52 RESTRICTED DISCHARGES AND PRETREATMENT

Sections:

13.52.010    Standard methods for testing and analysis.

13.52.020    Sanitary sewers – Prohibited discharges.

13.52.030    Storm sewer use requirements.

13.52.040    Nonpermitted discharges designated.

13.52.050    Prohibited discharges.

13.52.060    Rejection or pretreatment conditions.

13.52.070    Grease, oil and sand interceptors.

13.52.080    Pretreatment facilities – Operation and maintenance.

13.52.090    Control manhole for tests.

13.52.100    Special agreements not restricted.

13.52.110    Discharges prohibited without a permit.

13.52.120    Permitting existing connections.

13.52.130    Permitting new or renewed connections.

13.52.140    Wastewater permit issuance.

13.52.150    Wastewater permit duration.

13.52.160    Wastewater permit contents.

13.52.170    Wastewater permit appeals.

13.52.180    Wastewater permit modifications.

13.52.190    Wastewater permit transfer.

13.52.200    Wastewater permit reissuance.

13.52.210    Reports of potential problems.

13.52.220    Reports of significant production change.

13.52.230    Inspection and sampling.

13.52.240    Search warrants.

13.52.250    Confidential information.

13.52.270    Notification of violation.

13.52.280    Consent orders.

13.52.290    Compliance orders.

13.52.300    Cease and desist orders.

13.52.310    Emergency suspensions.

13.52.320    Permit revocation.

13.52.330    Injunctive relief.

13.52.340    Civil penalties – Industrial users only.

13.52.350    Civil penalties – Nonindustrial users.

13.52.360    Remedies nonexclusive.

13.52.370    Water supply severance.

13.52.380    Administrative review.


13.52.010 Standard methods for testing and analysis.

A. All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of water and waste to which reference is made in the utility code shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at such control manhole. In the event that no special manhole is required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected.

B. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect the effluent may be having on the sewer works and to determine the possible impact to the public welfare. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.52.020 Sanitary sewers – Prohibited discharges.

No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or polluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.52.030 Storm sewer use requirements.

Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the public works director. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged to a storm sewer or natural outlet, upon written approval of the director. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.52.040 Nonpermitted discharges designated.

No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any one of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:

A. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas; nor any kerosene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides;

B. Any water or waste containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other waste, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanides in excess of two mg/l of cyanide in the waste as discharged to the public sewer;

C. Any water and waste having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works;

D. Solids or visceral substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, feathers, tar, asphalt, lubricating oil, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshing, entrails, paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.52.050 Prohibited discharges.

A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely, in the opinion of the public works director or designee, that such wastes can harm either the sewer system, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger public health, safety or welfare, or constitute a nuisance. In forming such opinion, the public works director or designee will give consideration to such factors as to quantities of waste in relation to flows and velocities in the sewer system, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of waste in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors.

B. The substances prohibited are:

1. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees centigrade);

2. Any water or waste containing fats, gas, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l, or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (zero and 65 degrees centigrade), or which has a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant, and in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant receiving water which exceeds 105 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees centigrade);

3. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the public works director;

4. Any water or waste containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not;

5. Any water or waste containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, lead, nickel, silver, mercury, cadmium or other similar toxic substances which exceed EPA or DEQ standards;

6. Any water or waste containing high concentrations of phenols or other taste- or odor-producing substances;

7. Any radioactive waste or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed state or federal requirements;

8. Any water or waste having a pH in excess of 9.5;

9. Materials which exert or cause:

a. Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids, such as fuller’s earth, lime slurries and lime residues, or of dissolved solids such as sodium chloride and sodium sulphate,

b. Excessive discoloration, such as dye waste and vegetable tanning solutions,

c. Unusual BOD or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works,

d. Unusual volume of flow or concentration of waste constituting slugs, as defined in Chapter 13.02 SMC;

10. Water or waste containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving water. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.52.060 Rejection or pretreatment conditions.

If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics outlined in SMC 13.52.050, and which may have a detrimental effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving water, or which otherwise may create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the public works director may:

A. Reject the wastes;

B. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewer;

C. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or

D. Require payment to cover any increase of administering the wastewater permit, the added cost of chemicals needed to address the situation, and the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes, fees or other charges under the provisions of the utility code. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.52.070 Grease, oil and sand interceptors.

Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the public works director, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, and/or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the public works director, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.52.080 Pretreatment facilities – Operation and maintenance.

Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any water or waste, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at the owner’s own expense. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.52.090 Control manhole for tests.

When required by the public works director, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole, together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the public works director. Any cost to the city for required non-city sampling or testing shall be paid by the owner affected. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at the owner’s own expense, and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.52.100 Special agreements not restricted.

A. No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor, by the industrial concern, and provided such agreement is in compliance with EPA and DEQ regulations.

B. When requested, an industrial user must submit information on a survey form prepared by the public works director before commencing discharge into the city wastewater system, identifying the nature and characteristics of the user’s wastewater. The director may periodically require industrial users to update the survey. Failure to complete this survey within the time set by the director is grounds for terminating service to the industrial user. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.52.110 Discharges prohibited without a permit.

A. No industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the city’s municipal wastewater system without first obtaining a wastewater permit.

B. No permittee shall violate the terms and conditions of a wastewater permit issued pursuant to this chapter. Obtaining a wastewater permit does not relieve a permittee from the obligation to obtain other permits required by federal, state, or local law. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.52.120 Permitting existing connections. 

Any industrial user, not already possessing a permit, that discharges industrial waste into the city wastewater system prior to the effective date of this chapter and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future shall, within 90 days after the effective date, apply to the city for a wastewater permit, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the system to continue after 180 days of the effective date except in accordance with a permit issued by the public works director. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.52.130 Permitting new or renewed connections.

A. Any industrial user proposing to begin or to recommence discharging industrial wastes directly or indirectly into the city wastewater system must obtain a wastewater permit prior to beginning or recommencing such discharge.

B. An application for a permit renewal must be received at least 90 days before the current permit expires. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.52.140 Wastewater permit issuance.

A. Within 60 days of the date the public works director deems a permit application complete, the director will evaluate the data furnished by the industrial user and determine whether a wastewater permit should be issued. The director will issue a permit within said 60 days unless a circumstance identified in subsection (B) of this section exists.

B. If any wastewater proposed to be discharged to the city wastewater system contains substances identified or possesses the characteristics enumerated in SMC 13.52.040 and 13.52.050 which, in the director’s judgment, may have a deleterious effect upon the city wastewater system, processes, equipment, or waters of the state, or otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the director may:

1. Refuse to permit the discharge;

2. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge into the city wastewater system; or

3. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.52.150 Wastewater permit duration. 

Permits shall be issued for a time period of five years. Each permit shall indicate the specific date upon which it will expire. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.52.160 Wastewater permit contents. 

A wastewater permit shall include such conditions deemed reasonably necessary by the public works director, or designee, to prevent pass through or interference and to implement the objectives of this chapter.

A. Wastewater permits shall, at a minimum, contain:

1. A statement of permit duration;

2. A statement the permit is nontransferable;

3. Effluent limits applicable to the industrial user, including best management practices, based on applicable pretreatment standards in 40 CFR Part 403, categorical pretreatment requirements, local limits, and state and local law;

4. Monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record keeping requirements, including an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law;

5. Statement of applicable penalties for violation of pretreatment standards, pretreatment requirements, and compliance schedules; and

6. Requirements to control spills or slug discharges as determined necessary by the POTW, including conditions for emergency suspension of the permit, or conditions thereof.

B. Permits may contain:

1. Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;

2. Limits on the instantaneous daily and monthly average, and/or maximum concentration, mass, or other measure of identified wastewater pollutants or properties;

3. Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology or construction of appropriate containment devices or other similar technologies or devices designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works;

4. Development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or routine discharges;

5. Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the city wastewater system;

6. Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment;

7. Specifications for monitoring programs, which may include designation of sampling locations and frequency of sampling; the number, types, and standards for tests; and reporting schedules;

8. Requirements for immediate reporting of any instance of noncompliance and for automatic resampling and reporting within 30 days of such noncompliance where monitoring indicates a violation;

9. Compliance schedules for meeting pretreatment standards and pretreatment requirements;

10. Requirements for submission of periodic monitoring or special notification reports;

11. Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge, and affording the director or his designee access thereto;

12. Requirements for prior notification and approval by the public works director, or designee, of any introduction of new wastewater pollutants or any unpermitted change in the volume or character of wastewater prior to introduction in the city wastewater system;

13. Requirements for prior notification to and approval by the director of any significant change in the manufacturing and/or pretreatment process;

14. Requirements for immediate notification of excessive, accidental, or slug discharges, or other discharge which may cause any problems to the city wastewater system;

15. A statement that compliance with the permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards and pretreatment requirements, including those which become effective during the term of the permit; and

16. Other conditions deemed appropriate by the director to ensure compliance with this chapter; state and federal laws, rules, and regulations; and the terms of the permit. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.52.170 Wastewater permit appeals. 

Any person, including the permittee, may appeal the conditions imposed in a permit, or the issuance or denial of a permit within 10 days of the issuance of the final permit by filing a notice of appeal, as provided for in SMC 13.52.380.

A. Failure to submit a timely notice of appeal shall be a waiver of all rights to administrative review.

B. In addition to the requirements in SMC 13.52.380, the appellant shall indicate the specific objection, the reasons for the objection, and alternative conditions, if any, the appellant seeks to have placed in the permit.

C. The effectiveness of the permit shall not be stayed pending resolution of appeal. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.52.180 Wastewater permit modifications.

A. The public works director may modify a permit for good cause including, but not limited to, the following:

1. To incorporate any newly revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or pretreatment requirements;

2. To address significant alterations or additions to the industrial user’s operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of permit issuance;

3. A change in the city wastewater system that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the permitted discharge;

4. Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the city wastewater system, city personnel, or waters of the state;

5. Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater permit;

6. Misrepresentation or failure to disclose fully all relevant facts in the permit application or in any required reporting;

7. A revision or grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; or

8. To correct typographical or other errors in the permit.

B. The filing of a request by the permittee for a permit modification does not stay any permit condition. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.52.190 Wastewater permit transfer. 

Permits may not be reassigned or transferred from the permittee to a new industrial user. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.52.200 Wastewater permit reissuance. 

An industrial user shall apply for permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application no later than 90 days before the expiration of the user’s permit. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.52.210 Reports of potential problems.

A. If an accidental, slug, or other discharge occurs which may cause problems for the city wastewater system, the user shall immediately notify the city by telephone of the incident. Notification shall include the location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user.

B. Unless waived by the director, within five days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, expense, loss, damage, or other liability that may be incurred or imposed as a result of damage to the city wastewater system, natural resources, or persons or property.

C. Failure to notify the city of potential problem discharges shall be deemed a separate violation of this chapter.

D. Industrial users shall prominently post a notice on a bulletin board or other similar place readily accessible to the user’s employees, advising the employees of whom to call in the event of a potential problem discharge, and shall train all employees in the emergency notification procedure.

E. Where the city has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial user, the control authority must perform the repeat sampling and analysis unless it notifies the user of the violation and requires the user to perform the repeat analysis. Resampling may not be required if:

1. The city performs sampling at the industrial user at a frequency of at least once per month, or the city performs sampling at the user between the time when the initial sampling was conducted and the time when the user or the control authority receives the results of this sampling.

2. Cost to the city for repeat analysis may be recouped per SMC 13.52.060. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.52.220 Reports of significant production change. 

An industrial user operating under a waste discharge permit incorporating equivalent mass or concentration limits calculated from a production-based standard shall notify the city within two business days after the user has a reasonable basis to know that the production level will significantly change within the next calendar month. Any user not notifying the city of such anticipated change will be required to meet the mass or concentration limits in its permit that were based on the original estimate of the long-term average production rate. For purposes of this section the term “significantly” will be defined in the permit. An industrial user is not required to report or warn of a production change unless it will change the industrial discharge to an extent not allowed by the industrial user’s permit. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.52.230 Inspection and sampling.

A. An industrial user shall allow the city to enter the facilities of the user without unreasonable delay, to ascertain whether the user is complying with pretreatment standards and pretreatment requirements. Industrial users shall allow the public works director, or designee, ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties.

B. If an industrial user has security measures that require identification and clearance before entry, the industrial user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that upon presentation of proper identification personnel from the city, state, and the EPA will be permitted entry without unreasonable delay to perform their specific responsibilities.

C. The city, state, and the EPA shall have the right to set up or require installation of such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the industrial user’s operations.

D. The city may require the industrial user to install all necessary monitoring equipment. The facility’s sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in safe and proper operating condition by the industrial user at the industrial user’s expense. A qualified technician must calibrate all devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality at least twice yearly to ensure accuracy.

E. Any obstruction to safe and easy access to the industrial facility shall be promptly removed by the industrial user at the request of the director and shall not be replaced. The costs of removal shall be borne by the industrial user.

F. Unreasonable delays in allowing city personnel access to the industrial user’s premises shall be a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.52.240 Search warrants. 

If the director is refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and has probable cause to believe there may be a violation to this chapter or needs to conduct an inspection as part of a routine program designed to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, the director may apply for a search warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction. The application shall identify the specific location to be searched, and shall specify what locations may be searched and what property may be seized. After issuance, the director will serve the warrant at reasonable hours. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.52.250 Confidential information.

A. Information and data on an industrial user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits, monitoring programs, and city inspection and sampling activities shall be available to the public without restriction unless the industrial user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city attorney that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets, and are exempt from disclosure under applicable law.

B. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other effluent data as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 are not confidential and will be available to the public without restriction.

C. Any information determined to be exempt from disclosure under subsection (A) of this section shall remain confidential, and portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be available for public inspection; provided, that such information shall be made available to governmental agencies for uses related to this chapter or the NPDES program. Notwithstanding subsection (A) of this section, no information is confidential if the information is relevant to, and necessary for, enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report.

D. For the purposes of this section, a specific request is made when the words “confidential business information” are stamped on each page containing such information. If no such specific request is made at the time of furnishing the report, the city may make the information available to the public without further notice.

E. All costs, expenses and attorney’s fees associated with defending a request for confidential information shall be the responsibility of the industrial user requesting confidentiality. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.52.270 Notification of violation. 

Whenever any industrial user has violated or is violating this chapter, a wastewater permit or order issued hereunder, or any pretreatment standard or pretreatment requirement, the director may issue a written notice of violation. Within 10 days of the receipt of this notice, the industrial user shall submit an explanation of the violation and a detailed plan for the satisfactory correction of the violation and the prevention of future violation. Submission of this plan does not relieve the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the city authority to take emergency action without first issuing a notice of violation. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.52.280 Consent orders. 

The director may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with an industrial user to resolve issues of noncompliance. Such orders shall include the specific action to be taken by the industrial user to correct noncompliance within a time period specified in the order. Consent orders shall be judicially enforceable, and any costs, including attorney’s fees, incurred by the city in seeking such enforcement shall be assessed against the industrial user as part of any judgment entered therein. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.52.290 Compliance orders. 

When the director finds an industrial user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, or a permit or order issued hereunder, or any pretreatment standard or pretreatment requirement, the director may issue an order discontinuing the industrial user’s sewer service unless compliance is obtained within a time certain stated in the order. Compliance orders may contain other requirements necessary and appropriate to correct noncompliance, including additional monitoring and changes to management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the city wastewater system. The director may require additional monitoring for at least 90 days after consistent compliance has been achieved, after which monitoring conditions set forth in industrial user’s discharge permit shall be followed. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.52.300 Cease and desist orders.

A. When an industrial user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, permits or orders issued hereunder, or any pretreatment standard or pretreatment requirement, the director may issue a notice and proposed order to the industrial user to cease and desist all such violations and commanding the user to:

1. Immediately comply with all requirements.

2. Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address the continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.

B. The director may order any industrial user that causes or contributes to a violation of this chapter, wastewater permits or orders issued hereunder, or any pretreatment standard or pretreatment requirement to appear and show cause why a cease and desist order should not be issued.

C. The city will serve notice on the industrial user specifying the time and place for hearing, the nature of the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a direction that the user appear and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served upon the industrial user or the user’s authorized representative, personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, at least 10 days prior to the hearing. A cease and desist order may be issued immediately following the hearing. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.52.310 Emergency suspensions.

A. The director may immediately suspend any user’s discharge that threatens to interfere with the operation of the city wastewater system, endangers the environment, or may cause violation of the NPDES permit.

B. Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately terminate all discharges into the city wastewater system. In the event a user fails to immediately and voluntarily comply with the suspension order, the director may take such steps deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the user’s connection to the city wastewater system. The director may allow the user to recommence discharge when the user demonstrates to the satisfaction of the director that endangerment has passed, unless termination proceedings under SMC 13.52.370 have been initiated.

C. No hearing shall be required prior to any emergency suspension. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.52.320 Permit revocation.

A. An industrial wastewater permit may be revoked if the user:

1. Fails to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge;

2. Fails to accurately report wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge;

3. Falsifies monitoring reports;

4. Refuses reasonable access to the user’s premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling;

5. Tampers with monitoring equipment;

6. Refuses to allow the city timely access to the facility premises and records;

7. Fails to meet effluent limitations;

8. Fails to pay fines;

9. Fails to pay sewer charges;

10. Fails to meet compliance schedules;

11. Fails to complete a wastewater survey; or

12. Violates any pretreatment standard or pretreatment requirement, the user’s permit, any order issued pursuant to this chapter, or any provision of this chapter.

B. Industrial users shall be notified of proposed termination and be offered an opportunity to appear and show cause why the permit should not be revoked. Termination of a permit shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other enforcement action against the user.

C. Notice shall be served on the industrial user specifying the time and place for the show cause hearing, the reasons for permit revocation, and a direction that the user appear and show cause why the permit should not be revoked. The notice of the hearing shall be served upon the industrial user or the user’s authorized representative personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, at least 10 days prior to the hearing. An order revoking the permit may be issued immediately after the hearing. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.52.330 Injunctive relief. 

In addition to other relief, the city attorney may petition a court of competent jurisdiction for the issuance of temporary or permanent injunction to restrain a violation, or compel specific performance, of the terms and conditions of the wastewater permit, order, pretreatment standard or pretreatment requirement, or other provision of this chapter. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.52.340 Civil penalties – Industrial users only.

A. The director may impose upon any industrial user that has violated or continues to violate this chapter, any order or permit hereunder, or any pretreatment standard or pretreatment requirement a maximum civil penalty of $2,500 per violation per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties may accrue for each day during the period of this violation.

B. Where appropriate, the director may accept mitigation projects in lieu of the payment of civil penalties where the project provides a valuable service to the city and the industrial user’s expense in undertaking the project is at least 150 percent of the civil penalty.

C. For purposes of this section, the term “civil penalty” means the same as the term “administrative fine” as set forth in any enforcement response plan adopted by the city council pursuant to this chapter’s authority. Any civil penalty assessed pursuant to this section will be based on the severity of the violation using the factors outlined in the enforcement response plan. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.52.350 Civil penalties – Nonindustrial users.

A. A violation of SMC 13.52.020, 13.52.040(A), (B) or (C), or 13.52.200 is punishable by a civil penalty not exceeding $2,500.

B. A violation of any other provision of this chapter is punishable by a civil penalty of not less than $50.00. The second and subsequent violation of the same provision of this chapter within any one-year period is punishable by a civil penalty of not less than $200.00.

C. Any civil penalty assessed pursuant to this section will be based on the severity of the violation using the factors outlined in a city council-adopted enforcement response plan, even if the offender is not a party to that plan. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.52.360 Remedies nonexclusive. 

The public works director shall prepare an enforcement response plan to be adopted by a resolution of the city council for use with industrial users related to any violation of this chapter. The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive, and the director may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user, and may bring more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city’s enforcement response plan; however, the director may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.52.370 Water supply severance. 

Whenever an industrial user has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter or orders or permits issued hereunder, water service to the industrial user may be severed and service will only be resumed, at the user’s expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


13.52.380 Administrative review.

A. Any person aggrieved by any decision or action of the director may appeal such decision or action as provided in this section.

B. The appeal must be filed with the city manager within 30 days after the date of the decision or action being appealed, must be in writing and must state:

1. The name and address of the appellant;

2. Nature of the decision or action being appealed;

3. The reason the decision or action is incorrect; and

4. What the correct decision or action should be.

Within 10 days of an appeal being filed with the city manager, the city manager will meet with the appealing industrial user and attempt to resolve the matter prior to action by the city council.

C. An appellant who fails to file such a statement within the time permitted waives all objections, and the appeal shall not be considered.

D. Unless the appellant and city agree to a longer period, an appeal shall be heard by the city council within 45 days of the receipt of the notice of appeal. At least 10 days prior to the hearing, the city shall mail notice of the time and location of the hearing to the appellant.

E. The city council will hear and determine the appeal on the basis of the appellant’s written statement and any additional evidence the council deems appropriate. At the hearing, the appellant may present testimony and oral arguments personally or by counsel.

F. If the appeal is from the modification of a permit pursuant to the imposition of a civil penalty, the burden is on the director to prove that the modification or civil penalty was proper. If the appeal is from the denial of a permit, the burden is on the appellant to prove that the denial was improper. In all other cases the burden of proof is on the proponent of a fact or position.

G. The city council will issue a written decision within 30 days of the hearing date. The decision of the city council is final.

H. An appeal fee established by council resolution must accompany the statement of appeal. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)


Chapter 13.70 SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGES

Sections:

13.70.010    Purpose.

13.70.020    Scope.

13.70.030    Definitions.

13.70.040    System development charge established.

13.70.050    Methodology.

13.70.060    Authorized expenditures.

13.70.070    Expenditure restrictions.

13.70.080    Improvement plan.

13.70.090    Collection of charge.

13.70.100    Delinquent charges – Hearing.

13.70.110    Exemptions.

13.70.120    Credits.

13.70.125    Notice.

13.70.130    Segregation and use of revenue.

13.70.140    Appeal procedure.

13.70.150    Prohibited connection.

13.70.160    Penalty.

13.70.170    Construction.

13.70.180    Severability.

13.70.190    Installment payments.


13.70.010 Purpose.

The purpose of the system development charge is to impose a portion of the cost of capital improvements for the water system, sewer system, storm drainage, transportation, and parks and recreation capital improvement projects that create the need for or increase the demands on capital improvements. (Ord. 94-135 § 1, 1994; Ord. 92-110 § 2, 1992)


13.70.020 Scope.

The system development charge imposed by this chapter is separate from and in addition to any applicable tax, assessment, charge or fee otherwise provided by law or imposed as a condition of development. (Ord. 92-110 § 2, 1992)


13.70.030 Definitions.

For purposes of this chapter, the following mean:

A. “Capital improvements” means facilities or assets used for:

1. Water supply, treatment and distribution;

2. Waste water collection, transmission, treatment disposal;

3. Drainage and flood control;

4. Parks and recreation; or

5. Transportation.

B. “Permittee” means the person to whom a building permit, development permit, a permit or plan approval to connect the sewer or water system, or right-of-way access permit is issued.

C. “Qualified public improvements” means a capital improvement that is:

1. Required as a condition of development approval; and either

2. Identified in the plan adopted pursuant to SMC 13.70.080; or

3. Adopted into the plan pursuant to SMC 13.70.080 at any time prior to final completion and acceptance thereof; and either

4. Not located on or contiguous to a parcel of land that is the subject of the development approval; or

5. Located in whole or in part on or contiguous to property that is the subject of development approval and required to be built larger or with greater capacity than is necessary to the particular development project to which the improvement fee is related.

6. For purposes of this definition, “contiguous” means in a public way which abuts the parcel.

D. “Development” means conducting a building or mining operation, making a physical change in the use or appearance of a structure or land, and creating or terminating a right of access.

E. “Improvement fee” means a fee for costs associated with capital improvements to be constructed after the date the fee is adopted pursuant to SMC 13.70.040.

F. “Land area” means the area of a parcel of land as measured by projection of the parcel boundaries upon a horizontal plane with the exception of a portion of the parcel within a recorded right-of-way or easement subject to a servitude for a public street or scenic or preservation purpose.

G. “Owner” means the owner or owners of record title or the purchaser or purchasers under a recorded sales agreement, and other persons having an interest of record in the described real property.

H. “Parcel of land” means a lot, parcel, block or other tract of land that is occupied or may be occupied by a structure or structures or other use and that includes the yards and other open spaces required under the zoning, subdivision or other development ordinance.

I. “Reimbursement fee” means a fee for costs associated with capital improvements constructed or under construction on the date the fee is adopted pursuant to SMC 13.70.040.

J. “System development charge” means a reimbursement fee, an improvement fee or a combination thereof assessed or collected at the time of increased usage of a capital improvement, at the time of issuance of a development permit or building permit, or at the time of connection to the capital improvement. “System development charge” includes that portion of a sewer or water system connection charge that is greater than the amount necessary to reimburse the city for its average cost of inspecting and installing connections with water and sewer facilities. “System development charge” does not include fees assessed or collected as part of a local improvement district or a charge in lieu of a local improvement district assessment or the cost of complying with requirements or conditions imposed by a land use decision. (Ord. 98-109, 1998; Ord. 94-135 § 2, 1994; Ord. 92-110 § 2, 1992)


13.70.040 System development charge established.

A. System development charges shall be established and may be revised by resolution of the council.

B. Unless otherwise exempted by the provisions of this chapter or other local or state law, a system development charge is imposed upon all parcels of land within the city, and upon all lands outside the boundary of the city that connect to or otherwise use the sewer facilities, storm sewers, or water facilities of the city. (Ord. 92-110 § 2, 1992)


13.70.050 Methodology.

A. The methodology used to establish the reimbursement fee shall consider the cost of then-existing facilities, prior contributions by then-existing users, the value of unused capacity, rate-making principals employed to finance publicly owned capital improvements, and other relevant factors identified by the council. The methodology shall promote the objective that future systems users shall contribute no more than an equitable share of the cost of then-existing facilities.

B. The methodology used to establish the improvement fee shall consider the cost of projected capital improvements needed to increase the capacity of the systems to which the fee is related.

C. The methodology used to establish the improvement fee or the reimbursement fee, or both, shall be adopted by resolution of the council. (Ord. 92-110 § 2, 1992)


13.70.060 Authorized expenditures.

A. Reimbursement fees shall be applied only to capital improvements associated with the systems for which the fees are assessed, including expenditures relating to repayment of indebtedness.

B. 1. Improvement fees shall be spent only on capacity increasing capital improvements, including expenditures relating to repayment of future debt for the improvements. An increase in system capacity occurs if a capital improvement increases the level of performance or service provided by existing facilities or provides new facilities. The portion of the capital improvements funded by improvement fees must be related to demands created by development.

2. A capital improvement being funded wholly or in part from revenues derived from the improvement fee shall be included in the plan adopted by the city pursuant to SMC 13.70.080.

C. Notwithstanding subsections A and B of this section, system development charge revenues may be expended on the direct costs of complying with the provisions of this chapter, including the costs of developing system development charge methodologies and providing an annual accounting of system development charge expenditures. (Ord. 92-110 § 2, 1992)


13.70.070 Expenditure restrictions.

A. System development charges shall not be expended for costs associated with the construction of administrative office facilities that are more than an incidental part of other capital improvements.

B. System development charges shall not be expended for costs of the operation or routine maintenance of capital improvements. (Ord. 05-03 § 1, 2005; Ord. 94-135 § 4, 1994; Ord. 92-110 § 2, 1992)


13.70.080 Improvement plan.

The council shall adopt a plan that:

A. Lists the capital improvements that may be funded with improvement fee revenues;

B. Lists the estimated cost and time of construction of each improvement; and

C. May be modified at any time by council resolution. (Ord. 98-109 § 3, 1998; Ord. 92-110 § 2, 1992)


13.70.090 Collection of charge.

A. The systems development charges established by resolution pursuant to this chapter are payable upon issuance of:

1. A building permit;

2. A development permit for development not requiring the issuance of a building permit; 

3. A permit to connect to the sewer system; or

4. A permit to connect to the water system.

B. If no building, development, or connection permit is required, the system development charge is payable at the time the usage of the capital improvement is increased.

C. If development is commenced or connection is made to the water or sewer systems without an appropriate permit, the system development charge is immediately payable upon the earliest date that a permit was required.

D. The city manager or designee shall collect the applicable system development charge when a permit that allows building or development of a parcel is issued or when a connection to the water or sewer system of the city is made.

E. The city manager or designee shall not issue such permit or allow such connection until the charge has been paid in full, or until provision for payment has been made pursuant to SMC 13.70.190, or unless an exemption is granted pursuant to SMC 13.70.110. (Ord. 05-03 § 2, 2005; Ord. 04-104 § 1, 2004; Ord. 92-110 § 2, 1992)


13.70.100 Delinquent charges – Hearing.

A. When, for any reason, the system development charge has not been paid, the city manager shall report to the council the amount of the uncollected charge, the description of the real property to which the charge is attributable, the date upon which the charge was due, and the name of the owner.

B. The city council shall schedule a public hearing on the matter and direct that notice of the hearing be given to each owner with a copy of the city manager’s report concerning the unpaid charge. Notice of the hearing shall be given either personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by both personal and mailed notice, and by posting notice on the parcel at least 10 days before the date set for the hearing.

C. At the hearing, the council may accept, reject or modify the determination of the city manager as set forth in the report. If the council finds that a system development charge is unpaid and uncollected, it shall direct the city manager to docket the unpaid and uncollected system development charge in the lien docket. Upon completion of the docketing, the city shall have a lien against the described land for the full amount of the unpaid charge, together with interest at the legal rate of 10 percent and with the city’s actual cost of serving notice of the hearing on the owners. The lien shall be enforceable in the manner provided in ORS Chapter 223. (Ord. 92-110 § 2, 1992)


13.70.110 Exemptions.

A. Structures and uses established and existing on or before the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter are exempt from a system development charge, except water and sewer charges, to the extent of the structure or use then existing and to the extent of the parcel of land as it is constituted on that date. Structures and uses affected by this subsection shall pay the water or sewer charges pursuant to the terms of this chapter upon the receipt of a permit to connect to the water or sewer system.

B. Additions to single-family dwellings are exempt from all portions of the system development charge.

C. An alteration, addition, replacement or change in use that does not increase the parcel’s or structure’s use of the public improvement facility are exempt from all portions of the system development charge.

D. A project financed by city revenues is exempt from all portions of the system development charge.

E. A project financed by Habitat for Humanity provided that such projects provide housing to families at or below the city’s 80 percent median income level as defined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. (Ord. 02-111, 2002; Ord. 92-110 § 2, 1992)


13.70.120 Credits.

A. A system development charge shall be imposed when a change of use of a parcel or structure occurs, but credit shall be given for the computed system development charge to the extent that prior structures existed and services were established on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. The credit so computed shall not exceed the calculated system development charge. No refund shall be made on account of such credit.

B. A credit shall be given to the permittee/developer for qualified public improvements required to be built as capacity-increasing capital facilities with greater capacity than is necessary for the particular development project, as defined in ORS 223.307. The credit shall apply only for the portion of the improvement that exceeds the city’s minimum standard facility size or capacity needed to serve the development, including all future phases or adjacent properties with common ownership. In no case shall credits be given for more than the over-capacity portion of a public improvement required as part of the development approval.

C. The applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating that a particular improvement qualifies for credit under this subsection. The credit shall not exceed the improvement fee and shall require acceptance of the public improvement and receipt of written confirmation thereof from the city manager or designee.

D. The request for credit for a qualified public improvement shall be filed with the city manager, or his designee, not later than 60 days after approval of the development by the city. The request shall include:

1. A legal description of all land within the development;

2. A legal description of any land proposed to be donated as part of the qualified public improvement;

3. A written appraisal of the fair market value of donated lands which are a part of the qualified public improvement. The appraisal shall be prepared by a certified professional appraiser and based upon comparable sales of similar property between unrelated parties;

4. A detailed written estimate of proposed construction costs for each qualified public improvement, prepared by a professional engineer. The estimate shall include separate costs for that portion of each improvement that exceeds the city’s minimum standard facility size or capacity;

5. If the qualified public improvement is not currently on the city’s capital improvement plan, a statement requesting the addition of the improvement onto the plan shall be made in writing;

6. The signatures of all legal owners of the development property together with the designation of who is to receive any credits and the designated percentage for each, if more than one person or entity is designated.

E. When the construction of a qualified public improvement located in whole or in part or contiguous to the property that is the subject of development approval gives rise to a credit amount greater than the improvement fee that would otherwise be levied against the project, the credit in excess of the improvement fee for the original development project may be applied against improvement fees that accrue in subsequent phases of the original development project.

F. Credits shall not be transferable from one development to another.

G. Credits shall not be transferable from one type of system development charge to another.

H. Credits shall be used within 10 years from the date the credit is given.

I. Where a public improvement qualifies for both credits for system development charges from the city and reimbursement from such other property owners receiving service from the improvement pursuant to Chapter 12.08 SMC, the developer shall only be entitled to a combined total redeemed credit and reimbursement amount not greater than the total qualified public improvement cost.

J. Where a public improvement qualifies for both credits pursuant to this section and reimbursement pursuant to Chapter 12.08 SMC, the city shall assume any right for reimbursement for any credits redeemed by a developer for that portion of the improvement up to and including the city standard for size or capacity. (Ord. 09-09 § 1, 2009; Ord. 98-109 § 2, 1998; Ord. 94-135 § 5, 1994; Ord. 92-110 § 2, 1992)


13.70.125 Notice.

A. The city shall maintain a list of persons who have made a written request for notification prior to adoption or amendment of a methodology for any system development charge. Written notice shall be mailed to persons on the list at least 45 days prior to the first hearing to adopt or amend a system development charge. The methodology supporting the adoption or amendment shall be available at least 30 days prior to the first hearing to adopt or amend a system development charge. The failure of a person on the list to receive a notice that was mailed shall not invalidate the action of the city.

B. The city may periodically delete names from the list, but at least 30 days prior to removing a name from the list, the city must notify the person whose name is to be deleted that a new written request for notification is required if the person wishes to remain on the notification list. (Ord. 94-135 § 6, 1994)


13.70.130 Segregation and use of revenue.

A. All funds derived from a particular type of system development charge are to be segregated by accounting practices from all other funds of the city. That portion of the system development charge calculated and collected on account of a specific facility system shall be used for no purpose other than those set forth in SMC 13.70.060.

B. The city manager shall provide the city council with an annual accounting, based on the city’s fiscal year, for system development charges showing the total amount of system development charge revenues collected for each type of facility and the projects funded from each account. (Ord. 92-110 § 2, 1992)


13.70.140 Appeal procedure.

A. A person challenging the propriety of an expenditure of system development charge revenues may appeal the decision or the expenditure to the city council by filing a written request with the city manager describing with particularity the decision of the city manager and the expenditure from which the person appeals. An appeal of an expenditure must be filed within two years of the date of the alleged improper expenditure.

B. Appeals of any other decision required or permitted to be made to the city manager under this chapter must be filed within 10 days of the date of the decision.

C. After providing notice to the appellant, the council shall determine whether the city manager’s decision or the expenditure is in accordance with this chapter and the provisions of ORS 223.297 to 223.314 and may affirm, modify or overrule the decisions. If the council determines that there has been an improper expenditure of system development charge revenues, the council shall direct that a sum equal to the misspent amount shall be deposited within one year to the credit of the account or fund from which it was spent.

D. A legal action challenging the methodology adopted by the council pursuant to SMC 13.70.050 shall not be filed later than 60 days after the adoption. (Ord. 92-110 § 2, 1992)


13.70.150 Prohibited connection.

No person may connect to the water or sewer systems of the city unless the appropriate system development charge has been paid or the lien or installment payment method has been applied for and approved. (Ord. 92-110 § 2, 1992)


13.70.160 Penalty.

Violation of Chapter 13.70 SMC is punishable by a fine as adopted by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 92-110 § 2, 1992)


13.70.170 Construction.

The rules of statutory construction contained in ORS Chapter 174 are adopted and by this reference made a part of this chapter. (Ord. 92-110 § 2, 1992)


13.70.180 Severability.

The invalidity of a section or subsection of this chapter shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections or subsections. (Ord. 92-110 § 2, 1992)


13.70.190 Installment payments.

A. When an eligible systems development charge is due and collectable, the owner of the parcel of land subject to the development charge may apply for payment in up to 40 semi-annual installments, to include interest on the unpaid balance, in accordance with ORS 223.208 and city ordinances. In addition to single-family residences and multifamily dwellings, the city hereby also authorizes the use of installment payments for all types of development, including but not limited to commercial and industrial properties. The application shall provide that the owner agrees to pay an additional specified amount for bond issuance and administration costs, which shall be determined on the same basis as the most recent bond issuance and administration costs charged to persons for bonding assessments for local improvements. The application shall provide that the owner agrees to pay interest at the rate of eight percent per annum on the unpaid balance until the bonds are sold and thereafter the rate shall be the net effective interest rate on the bond issue rounded up to the next one-tenth of one percent. The application shall also provide that the owner agrees to pay a billing charge to be added to each installment. The billing charge shall be a prorated share of the actual cost of billing and keeping records of installment payment accounts. The amount of the billing charge shall be determined from time to time by the finance director. 

B. The city manager shall provide application forms for installment payments which shall include a waiver of all rights to contest the validity of the lien except for the correction of computational errors. The applicant shall pay an administration fee in cash at the time of application in the amount of three percent of the balance due or $25.00, whichever is greater. 

C. An application for installment payments shall have the burden of demonstrating the applicant’s authority to assent to the imposition of a lien on the parcel and that the interest of the applicant is adequate to secure payment of the lien. 

D. Upon acceptance of the application, the lien shall be entered in the lien docket. From that time the city shall have a first lien upon the described parcel for the amount of the systems development charge, together with interest on the unpaid balance at the rate established by the council. The lien shall be enforceable in the manner provided in ORS Chapter 223. 

E. Only those systems development charges designed to finance the purchase or development of a public park or recreational facility, or the construction, extension or enlargement of a street, storm sewer, community water supply or sewerage or disposal system (the last three facilities as defined in ORS 199.464), imposed by the city as a condition to issuance of any occupancy permit or imposed at some other time determined by ordinance, are eligible for payment in installments as set forth in this section. (Ord. 05-03 § 3, 2005)


Chapter 13.90 EQUIVALENT ASSESSMENT CONNECTION CHARGE

Sections:

13.90.010    	Purpose.

13.90.020    	Determination of equivalent assessment charge.

13.90.030    	Charge imposed.

13.90.040    	Relation to other connection charges.

13.90.050    	Charge due and payable.

13.90.060    	Payment deferral.

13.90.070    	Collection.

13.90.080    	Violations.

13.90.090    	Penalty.


13.90.010 Purpose.

For some time, the city council has had a policy of assessing properties that benefit from potential utilization of a public improvement. Those assessments are levied to equitably distribute the original cost of initial installation of the water and sewer mains to all the city properties benefiting from the use of those water and sewer mains. Those assessments were also levied to permit the city to recover the costs of those mains which were originally financed by the water fund or sewer fund. State law does not authorize a city to assess properties outside of the municipal boundaries, but does authorize the city to construct extraterritorial utility systems. Such extraterritorial utility systems may be determined by the council to be “benefited” by the construction of the utility improvements near their location, and therefore will be subject to an equivalent assessment charge. After appropriate and lengthy review of current policies, and comments of the general public, the city council has determined that it is reasonable to enact and impose an equivalent assessment charge for those properties that benefited from the provision of a public improvement but were unable to be assessed at the time of the special assessment district. (Ord. 03-115 § 1.1.1, 2003)


13.90.020 Determination of equivalent assessment charge.

An equivalent assessment charge shall be collected at the time of hook up/connection to water mains or sewer lines adjacent to those properties as they would have paid had they hooked up at the time of original installation (assessment). The amount of the equivalent assessment charge pertinent to the property shall be determined by the council in accordance with the assessment formula utilized by the council in the computation of the original assessment. For example, and not by way of limitation, if the council employed a linear foot, area, or per lot formula (or any combination thereof), that methodology shall be applied to calculate the equivalent assessment payable by the property connecting after the original assessment. The city manager shall utilize the methodology from the ordinance assessing properties in the original district to compute the applicable equivalent assessment charge. (Ord. 03-115 § 1.1.2, 2003)


13.90.030 Charge imposed.

An equivalent assessment is imposed upon all properties which in the future wish to utilize either sewer facilities or water facilities or both of the city when a water line or sewer line installation has been completed and the adjacent property did not hook up at the time of completion and was not assessed for the cost of the installation of the water line or sewer line. (Ord. 03-115 § 1.1.3, 2003)


13.90.040 Relation to other connection charges.

The equivalent assessment shall be in addition to any other development or connection fee payable to the city. The equivalent assessment charge provided in this chapter is separate from any applicable tax assessment, charge or fee otherwise provided by law. Equivalent assessment charge is in the nature of a charge for service rendered or to be rendered. (Ord. 03-115 § 1.1.4, 2003)


13.90.050 Charge due and payable.

A. The equivalent assessment charge is immediately due and payable upon receipt of an application for a building permit, or upon receipt of an application for connection to the sewer system or water system or drainage system, or upon receipt of an application for a permit to create an access to the street system of the city, or upon receipt of an application for the consolidation or partition of a parcel or parcels of land as provided in this code, whichever occurs first. The equivalent assessment fee for all systems shall be due and payable whenever any application, permit, or event described herein shall occur. 

B. If development is commenced or connection is made to the sewer, water, drainage, or street system without an appropriate permit, the equivalent assessment charge is immediately due and payable upon the earliest date that any such permit was required. The owner shall pay and the city manager shall collect the applicable equivalent assessment charge before issuing any building or development permit or before permitting any connection to the water, sewer, drainage, or street systems of the city. The city manager shall decline to issue such a permit or to permit such a connection until that charge has been paid in full. If a connection has been made without benefit of a permit, the city manager shall immediately terminate the connection, and shall cause such violation to be prosecuted as provided herein. (Ord. 03-115 § 1.1.5, 2003)


13.90.060 Payment deferral. 

Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, whenever an equivalent assessment charge of $1,000 or more would otherwise be due and collectable, the owner may apply upon forms provided by the city manager for payment of the charge in not more than 10 semi-annual installments plus interest. Upon receipt of such an application, the city manager shall compute the amount of the equivalent assessment charge, the date upon which that charge is due, the name or names of the owner(s) of the development for which the equivalent assessment charge is imposed, and the description of the property upon which the development is occurring or has occurred. The total amount of the charge shall be subject to interest at the rate of nine percent per annum, which interest shall be the full and only compensation to the city for its administrative costs and shall be secured by property, bond(s), deposits, letter of credit or other security acceptable to the city manager. Any deferred payment secured with real property shall become a lien upon the property and the city manager shall docket the lien in the docket of liens; and from the time that docketing is completed, the city shall have a lien upon that described property for the total amount of the charge. That lien may be enforced in the manner provided in ORS Chapter 223. That lien herein shall have priority over all other liens and encumbrances of any character. (Ord. 03-115 § 1.1.6, 2003)


13.90.070 Collection. 

Whenever the full and correct equivalent assessment charge has not been paid and collected or any payment deferred in accordance with SMC 13.90.060 has not been paid when due for any reason, the city manager shall report to the council the amount of the uncollected charges, the description of the real property upon which the development occurred, the date upon which the charge was due, and the name or names of the owner(s), and, if the property was secured by a lien upon real property, a description of the real property and the owner or owners of record or the purchaser or purchasers of record of the property. The city council by motion shall then set a public hearing and shall direct the city manager to give notice of that hearing to each of those owners or contract purchasers together with a copy of that city manager’s report concerning the unpaid charge(s) either in person or by certified mail. Upon public hearing, the council may accept, reject, or modify the manager’s report. If the council finds that any charge or installment payment is unpaid and uncollected, the council, by motion, may direct the city attorney to file an action to collect the charge(s). If the payment of the charge is secured by real property, the council may direct the city manager to foreclose the lien as provided by law for the full amount of unpaid charge(s), interest and the city’s actual costs of serving notice upon the owner(s) and/or contract purchasers. That lien may be enforced in the manner provided in ORS Chapter 223. That lien herein shall have priority over all other liens and encumbrances of any character. (Ord. 03-115 § 1.1.7, 2003)


13.90.080 Violations. 

A. No person shall fail to pay the full and correct equivalent assessment charge or any payment deferred in accordance with SMC 13.90.060 when due.

B. No person shall connect to the water, sewer, or drainage systems or access the street system of the city unless the appropriate equivalent assessment charge has been paid or the installment payment method has been applied for and approved. (Ord. 03-115 § 1.1.8, 2003)


13.90.090 Penalty. 

Violation of any provision of this chapter is punishable by a fine of not less than $500.00 and not more than $1,000. Each day during which the person shall have failed to pay the due assessment or was connected without paying the appropriate fee shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 03-115 § 1.1.9, 2003)


Chapter 13.100 STREET MAINTENANCE FEE

Sections:

13.100.010    Creation – Premise.

13.100.020    Definitions.

13.100.030    Dedicated fund – Fund uses.

13.100.040    Determination of amount, billing and collection of fee.

13.100.060    Administrative provisions and appeals.


13.100.010 Creation – Premise.

A street maintenance fee (SMF) is hereby created and imposed, the amount of which is to be set by council resolution. The revenue from the SMF shall be used to pay the cost of planning, management, construction, preservation, maintenance and where necessary, alteration of city owned or controlled streets. The SMF shall be paid by responsible parties for developed property in the city. The SMF is premised on the direct and indirect use of or benefit derived from use of city’s streets and is neither a property tax nor subject to the limitations of Article XI, Section 11 of the Oregon Constitution. (Ord. 13-06 § 1, 2013)


13.100.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following phrases shall be used as described in this section:

A. “Billing unit” means any structure(s) or discrete portion thereof lawfully capable of being occupied as either residential or nonresidential property. For example, in multifamily residential property each separate dwelling unit is considered a separate billing unit. Each separate and distinct business outlet in a shopping mall is considered a separate billing unit. A “billing unit” may include one or more structure(s) if all are used in a common purpose or operation. For example, nonresidential property being used as an industrial or commercial site having several structures forming or being used for an integrated commercial purpose or manufacturing process constitute one billing unit.

B. “City” means the city of Silverton, Oregon.

C. “City utility service” means both the city’s water and sanitary sewer utility(ies).

D. “Developed property” means improved legally identifiable lots located in the city containing one or more billing units. The phrase “developed property” does not include property owned or controlled by the city or the federal government.

E. “Improved” means real property with residential or nonresidential buildings or structures (habitable or otherwise) and parking surfaces. 

F. “Nonresidential property” means all developed property not used or intended as residential property.

G. “Residential property” means developed property used or intended primarily as personal domestic domicile(s) (along with related improvements) including single-family, multifamily and group homes but not including properties used for transient (i.e., less than 30 day) occupancies such as hotels, resorts or motels.

H. “Responsible party” means the person who either by ownership or occupancy of developed property with one billing unit, or, pursuant to contract, is responsible for payment of city utility services provided that property. For any developed property with one billing unit not otherwise required to pay a utility bill for city utility services, “responsible party” shall mean the owner of that property or the person(s) legally entitled to occupancy of that property, unless a person/party other than an occupant or owner has agreed to pay for city’s utility services in which case they would be the “responsible party.” For developed property with more than one billing unit, the “responsible party” for each billing unit shall be responsible for payment of the SMF. (Ord. 13-06 § 1, 2013)


13.100.030 Dedicated fund – Fund uses.

All SMF monies shall be deposited to a dedicated fund the proceeds of which are to be used for planning, management, construction, preservation, maintenance and where necessary, alteration of city owned or controlled streets including payment of an equitable share of the city’s costs related to those activities. (Ord. 13-06 § 1, 2013)


13.100.040 Determination of amount, billing and collection of fee. 

A. The council resolution establishing the amount of the SMF may also establish other policies and procedures for calculating, billing and collecting the SMF.

B. The SMF will be collected from the responsible party of each billing unit on developed property in the city in a manner similar to the process used for collection of utility bills for city utility services.

C. The city’s finance director, under the direction of the city manager, shall be responsible for the calculation and collection of the SMF.

D. The SMF shall be billed to and collected monthly from the responsible party. This billing shall be included as part of utility bills issued for city utility services. If any particular developed property does not have city utility services, a separate monthly bill for that property will be sent the responsible party. All of these bills shall become due and payable on the same schedule as the bills issued for city utility services.

E. Payments on any utility bill that includes a SMF charge will be applied consistent with the terms of SMC 13.200.040(E). An account is delinquent if the SMF is not paid by the due date shown on the utility bill. The city may follow the procedures for collection of delinquent accounts for any such bill, including termination of water and/or sewer services. (Ord. 13-06 § 1, 2013)


13.100.060 Administrative provisions and appeals.

A. The city manager, in consultation with the public works director and finance director, has the authority to interpret all terms, provisions and requirements of this chapter and determine the appropriate charges thereunder. 

B. A responsible party may request reconsideration of any determination on any issue by submission of a written application to the city manager. The application shall provide sufficient detail to enable the city manager to render a decision on any issue presented. 

C. Within 30 days of submission of a complete application requesting reconsideration, the city manager shall issue a decision thereon. The decision of the city manager is final but may be reviewed consistent with the terms of ORS 34.010 to 34.100. (Ord. 13-06 § 1, 2013)


Chapter 13.200 STORMWATER SYSTEM FEE

Sections:

13.200.010    Creation – Premise.

13.200.020    Definitions.

13.200.030    Dedicated fund – Fund uses.

13.200.040    Determination of amount, billing and collection of fee.

13.200.050    Administrative provisions and appeals.


13.200.010 Creation – Premise.

A stormwater system fee (SSF) is hereby created and imposed, the amount and calculation of which is to be set by council resolution. The revenue from the SSF shall be used to pay costs associated with the planning, management, construction, preservation, maintenance and where necessary, alteration of the city’s stormwater system as defined herein. The SSF shall be paid by responsible parties for developed property located in the city. The SSF is premised on both the direct and indirect use of or benefit from the provision and use of the city’s stormwater system and is neither a property tax nor subject to the limitations of Article XI, Section 11 of the Oregon Constitution. (Ord. 13-04 § 1, 2013)


13.200.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the following phrases are defined and as follows:

A. “City” means the city of Silverton, Oregon.

B. “City utility services” means either or both the city’s water and sanitary sewer utility(ies).

C. “Developed property” means legally identifiable real property lots located in the city altered from their natural state by the addition of improvements such as buildings, structures or other impervious surfaces. “Improved” includes both structures (habitable or otherwise) and parking surfaces. The phrase “developed property” does not include government owned or controlled property. 

D. “Equivalent dwelling unit” or “EDU” is the average measure of impervious surface (measured in square feet) found on developed property in the city’s R-1 zone. One EDU equals 3,121 square feet. All developed property in the city regardless of zoning designation, having as its primary improved use a single-family residential structure, is deemed to have one EDU. 

E. “Impervious surface” means a surface area compacted or covered with material designed to be resistant to infiltration by water (such as brick, concrete, asphalt, stone, roofing) including most conventionally surfaced driveways, patios, walkways, parking lots and roofs.

F. “Responsible party” means person(s) whom either by ownership or occupancy of developed property (or pursuant to contract) are responsible for payment of city utility services provided that developed property. For any developed property not otherwise required to pay a city utility bill, “responsible party” shall mean the owner of the developed property or the person(s) legally entitled to occupancy thereof, unless a person/party other than an occupant or owner has agreed to pay for city’s utility services in which case they would be the responsible party. 

G. “Stormwater system” or “system” means the city owned, managed and/or controlled storm and surface water system (including its component parts) such as inlets, conduits, manholes, channels, gutters, ditches, drainage easements, retention and detention basins, and infiltration facilities excluding city owned or controlled roadway surfaces and sidewalks. (Ord. 13-04 § 1, 2013)


13.200.030 Dedicated fund – Fund uses.

All SSF monies are to be deposited to a dedicated fund the proceeds of which are to be used for the planning, management, construction, preservation, maintenance and where necessary, alteration of the system. (Ord. 13-04 § 1, 2013)


13.200.040 Determination of amount, billing and collection of fee. 

A. The SSF amount and calculation thereof shall be established by council resolution and be based on the amount of equivalent dwelling units (or portion thereof) above one developed property in the city has.

B. The SSF will be billed and collected from the responsible party for each developed property in manners similar to that used for city utility services.

C. The city’s finance director, under the direction of the city manager, shall be responsible for collection of the SSF.

D. The SSF shall be billed to and collected monthly from the responsible party and be included as part of the billing(s) for city utility services. If particular developed property neither utilizes nor is billed for city utility service, a separate SSF bill for that developed property will be sent the responsible party. SSF billings are due and payable on the same schedule as billings for city’s utility services.

E. Payments on billings for city utility services applied in the following priority:

1. To any park fee established under Chapter 12.48 SMC;

2. To any street maintenance fee established pursuant to Chapter 13.100 SMC; 

3. To the SSF established pursuant to this chapter; and then 

4. To charges for city utility services. 

A city utility services account is delinquent if any of the aforementioned fees are not paid by the date shown on the city utility services billing. The city may follow procedures for collection of delinquent city utility services accounts including termination of city utility services. (Ord. 13-04 § 1, 2013)


13.200.050 Administrative provisions and appeals.

A. The city manager, in consultation with the public works director and finance director, has authority to interpret all terms, provisions and requirements of this chapter including determination of appropriate charges and priority of collection thereunder consistent with council resolution establishing the amount thereof. 

B. A responsible party may request reconsideration of a determination by the city manager made pursuant to subsection (A) of this section by filing a written application therefor. The application shall be submitted in sufficient detail to enable the city manager to render a decision on the issue presented and not later than 30 days of the date of the determination for which review is sought. 

C. Within 30 days of the submission of a completed application for reconsideration, the city manager shall issue a decision thereon. The decision of the city manager is final but may be reviewed consistent with the terms of ORS 34.010 to 34.100. (Ord. 13-04 § 1, 2013)


Title 14 (RESERVED)


Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION

Chapters:

15.04    State Building Codes Adopted

15.08    Property Maintenance Regulations

15.09    Boarding Up of Buildings in Downtown Commercial Core

15.12    Uniform Fire Code

15.16    Signs

15.20    Building Code Enforcement


Chapter 15.04 STATE BUILDING CODES ADOPTED

Sections:

15.04.010    Documents adopted by reference – Compliance required.

15.04.020    Administration of regulations.

15.04.030    Approval of new materials or methods.

15.04.040    Unsafe building regulations.

15.04.050    Violation – Penalty.

15.04.060    Stop work.


15.04.010 Documents adopted by reference – Compliance required.

In addition to compliance with this chapter and other ordinances of the city, building and related activities shall comply with provisions of each of the specialty codes making up the State Building Code adopted by the Director of the State Department of Commerce, and the Fire and Life Safety Code adopted by the State Fire Marshal, as these codes are now or hereafter constituted. No person shall conduct building or related activities without compliance with these standards. (Ord. 749 § 1, 1978)


15.04.020 Administration of regulations.

The city shall provide for the administration of a plan checking, permit and inspection program for structural, mechanical, plumbing and electrical work. This city program is applicable to public as well as private building. A fee for city permit review and processing shall be charged to all structural, mechanical, plumbing and electrical work as set by council resolution. (Ord. 92-117 § 6, 1992; Ord. 749 § 2, 1978)


15.04.030 Approval of new materials or methods.

A. In addition to the provisions of Section 106 of the Structural Specialty Code, and similar provisions of other specialty codes, the building official may approve a material or a method of construction not specifically prescribed by this chapter, provided the building official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and that the material, method or work offered is for the purpose intended at least the equivalent of that specifically prescribed by this chapter in quality, effectiveness, fire-resistance, durability, safety, and energy conservation, and that the Director of the Department of Commerce has not issued a report disapproving the material or method for the purpose.

B. The building official may refer the proposed design to the State Board of Appeals, and a person affected by a ruling of the building official may appeal such ruling to the board of appeals within 30 days of the date of the ruling.

C. The provisions of this section shall not be interpreted to preclude a person from requesting a ruling from the Director of the Department of Commerce prior to submitting an application to the city for a permit, or after withdrawing a previously submitted application. (Ord. 749 § 3, 1978)


15.04.040 Unsafe building regulations.

The law referred to in Ordinance 750 of the city, set out in Chapter 15.08 SMC, is the ordinance of the city providing for the abatement of building nuisances. (Ord. 749 § 4, 1978)


15.04.050 Violation – Penalty.

A. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure in the city, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.

B. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted; and upon conviction of any such violation, such persons shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 per offense. (Ord. 97-105 (4), 1997; Ord. 749 § 5, 1978)


15.04.060 Stop work.

A. Work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of this code shall immediately cease.

1. The building official shall provide a notice in writing which shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the specific violations and the conditions under which work may be resumed.

2. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work.

B. The authority provided in this chapter shall be in addition to any other authority and power granted to the building official under this chapter and ORS Chapters 446, 447, 455, 460, 479, and 480.

C. Except where inconsistent with other provisions of law, the building official may enforce the provisions of this section and ORS Chapters 446, 447, 455, 460, 479, and 480 against any person regardless of whether a permit, certificate, or other indicia of authority has been issued. The building official may:

1. Make an investigation;

2. Take sworn testimony;

3. With the authorization of the city attorney, subpoena persons and records;

4. Order corrective action; and

5. If an immediate hazard to health and safety is imminent, issue an order to stop all or any part of the work under the applicable specialty code.

D. If the building official has reason to believe that any person has been engaged, or is engaging, or is about to engage in any violation of this chapter and ORS Chapters 446, 447, 455, 460, 479, and 480 and any rule adopted thereunder, the building official may issue an order, directed to the person to cease and desist from the violation or threatened violation.

E. If the building official has reason to believe that any person has been engaged, or is engaging, or is about to engage in any violation of this chapter and ORS Chapters 446, 447, 455, 460, 479, and 480 and any rule adopted thereunder, the building official may bring suit in the name and behalf of the city of Silverton in the municipal court of Marion County to enjoin the acts or practices and to enforce compliance with this chapter and ORS Chapters 446, 447, 455, 460, 479, 480 and any rule adopted thereunder. Upon a proper showing a permanent or temporary injunction, restraining order or wit of mandamus shall be granted.

F. The provisions of subsection (C)(3) of this section apply only to testimony and documents related to enforcement of the building codes.

G. A provision allowing a board to assess a penalty in this chapter or ORS Chapters 446, 447, 455, 460, 479, or 480 shall take precedence over any provision allowing for a penalty. (Ord. 98-103, 1998)


Chapter 15.08 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE REGULATIONS

Sections:

Article I. In General

15.08.010    Chapter title.

15.08.020    Purpose.

15.08.030    Scope – Conflict with state law.

15.08.040    Application.

15.08.050    Use of summary headings.

15.08.060    Definitions – Generally.

15.08.070    Definitions.

Article II. Standards

15.08.080    Maintenance – Generally.

15.08.090    Display of address number.

15.08.100    Accessory structures.

15.08.110    Roofs.

15.08.120    Chimneys.

15.08.130    Foundations and structural members.

15.08.140    Exterior walls and exposed surfaces.

15.08.150    Stairs and porches.

15.08.160    Handrails and guardrails.

15.08.170    Windows.

15.08.180    Doors.

15.08.190    Interior walls, floors, and ceilings.

15.08.200    Interior dampness.

15.08.210    Insect and rodent harborage.

15.08.220    Cleanliness and sanitation.

15.08.230    Bathroom facilities.

15.08.240    Kitchen facilities.

15.08.250    Plumbing facilities.

15.08.260    Heating equipment and facilities.

15.08.270    Electrical system, outlets, and lighting.

15.08.280    Sleeping room requirements.

15.08.290    Overcrowding.

15.08.300    Emergency exits.

15.08.310    Smoke alarms and detectors.

15.08.320    Hazardous materials.

15.08.330    Maintenance of facilities and equipment.

15.08.340    Swimming pool enclosures.

15.08.350    Special standards for single-room occupancy housing units.

Article III. Dangerous and Derelict Structures

15.08.360    Dangerous and derelict structures – Generally.

15.08.370    Derelict structures.

15.08.380    Dangerous structures.

Article IV. Enforcement

15.08.385    Notice of status as derelict or dangerous structure.

15.08.390    Statement of actions required.

15.08.400    Notice of unsafe occupancy.

15.08.410    Abatement of dangerous structures.

15.08.420    Inspections required – Right of entry.

15.08.430    Reserved.

15.08.440    Occupancy of residential property after notice of violation.

15.08.450    Illegal residential occupancy.

15.08.460    Interference with repair, demolition, or abatement prohibited.

15.08.470    Violations.

Article V. Civil Infractions

15.08.480    Title for provisions.

15.08.490    Establishment and purpose.

15.08.500    Definitions.

15.08.510    Use of language.

15.08.520    Reference to state law.

15.08.530    Culpability – Article provisions not exclusive.

15.08.540    Effect of this article.

15.08.550    Severability.

15.08.560    Reports of infractions.

15.08.570    Assessment.

15.08.580    Notice.

15.08.610    Time to remedy infraction after notice.

15.08.620    Immediate remedial action required when.

15.08.630    Notice – Methods.

15.08.640    Notice – Computation of time period.

15.08.650    Notice – Information.

15.08.660    Failure to respond to notice.

15.08.670    Voluntary compliance agreement.

15.08.681    Civil infraction summons and complaint – Timing.

15.08.682    Civil infraction summons and complaint – Process requirements.

15.08.683    Civil infraction summons and complaint – Service – Failure to receive – Default.

15.08.684    Civil infraction summons and complaint – Respondent’s response required.

15.08.690    No right to jury.

15.08.700    Representation by counsel.

15.08.710    Opportunity to be heard – Cross-examination.

15.08.720    Witnesses.

15.08.730    Hearing – Admissible evidence.

15.08.740    Hearing – Decision by hearings officer.

15.08.750    Civil penalty – Abatement requirements.

15.08.760    Civil penalty – Assessment of fees.

15.08.770    Hearing – Records.

15.08.780    Finality of decision – Appeals.

15.08.790    Remedial action by city – Costs.

15.08.800    Default judgment.

15.08.810    Enforcement – Rules and regulations.

15.08.820    Lien filing and docketing.

15.08.830    Continuous infractions.

15.08.840    Failure to comply with judgment order.

15.08.850    Penalty – Payment due when.

15.08.860    Penalty – Classifications.

15.08.870    Penalty – Assessment.

15.08.880    Penalty – Repeat violations.

15.08.890    Penalty – Prior to hearing.

15.08.900    Delinquent civil penalties.

Article I. In General


15.08.010 Chapter title.

This chapter shall be known as the “property maintenance regulations,” and is referred to herein as “this chapter.” (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.020 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and welfare of Silverton citizens, to prevent deterioration of existing structures, and to contribute to vital neighborhoods by:

A. Regulating and abating dangerous and derelict buildings.

B. Establishing and enforcing minimum standards for residential structures regarding basic equipment, facilities, sanitation, fire safety, and maintenance. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.030 Scope – Conflict with state law.

The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all property in the city limits except as otherwise excluded by law; however, the provisions of this chapter do not apply to jails, institutions and similar occupancies as classified by the state-adopted Oregon Structural Specialty Code. In the event that a provision of this chapter conflicts with a licensing requirement of the Oregon State Department of Human Resources the state licensing requirements shall be followed. In areas where the Oregon State Department of Human Resources does not regulate through its licensing process, the provisions of this chapter shall apply. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.040 Application.

Any alterations to buildings, or changes of their use, which may be a result of the enforcement of this chapter shall be done in accordance with applicable building codes as adopted by the city of Silverton. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.050 Use of summary headings.

This chapter makes use of summary headings (in boldface type) on chapters, sections, and subsections to assist the reader in navigating the document. In the event of a conflict in meaning between the bold heading and the following plain text, the meaning of the plain text shall apply. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.060 Definitions – Generally.

For the purpose of this chapter, certain abbreviations, terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall be construed as specified in this chapter. Words used in the singular include the plural and the plural the singular. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and the feminine the masculine. “And” indicates that all connected items or provisions apply. “Or” indicates that the connected items or provisions may apply singly or in combination. Terms, words, phrases and their derivatives used, but not specifically defined, in this chapter either shall have the meanings defined in other chapters of this code or if not defined, shall have their commonly accepted meanings. If a conflict exists between a definition in other chapters and a definition in this chapter, the definitions in this chapter shall apply to actions taken pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.070 Definitions.

“Abatement of a nuisance” means the act of removing, repairing, or taking other steps as may be necessary in order to remove a nuisance.

“Accessory structure” means any structure not intended for human occupancy which is located on residential property. Accessory structures may be attached to or detached from the residential structure. Examples of accessory structures include: garages, carports, sheds, and other nondwelling buildings; decks, awnings, heat pumps, fences, trellises, flag poles, tanks, towers, exterior stairs and walkways, and other exterior structures on the property.

Apartment House. See Dwelling Classifications.

“Approved” means meets the standards set forth by applicable provisions of the Silverton Municipal Code including any applicable regulations for electric, plumbing, building, or other sets of standards included by reference in this chapter.

“Basement” means the usable portion of a building which is below the main entrance story and is partly or completely below grade.

“Boarded” means secured against entry by apparatus which is visible off the premises and is not both lawful and customary to install on occupied structures.

“Building” means any structure used or intended to be used for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.

“Building, existing” means a building constructed and legally occupied prior to the adoption of this chapter, and one for which a building permit has been lawfully issued and has not been revoked or lapsed due to inactivity.

“Building official” means the building official, code enforcement officer or authorized representative charged with the enforcement and administration of this chapter.

“Ceiling height” means the clear distance between the floor and the ceiling directly above it.

“Court” means a space, open and unobstructed to the sky, located at or above grade level on a lot and bounded on three or more sides by walls of a building.

Dangerous Building. See “Dangerous structure.”

“Dangerous structure” means any structure which has any of the conditions or defects described in SMC 15.08.380.

“Derelict building” means any structure which has any of the conditions or defects described in SMC 15.08.370(A).

Duplex. See Dwelling Classifications, “Two-family dwelling.”

“Dwelling” means any structure containing dwelling units, including all dwelling classifications covered by this chapter.

Dwelling Classifications. Types of dwellings covered by this chapter include:

“Accessory dwelling unit” means an additional dwelling unit within a detached single-family dwelling.

“Apartment house” means any building or portion of a building containing three or more dwelling units, which is designed, built, rented, leased, let, or hired out to be occupied for residential living purposes.

“Hotel” means any structure containing dwelling units that are intended, designed, or used for renting or hiring out for sleeping purposes by residents on a daily, weekly, or monthly basis.

Manufactured Dwelling. The term “manufactured dwelling” includes the following types of single-family dwellings:

“Residential trailer” means a structure constructed for movement on the public highways that has sleeping, cooking, and plumbing facilities, that is intended for human occupancy, that is being used for, or is intended to be used for, residential purposes, and that was constructed before January 1, 1962.

“Mobile home” means a structure constructed for movement on the public highways that has sleeping, cooking, and plumbing facilities, that is intended for human occupancy, that is being used for, or is intended to be used for, residential purposes, and that was constructed between January 1, 1962, and June 15, 1976, and met the construction requirements of Oregon mobile home law in effect at the time of construction.

“Manufactured home” means a structure constructed for movement on the public highways that has sleeping, cooking, and plumbing facilities, that is intended for human occupancy, that is being used for, or is intended to be used for, residential purposes, and that was constructed in accordance with federal manufactured housing construction and safety standards and regulations.

“Manufactured dwelling” does not include any unit identified as a recreational vehicle by the manufacturer.

Motel. For purposes of this chapter, a “motel” shall be defined the same as a “hotel.”

“Single-family dwelling” means a structure containing one dwelling unit, including adult foster care homes.

“Single-room occupancy housing unit” means a one-room dwelling unit in a hotel providing sleeping, cooking, and living facilities for one or two persons in which some or all sanitary or cooking facilities (toilet, lavatory, bathtub or shower, kitchen sink, or cooking equipment) may be shared with other dwelling units.

“Social care facilities” means any building or portion of a building which is designed, built, rented, leased, let, hired out or otherwise occupied for group residential living purposes, which is not an apartment house, single-family dwelling or two-family dwelling. Such facilities include, but are not limited to, retirement facilities, assisted living facilities, residential care facilities, halfway houses, youth shelters, homeless shelters and other group living residential facilities.

“Two-family dwelling” means a structure containing two dwelling units, also known as a “duplex.”

“Dwelling unit” means one or more habitable rooms that are occupied by, or in the case of an unoccupied structure or portion of a structure, are designed or intended to be occupied by, one person or by a family or group living together as a single housekeeping unit that includes facilities for living and sleeping and, unless exempted by this chapter in SMC 15.08.230 and 15.08.240, also includes facilities for cooking, eating, and sanitation.

“Exit (means of egress)” means a continuous, unobstructed means of escape to a public way, as defined in the building code in effect in the city.

“Exterior property area” means the sections of residential property which are outside the exterior walls and roof of the dwelling.

“Extermination” means the elimination of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests at or about the affected building.

“Floor area” means the area of clear floor space in a room exclusive of fixed or built-in cabinets or appliances.

“Habitable room or space” means a structure for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls, storage or utility space, and similar areas are not considered habitable space.

“Hazardous materials” means materials defined by the current adopted fire code.

Hotel. See Dwelling Classifications.

“Human habitation” means the use of any residential structure or portion of the structure in which any person remains for continuous periods of two hours or more or for periods which will amount to four or more hours out of 24 hours in one day.

“Immediate danger” means any condition posing a direct, immediate threat to human life, health, or safety.

“Infestation” means the presence within or around a dwelling of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests to a degree that is harmful to the dwelling or its occupants.

“Inspection” means the examination of a property by a person authorized by law for the purpose of evaluating its condition as provided by this chapter.

“Inspector” means an authorized representative of the building official whose primary function is the inspection of properties and the enforcement of this chapter.

“Interested party” means any person or entity that possesses any legal or equitable interest of record in a property including but not limited to the holder of any lien or encumbrance of record on the property.

“Kitchen” means a room used or designed to be used for the preparation of food.

“Lavatory” means a fixed wash basin connected to hot and cold running water and the building drain and used primarily for personal hygiene.

“Maintenance” means the work of keeping property in proper condition to perpetuate its use.

Manufactured Dwelling. See Dwelling Classifications.

Motel. See Dwelling Classifications.

“Occupancy” means the lawful purpose for which a building or part of a building is used or intended to be used.

“Occupant” means any person (including an owner, tenant or operator) using a building, or any part of a building, for its lawful, intended use.

“Occupied” means used for an occupancy.

“Operator” means any person who has charge, care or control of a building or part of a building in which dwelling units are let or offered for occupancy.

“Outdoor area” means all parts of property that are exposed to the weather including the exterior of structures built for human occupancy. This includes, but is not limited to, open and accessible porches, carports, garages, and decks; accessory structures; and any outdoor storage structure.

“Owner” means the person whose name and address is listed as the owner of the property by the county tax assessor in the county assessment and taxation records.

“Plumbing” or “plumbing fixtures” means any water-heating facilities, water pipes, vent pipes, garbage or disposal units, waste lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes-washing machines or other similar equipment, catch basins, drains, vents, or other similarly supplied fixtures, together with all connection to water, gas, sewer, or vent lines.

“Property” means real property and all improvements or structures on real property, from property line to property line.

“Public right-of-way” means any sidewalk, planting strip, alley, street, or pathway, improved or unimproved, that is dedicated to public use.

“Repair” means the reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing structure for the purpose of its maintenance.

“Resident” means any person (including owner, tenant or operator) hiring or occupying a room or dwelling unit for living or sleeping purposes.

“Residential property” means real property and all improvements or structures on real property used or, in the case of unoccupied property, intended to be used for residential purposes including any residential structure, dwelling, or dwelling unit as defined in this chapter and any mixed-use structures which have one or more dwelling units. Hotels that are used exclusively for transient occupancy, as defined in this chapter, are excluded from this definition of residential property.

“Residential rental property” means any property within the city on which exist one or more dwelling units which are not occupied as the principal residence of the owner.

“Residential structure” means any building or other improvement or structure containing one or more dwelling units as well as any accessory structure. This includes any dwelling as defined in this chapter.

“Shall,” as used in this chapter, is mandatory.

Single-Family Dwelling. See Dwelling Classifications.

Single-Room Occupancy Housing Unit. See Dwelling Classifications.

“Sink” means a fixed basin connected to hot and cold running water and a drainage system and primarily used for the preparation of food and the washing of cooking and eating utensils.

“Sleeping room” means any room designed, built, or intended to be used as a bedroom as well as any other room used for sleeping purposes.

“Smoke alarm or detector” means an approved detection device for products of combustion other than heat that is either a single station device or intended for use in conjunction with a central control panel and which plainly identifies the testing agency that inspected or approved the device.

“Structure” means that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece or work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner, including but not limited to buildings.

“Substandard” means in violation of any of the minimum requirements as set out in this chapter.

“Supplied” means installed, furnished or provided by the owner or operator.

“Swimming pool” means an artificial basin, chamber, or tank constructed of impervious material, having a depth of 18 inches or more, and used or intended to be used for swimming, diving, or recreational bathing.

“Toilet” means a flushable plumbing fixture connected to running water and a drainage system and used for the disposal of human waste.

“Toilet compartment” means a room containing only a toilet or only a toilet and lavatory.

“Transient occupancy” means occupancy of a dwelling unit in a hotel where the following conditions are met:

1. Occupancy is charged on a daily basis and is not collected more than six days in advance;

2. The lodging operator provides maid and linen service daily or every two days as part of the regularly charged cost of occupancy;

3. The period of occupancy does not exceed 30 days; and

4. If the occupancy exceeds five days, the resident has a business address or a residence other than at the hotel.

Two-Family Dwelling. See Dwelling Classifications.

“Unoccupied” means not used for occupancy.

“Unsecured” means any structure in which doors, windows, or apertures are open or broken so as to allow access by unauthorized persons.

“Yard” means an open, unoccupied space, other than a court, unobstructed from the ground to the sky, and located between a structure and the property line of the lot on which the structure is situated. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)

Article II. Standards


15.08.080 Maintenance – Generally.

No owner shall maintain or permit to be maintained any property which does not comply with the requirements of this chapter. All residential property shall be maintained to the building code requirements in effect at the time of construction, alteration, or repair and shall meet the minimum requirements described in this chapter. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.090 Display of address number.

Address numbers posted shall be the same as the number listed on the county assessment and taxation records for the property. All dwellings shall have three-inch-high address numbers posted in a conspicuous place on a contrasting background so they may be read from the listed street or public way. Units within apartment houses shall be clearly numbered or lettered. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.100 Accessory structures.

All accessory structures on residential or commercial property shall be maintained structurally safe and sound and in good repair. Exterior steps and walkways shall be maintained free of unsafe obstructions or hazardous conditions. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.110 Roofs.

The roof shall be structurally sound, tight, and have no defects which might admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent rainwater from causing dampness in the walls or interior portion of the building and shall channel rainwater into approved receivers. Temporary use of tarps, sheet plastics and similar products shall be limited to 30 days’ duration. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.120 Chimneys.

Every masonry, metal, or other chimney shall remain adequately supported and free from obstructions and shall be maintained in a condition which ensures there will be no leakage or backup of noxious gases. Every chimney shall be reasonably plumb. Loose bricks or blocks shall be rebonded. Loose or missing mortar shall be replaced. Unused openings into the interior of the structure must be permanently sealed using approved materials. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.130 Foundations and structural members.

Foundation elements shall adequately support the building and shall be free of rot, crumbling elements, or similar deterioration. The supporting structural members in every structure shall be maintained structurally sound, showing no evidence of deterioration or decay which would substantially impair their ability to carry imposed loads. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.140 Exterior walls and exposed surfaces.

A. Every exterior wall and weather-exposed exterior surface or attachment shall be free of holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards or timbers and any other conditions which might admit rain or dampness to the interior portions of the walls or the occupied spaces of the building.

B. All exterior wood surfaces shall be made substantially impervious to the adverse effects of weather by periodic application of an approved protective coating of weather-resistant preservative, and be maintained in good condition. Wood used in construction of permanent structures and located nearer than six inches to the earth shall be treated wood or wood having a natural resistance to decay.

C. Exterior metal surfaces shall be protected from rust and corrosion.

D. Every section of exterior brick, stone, masonry, or other veneer shall be maintained structurally sound and be adequately supported and tied back to its supporting structure. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.150 Stairs and porches.

Every stair, porch, and attachment to stairs or porches shall be so constructed as to be safe to use and capable of supporting the loads to which it is subjected and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair, including replacement as necessary of flooring, treads, risers, and stringers that evidence excessive wear and are broken, warped, or loose. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.160 Handrails and guardrails.

Every handrail and guardrail shall be firmly fastened, and shall be maintained in good condition, capable of supporting the loads to which it is subjected, and meet the following requirements:

A. Handrails and guardrails required by building codes at the time of construction shall be maintained or, if removed, shall be replaced.

B. Where not otherwise required by original building codes, exterior stairs of more than three risers which are designed and intended to be used as part of the regular access to unit shall have handrails. Interior stairs of more than three risers that connect between floors shall have handrails. When required handrails are installed they shall have a minimum height of 30 inches and maximum height of 38 inches, measured vertically from the nosing of the treads. They shall be continuous the full length of the stairs and shall be returned or shall terminate as per building code.

C. Where not otherwise required by original building codes, porches, balconies or raised floor surfaces located more than 30 inches above the floor or grade below shall have guardrails. Open sides of stairs with a total rise of more than 30 inches above the floor or grade below shall have guardrails no less than 36 inches in height measured vertically from the nosing of the tread. When required guardrails are installed, they shall have intermediate rails or ornamental closures which will not allow passage of an object four inches or more in diameter. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.170 Windows.

A. Every habitable room shall have at least one window facing directly to an exterior yard or court or shall be provided with approved artificial light. Except where approved artificial light is provided, the minimum total glass area for each habitable room shall be eight percent of the room’s floor area, except for basement rooms where the minimum shall be four percent. These exceptions to the current code shall not apply where any occupancy has been changed or increased contrary to the provisions of this chapter.

B. Every habitable room shall have at least one window that can be easily opened or another approved device to adequately ventilate the room. Except where another approved ventilation device is provided, the total openable window area in every habitable room shall be equal to at least one-fortieth of the area of the room. Windows required for secondary escape purposes in sleeping rooms must also meet the requirements outlined in subsection D of this section.

C. Every bathroom and toilet compartment shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms as required by subsections A and B of this section, except that no window shall be required in bathrooms or toilet compartments equipped with an approved ventilation system.

D. Windows in sleeping rooms that are provided to meet emergency escape or rescue requirements described in SMC 15.08.300(A) shall have a sill height of no more than 44 inches above the floor or above an approved, permanently installed step. The step must not exceed 12 inches in height and must extend the full width of the window. The top surface of the step must be a minimum of six feet from the ceiling above the step.

E. Windows in sleeping rooms that are provided to meet emergency escape or rescue requirements described in SMC 15.08.300(A) shall have a minimum net clear opening at least 20 inches wide, at least 22 inches high, and, if constructed after July 1, 1974, at least five square feet in area.

F. Every window required for ventilation or emergency escape shall be capable of being easily opened and held open by window hardware. Any installed storm windows on windows required for emergency escape must be easily openable from the inside without the use of a key or special knowledge or effort.

G. All windows within 10 feet of the exterior grade that open must be able to be securely latched from the inside as well as be openable from the inside without the use of a key or any special knowledge or effort. This same requirement shall apply to all openable windows that face other locations that are easily accessible from the outside, such as balconies or fire escapes, regardless of height from the exterior grade.

H. Every window shall be substantially weathertight, shall be kept in sound condition and repair for its intended use, and shall comply with the following:

1. Every window sash shall be fully supplied with glass window panes or an approved substitute without open cracks and holes.

2. Every window sash shall be in good condition and fit weathertight within its frames.

3. Every window frame shall be constructed and maintained in relation to the adjacent wall construction so as to exclude rain as completely as possible and to substantially exclude wind from entering the dwelling. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.180 Doors.

A. Every dwelling or dwelling unit shall have at least one door leading to an exterior yard or court, or in the case of a two-family dwelling or apartment, to an exterior yard or court or to an approved exit. All such doors shall be openable from the inside without the use of a key or any special knowledge or effort. All screen doors and storm doors must be easily openable from the inside without the use of a key or special knowledge or effort.

B. In hotels and apartment houses, exit doors in common corridors or other common passageways shall be openable from the inside with one hand in a single motion, such as pressing a bar or turning a knob, without the use of a key or any special knowledge or effort.

C. Every door to the exterior of a dwelling unit shall be equipped with a lock designed to discourage unwanted entry and to permit opening from the inside without the use of a key or any special knowledge or effort.

D. Every exterior door shall comply with the following:

1. Every exterior door, door hinge, door lock, and strike plate shall be maintained in good condition.

2. Every exterior door, when closed, shall fit reasonably well within its frame and be weather-tight.

3. Every door frame shall be constructed and maintained in relation to the adjacent wall construction so as to exclude rain as completely as possible, and to substantially exclude wind from entering the dwelling.

E. Every interior door and door frame shall be maintained in a sound condition for its intended purpose with the door fitting within the door frame. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.190 Interior walls, floors, and ceilings.

A. Every interior wall, floor, ceiling, and cabinet shall be constructed and maintained in a safe and structurally sound condition, free of large holes and serious cracks, loose plaster or wallpaper, flaking or scaling paint, to permit the interior wall, floor, ceiling and cabinet to be kept in a clean and sanitary condition.

B. Every toilet compartment, bathroom, and kitchen floor surface shall be constructed and maintained to be substantially impervious to water and to permit the floor to be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.200 Interior dampness.

Every structure, including basements and crawl spaces shall be maintained reasonably free from dampness to prevent conditions conducive to decay, mold growth, or deterioration of the structure. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.210 Insect and rodent harborage.

Every structure shall be kept free from insect and rodent infestation, and where insects and rodents are found, they shall be promptly exterminated. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent reinfestation. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.220 Cleanliness and sanitation.

The interior and exterior of every structure shall be constructed in a safe and structurally sound condition to permit the interior and exterior to be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. The interior/exterior of every dwelling shall be free from accumulation of rubbish, used appliances, discarded furniture or garbage which is affording a breeding ground for insects and rodents, producing dangerous or offensive gases, odors and bacteria, or other unsanitary conditions, or a fire hazard. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.230 Bathroom facilities.

A. Except as otherwise noted in this chapter, bathroom facilities shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary working condition:

1. A toilet located in a room that is separate from other rooms and that allows privacy;

2. A lavatory basin; and

3. A bathtub or shower located in a room that allows privacy.

B. In hotels, apartment houses and social care facilities where private toilets, lavatories, or baths are not provided, there shall be on each floor at least one toilet, one lavatory, and one bathtub or shower, each provided at the rate of one for every 12 residents or fraction of 12 residents. Required toilets, bathtubs, and showers shall be in a room, or rooms, that allow privacy.

C. When there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of this section for hotels, apartment houses and social care facilities where private toilets, lavatories or baths are not provided, the building official may grant modifications for individual cases. The building official shall first find that a special and individual reason makes the requirements of this section impractical and that the modification is in conformance with the intent of this section and that such modification does not result in the provision of inadequate bathroom facilities in the dwelling. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.240 Kitchen facilities.

A. Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink apart from the lavatory basin required under SMC 15.08.230, with the exception of single room occupancy housing units which shall comply with SMC 15.08.350(B) and social care facilities complying with subsection C of this section.

B. Except as otherwise provided for in subsection C of this section and SMC 15.08.350(B) and (C), every dwelling unit shall have approved service connections for refrigeration and cooking appliances.

C. Social care facilities may be provided with a community kitchen with facilities for cooking, refrigeration, and washing utensils. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.250 Plumbing facilities.

A. Every plumbing fixture or device shall be properly connected to a public or an approved private water system and to a public or an approved private sewer system.

B. All required sinks, lavatory basins, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied with both hot and cold running water. Every dwelling shall be supplied with water-heating facilities adequate for each dwelling unit which are installed in an approved manner, properly maintained, and properly connected with hot water lines to all sinks, lavatory basins, bathtubs and showers. Water-heating facilities shall be capable of heating water enough to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every facility at a temperature of at least 120 degrees at any time needed.

C. In every dwelling all plumbing or plumbing fixtures shall be:

1. Properly installed, connected, and maintained in good working order;

2. Kept free from obstructions, leaks, and defects;

3. Capable of performing the function for which they are designed; and

4. Installed and maintained so as to prevent structural deterioration or health hazards.

D. All plumbing repairs and installations shall be made in accordance with the provisions of the plumbing code adopted by the city. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.260 Heating equipment and facilities.

A. All heating equipment, including that used for cooking, water heating, heat, and clothes drying shall be:

1. Properly installed, connected, and maintained in safe condition and good working order;

2. Free from leaks and obstructions and kept functioning properly so as to be free from fire, health, and accident hazards; and

3. Capable of performing the function for which they are designed.

B. Every habitable structure shall have a heating facility capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68 degrees Fahrenheit at a point three feet from the floor in all rooms.

1. Portable heating devices may not be used to meet the dwelling heat requirements of this chapter.

2. No inverted or open flame fuel burning heater shall be permitted. All heating devices or appliances shall be of an approved type. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.270 Electrical system, outlets, and lighting.

A. All structures shall be connected to an approved source of electric power. Every electric outlet and fixture shall be maintained and safely connected to an approved electrical system. The electrical system shall not constitute a hazard to the occupants of the building by reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, improper wiring or installation, deterioration or damage, or similar reasons.

B. In addition to other electrical system components that may be used to meet cooking, refrigeration, and heating requirements listed elsewhere in this section, the following outlets and lighting fixtures are required:

1. Every habitable room shall contain at least two operable electric outlets or one outlet and one operable electric light fixture.

2. Every toilet compartment or bathroom shall contain at least one supplied and operable electric light fixture and one outlet. Every laundry, furnace room, and all similar nonhabitable spaces shall have one supplied electric light fixture available at all times.

3. Every public hallway, corridor, and stairway in apartment houses, hotels and social care facilities shall be adequately lighted at all times with an average intensity of illumination of at least one foot-candle at principal points such as angles and intersections of corridors and passageways, stairways, landings of stairways, landings of stairs and exit doorways, and at least one-half foot-candle at other points. Measurement of illumination shall be taken at points not more than four feet above the floor. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.280 Sleeping room requirements.

Every room used for sleeping purposes:

A. Shall be a habitable room as defined in this chapter; and

B. Shall have natural or approved artificial light, ventilation, and windows or other means for escape purposes as required by this chapter. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.290 Overcrowding.

No dwelling unit shall be permitted to be overcrowded. A dwelling unit shall be considered overcrowded if there are more than two residents for every 150 square feet of floor area of the habitable rooms in the dwelling unit. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.300 Emergency exits.

A. Every sleeping room shall have at least one operable window or exterior door approved for emergency escape or rescue that is openable from the inside to a full, clear opening without the use of special knowledge, effort, or separate tools. Windows used to meet this requirement shall meet the size and sill height requirements described in SMC 15.08.170(D). All below grade windows used to meet this requirement shall have a window well the full width of the window, constructed of permanent materials with a three-foot clearance measured perpendicular to the outside wall. The bottom of the well may not be more than 44 inches below grade.

B. Required exit doors and other exits shall be free of encumbrances or obstructions that block access to the exit.

C. All doorways, windows and any device used in connection with the means of escape shall be maintained in good working order and repair.

D. In addition to other exit requirements, in hotels and apartment houses:

1. All fire escapes shall be kept in good order and repair.

2. Every fire escape or stairway, stair platform, corridor or passageway which may be one of the regular means of emergency exit from the building shall be kept free of encumbrances or obstructions of any kind.

3. Where doors to stair enclosures are required by the Silverton Municipal Code to be self-closing, the self-closing device shall be maintained in good working order and it shall be unlawful to wedge or prop the doors open.

4. Windows leading to fire escapes shall be secured against unwanted entry with approved devices which permit opening from the inside without the use of a key or any special knowledge, effort or tool.

5. Where necessary to indicate the direction of egress, every apartment house and hotel shall have directional signs in place, visible throughout common passageways, that indicate the way to exit doors and fire escapes. Emergency exit doors and windows shall be clearly labeled for their intended use. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.310 Smoke alarms and detectors.

Smoke alarms and detectors shall be required to be maintained as was required at the time of construction of the dwelling. Notwithstanding the provisions of the requirement at the time of construction, a single station smoke alarm or detector shall be located in all buildings where a room or area therein is designated for sleeping purposes either as a primary use or use on a casual basis. A single station smoke alarm or detector shall be installed in the immediate vicinity of the sleeping rooms and on each additional story of the dwelling, including basements and attics with habitable space. All alarms and detectors shall be approved, shall comply with all applicable laws, shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions and shall be operable. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.320 Hazardous materials.

A. When paint is applied to any surface of a structure, it shall be lead-free.

B. Property shall be free of dangerous levels of hazardous materials, contamination by toxic chemicals, or other circumstances that would render the property unsafe.

C. No residential property shall be used as a place for the storage and handling of highly combustible or explosive materials or any articles which may be dangerous or detrimental to life or health. No residential property shall be used for the storage or sale of paints, varnishes or oils used in the making of paints and varnishes, except as needed to maintain the dwelling.

D. All structures shall be kept free of friable asbestos. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.330 Maintenance of facilities and equipment.

In addition to other requirements for the maintenance of facilities and equipment described in this chapter:

A. All facilities in structures shall be constructed and maintained to properly and safely perform their intended function.

B. All facilities or equipment present in a dwelling shall be maintained to prevent structural damage to the building or hazards of health, sanitation, or fire. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.340 Swimming pool enclosures.

Each swimming pool not totally enclosed by a structure shall be enclosed by a substantial fence at least four feet in height and equipped with a self-closing and latching gate except where bordered by a wall of an adjacent structure at least four feet in height. No swimming pool shall be nearer than three feet from any lot line, and no enclosing fence or wall shall be constructed nearer than three feet to the outer walls of the swimming pool, but in no case shall the distance between the pool and the lot line or wall be closer than allowed by a variance. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.350 Special standards for single-room occupancy housing units.

In addition to meeting requirements for residential structures defined elsewhere in this chapter, hotels containing single-room occupancy housing units shall comply with the following:

A. Either a community kitchen with facilities for cooking, refrigeration, and washing utensils shall be provided on each floor, or each individual single-room occupancy housing unit shall have facilities for cooking, refrigeration and washing utensils. In addition, facilities for community garbage storage or disposal shall be provided on each floor.

B. When there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of this subsection where each individual single-room occupancy housing unit is not provided with facilities for cooking, refrigeration and washing utensils, the building official may grant modifications for individual cases. The building official shall first find that a special and individual reason makes the requirements of this section impractical and that the modification is in conformance with the intent of this section and that such modification does not result in the provision of inadequate cooking, refrigeration and utensil washing facilities for the single-room occupancy housing units.

C. Where cooking units are provided in individual single-room occupancy housing units, they shall conform to the requirements set forth below:

1. All appliances shall be hard-wired and on separate circuits or have single dedicated connections;

2. All cooking appliances shall be fixed and permanent, except microwave ovens;

3. The Mechanical Specialty Code, as adopted, shall be used for setting standards for cooking appliances. Cabinets over cooking surfaces shall be 30 inches above the cooking surface, except that this distance may be reduced to 24 inches when a heat shield with one inch of airspace and extending at least six inches horizontally on either side of the cooking appliance is provided. Cooking appliances shall be located with at least a six-inch clear space in all directions from the perimeter of the cooking element or burner;

4. All cooking appliances shall be installed so as to provide a minimum clear work space in front of the appliance of 24 inches. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)

Article III. Dangerous and Derelict Structures


15.08.360 Dangerous and derelict structures – Generally.

No property shall contain any dangerous or derelict structure as described in this chapter. All such buildings or structures shall be repaired or demolished. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.370 Derelict structures.

A. A derelict structure is any building, structure, or portion thereof that meets any of the following criteria:

1. Has been ordered vacated by the building official pursuant to SMC 15.08.385, 15.08.390 and 15.08.400; or

2. Has been issued a notice of infraction by the code enforcement officer; or

3. Is unsecured; or

4. Is boarded in violation of Chapter 15.09 SMC; or

5. Has, while vacant, had a nuisance declared by the city on the property upon which it is located.

B. Any property which has been declared by the building official to include a derelict structure shall be considered in violation of this chapter until:

1. The structure has been lawfully occupied; or

2. The structure has been demolished and the lot cleared and graded after approval is issued by the city, with final inspection and approval by the building official; or

3. The owner has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the building official that the property is free of all conditions causing its status as a derelict structure. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.380 Dangerous structures.

A. Any structure which has any or all of the following conditions or defects to the extent that life, health, property, or safety of the public or the structure’s occupants are endangered, shall be deemed to be a dangerous structure, declared a nuisance, and such condition or defects shall be abated pursuant to SMC 15.08.410.

B. High Loads. Whenever the stress in any materials, member, or portion of a structure, due to all dead and live loads, is more than one and one-half times the working stress or stresses allowed for new buildings of similar structure, purpose, or location.

C. Weakened or Unstable Structural Members or Appendages.

1. Whenever any portion of a structure has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood, or by any other cause to such an extent that the structural strength or stability is materially less than it was before such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements for new buildings of similar structure, purpose, or location; or

2. Whenever appendages, including parapet walls, cornices, spires, towers, tanks, statuaries, or other appendages or structural members which are supported by, attached to, or part of a building, are in a deteriorated condition or otherwise unable to sustain the design loads which are specified in this code.

D. Buckled or Leaning Walls, Structural Members. Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean, or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third of the base.

E. Vulnerability to Earthquakes, High Winds.

1. Whenever any portion of a structure is wrecked, warped, buckled, or has settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of similar new construction; or

2. Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance, or ornamentation of the exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one-half of that specified in current code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose, or location without exceeding the working stresses for such buildings.

F. Insufficient Strength or Fire Resistance. Whenever any structure which, whether or not erected in accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances:

1. Has in any nonsupporting part, member, or portion, less than 50 percent of the strength or the fire-resisting qualities or characteristics required by law for a newly constructed building of like area, height, and occupancy in the same location; or

2. Has in any supporting part, member, or portion less than 66 percent of the strength or the fire-resisting qualities or characteristics required by law in the case of a newly constructed building of like area, height, and occupancy in the same location.

G. Risk of Failure or Collapse.

1. Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is likely to fail, or to become disabled or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property; or

2. Whenever the structure, or any portion thereof, is likely to partially or completely collapse as a result of any cause, including but not limited to:

a. Dilapidation, deterioration, or decay;

b. Faulty construction;

c. The removal, movement, or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such structure; or

d. The deterioration, decay, or inadequacy of its foundation.

H. Excessive Damage or Deterioration. Whenever the structure exclusive of the foundation:

1. Shows 33 percent or more damage or deterioration of its supporting member or members;

2. Shows 50 percent damage or deterioration of its nonsupporting members; or

3. Shows 50 percent damage or deterioration of its enclosing or outside wall coverings.

I. Demolition Remnants On-Site. Whenever any portion of a structure, including unfilled excavations, remains on a site for more than 30 days after the demolition or destruction of the structure.

J. Fire Hazard. Whenever any structure is a fire hazard as a result of any cause, including but not limited to: dilapidated condition, deterioration, or damage; inadequate exits; lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction; or faulty electric wiring, gas connections, or heating apparatus.

K. Other Hazards to Health, Safety, or Public Welfare.

1. Whenever, for any reason, the structure or any portion thereof is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is lawfully constructed or currently is being used; or

2. Whenever a structure is structurally unsafe or is otherwise hazardous to human life, including but not limited to whenever a structure constitutes a hazard to health, safety, or public welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, unsanitary conditions, obsolescence, fire hazard, disaster, damage, or abandonment.

L. Public Nuisance.

1. Whenever any structure is in such a condition as to constitute a public nuisance known to the common law or in equity jurisprudence; or

2. Whenever the structure has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake or flood or any other cause, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become:

a. An attractive nuisance; or

b. A harbor for vagrants or criminals.

M. Chronic Dereliction. Whenever a derelict structure, as defined in this chapter, remains unoccupied for a period in excess of six months or period less than six months when the structure or portion thereof constitutes an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public.

N. Violations of Codes, Laws. Whenever any structure has been constructed, exists, or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to such structure provided by the building regulations of this chapter, or any law of this state or city relating to the condition, location, or structure or buildings. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)

Article IV. Enforcement


15.08.385 Notice of status as derelict or dangerous structure.

When the building official determines that a structure is a derelict or dangerous structure, a notice of infraction shall be given to the owner. Additional notices to other affected persons may be given at the discretion of the building official. In addition to the notice, the building official shall give the statement of actions required to cure or remedy the condition and, if necessary, the order to vacate described in SMC 15.08.390 and 15.08.400. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.390 Statement of actions required.

A. Notice of the statement of action shall be given in conjunction with the notice of infraction pursuant to Article V of this chapter, Civil Infractions.

B. The statement of the action required to cure or remedy a condition giving rise to classification of a structure as derelict or dangerous shall include the following:

1. If the building official has determined that the building or structure must be repaired, the statement shall require that all required permits be secured and the work physically commenced within such time from the date of the statement and completed within such time as the building official shall determine is reasonable under all of the circumstances.

2. If the building official has determined that the building or structure must be vacated, the statement shall order that the building or structure shall be vacated within a time certain from the date of the statement as determined by the building official to be reasonable.

3. If the building official has determined that (a) the building or structure is vacant, (b) that the building or structure is structurally sound and does not present a fire hazard, and (c) the building or structure has presented or is likely to present a danger to individuals who may enter the building or structure even though they are unauthorized to do so, the statement shall require that the building or structure be secured against unauthorized entry by means which may include but are not limited to the boarding up of doors and windows.

4. If the building official has determined that the building or structure must be demolished, the statement shall order that the building be vacated within such time as the building official shall determine is reasonable from the date of the statement, that all required permits be secured from the date of the statement, and that the demolition be completed within such time as the building official shall determine is reasonable.

5. Statements advising that if any required repair or demolition work (without vacation also being required) is not commenced within the time specified, the building official will order the building vacated and posted to prevent further occupancy until the work is completed, and may proceed to cause the work to be done and charge the costs thereof against the property or its owners. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.400 Notice of unsafe occupancy.

A. Posting Notice. In conjunction with an order to vacate or demolish, a notice shall be posted at or upon each exit of the building and shall be in substantially the following form:

DO NOT ENTER

UNSAFE TO OCCUPY

It is a violation of Chapter 15.08 of the City Code to occupy this building or to remove or deface this notice.

Building Official

City of Silverton

________________

B. Compliance. Upon an order to vacate or demolish and the posting of an unsafe building notice, no person shall remain in or enter any building which has been so posted, except that entry may be made to repair, demolish or remove such building under permit.

No person shall remove or deface any such notice after it is posted until the required repairs, demolition or removal have been completed and a certificate of occupancy issued pursuant to the provisions of the building code provisions of this code and such removal or defacement shall constitute a violation of this section. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.410 Abatement of dangerous structures.

All structures or portions thereof which are determined after inspection by the building official to be dangerous as defined in this chapter are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or removal in accordance with the procedures specified herein. If the building official determines that a structure is dangerous, as defined by this chapter, the building official may commence proceedings to cause the repair, vacation or demolition of the structure. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.420 Inspections required – Right of entry.

A. Inspections. All buildings, structures, or other improvements regulated by this chapter and all construction work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official.

B. Right of Entry. Whenever the building official has reasonable cause to suspect that a violation of any provision of this chapter exists or when necessary to investigate an application for or revocation of any approval under any of the procedures described in this title, the building official may enter on any site or into any structure for the purpose of investigation; provided, that no premises shall be entered without first obtaining the consent of the owner or person in control of the premises if other than the owner, or by obtaining an administrative search warrant.

C. Administrative Search Warrant. If consent cannot be obtained, the building official shall secure an administrative search warrant from the city’s municipal court before further attempts to gain entry, and shall have recourse to every other remedy provided by law to secure entry. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.430 Reserved.

(Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.440 Occupancy of residential property after notice of violation.

A. If a notice of violation of SMC 15.08.080 through 15.08.350 or SMC 15.08.360 through 15.08.380 has been issued, and if the affected dwelling unit(s) is or becomes vacant, it shall be unlawful to reoccupy or permit reoccupancy of the unit(s) for residential purposes until the necessary permits are obtained, corrections made, and permit inspection approvals given.

B. Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, the building official may permit reoccupancy of the dwelling unit if, in the building official’s opinion, all fire and life safety hazards have been rectified. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.450 Illegal residential occupancy.

When a property has an illegal residential occupancy, including but not limited to occupancy of tents, campers, motor homes, recreational vehicles, or other structures or spaces not intended for permanent residential use or occupancy, or spaces constructed or converted without permit, the use shall be abated or the structure brought into compliance with the present regulations for a building of the same occupancy. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.460 Interference with repair, demolition, or abatement prohibited.

It is unlawful for any person to obstruct, impede, or interfere with any person lawfully engaged in:

A. The work of repairing, vacating, warehousing, or demolishing any structure pursuant to the provisions of this chapter;

B. The abatement of a nuisance pursuant to the provisions of this chapter;

C. The performance of any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work as authorized by this chapter or directed pursuant to it. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.470 Violations.

A. A violation of this chapter shall constitute a Class 1 civil infraction, which shall be processed according to the procedures in the civil infractions ordinance, set out in Article V of this chapter.

B. Each violation of a separate provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate infraction, and each day that a violation of this chapter is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate infraction.

C. A finding of a violation of this chapter shall not relieve the responsible party of the duty to abate the violation. The penalties imposed by this section are in addition and not in lieu of any remedies available to the city.

D. If a provision of this chapter is violated by a firm or corporation, the officer or officers or person or persons responsible for the violation shall be subject to the penalties imposed by this chapter (Chapter 1.08 SMC). (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)

Article V. Civil Infractions


15.08.480 Title for provisions.

The ordinance codified in this article shall be known as the “civil infractions ordinance,” and may also be referred to herein as “this article.” (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.490 Establishment and purpose.

A. The purpose of this article is to establish civil procedures for the enforcement of certain provisions of the Silverton Municipal Code (SMC).

B. The civil infraction procedures established herein are for the purpose of decriminalizing penalties for infractions of certain civil ordinances and for the purpose of providing a convenient and practical forum for the hearing and determination of cases arising out of such infractions. The civil infractions procedure is intended to be used for all violations of the SMC other than certain violations.

C. The civil infractions abatement procedures established herein are for the purpose of authorizing the city to proceed to abate such infractions if it is determined that the infraction presents an immediate danger to the public health, safety or welfare.

D. This article is adopted pursuant to the home rule powers granted the city of Silverton by Article IV, Section 1, and Article XI, Section 2, of the Oregon Constitution. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.500 Definitions.

For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:

“Civil infraction” shall mean the failure to comply with a code provision and shall also mean the process of imposing a civil penalty under this article.

“Civil infractions hearings officer” means the municipal judge or the individual appointed by the municipal judge with the delegated authority to preside over the code enforcement hearings and to perform the related functions as specified by this article.

“Code enforcement officer” means the building official or his/her designee.

“Respondent” means a person charged with a civil infraction.

“Violation” means failure to comply with a requirement imposed directly or indirectly by this article. “Violation” may also mean civil infraction.

“Voluntary compliance agreement” means an agreement, whether written or verbal, between the code enforcement officer and the respondent, which is intended to resolve the alleged civil infraction. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.510 Use of language.

As used in this article, pronouns indicating the masculine gender shall include the feminine gender; singular pronouns shall include the plural; and “person” shall, where appropriate, include any partnership, corporation, unincorporated association, the state of Oregon, or other entity. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.520 Reference to state law.

Any reference to a state statute incorporates into this article by reference the statute in effect on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.530 Culpability – Article provisions not exclusive.

A. Acts or omissions to act which are designated as an infraction by any city ordinance do not require a culpable mental state as an element of the infraction.

B. The procedures prescribed by this article shall be the exclusive procedures for imposing civil penalties; however, this section shall not be read to prohibit in any way alternative remedies set out in the Silverton Municipal Code which are intended to abate or alleviate code infractions, nor shall the city be prevented from recovering, in any manner prescribed by law, any expense incurred by it in abating or removing ordinance infractions pursuant to any code provision. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.540 Effect of this article.

A. Citations or complaints issued and filed with the municipal court prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article shall be processed in accordance with the provisions in effect at the time the complaint was issued.

B. Nothing in this article shall be construed as a waiver of any prior assessment, bail or fine ordered by the municipal court. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.550 Severability.

The provisions of this article are severable. If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this article is adjudged to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, that decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.560 Reports of infractions.

All reports or complaints of infractions covered by this article shall be made or referred to an authorized code enforcement officer. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.570 Assessment.

A. Assessment. When an alleged infraction is reported to the city of Silverton, the code enforcement officer shall review the facts and circumstances surrounding the alleged infraction and if he or she deems it appropriate will proceed with appropriate enforcement actions.

B. Sufficiency of Evidence. The code enforcement officer shall not proceed further with the matter if the officer determines that there is not sufficient evidence to support the allegation, or if the officer determines that it is not in the best interest of the city to proceed. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.580 Notice.

Notice of the alleged infraction may be given to the respondent before a civil infraction summons and complaint is issued for an infraction. It is not a prerequisite to the issuance of the summons and complaint, and the giving of notice is at the sole discretion of the code enforcement officer. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.610 Time to remedy infraction after notice.

If a notice of violation is given to a respondent pursuant to this article, the code enforcement officer or building official shall give the respondent a reasonable time to cure or remedy the alleged infraction after the notice is given. The time allowed shall not be less than 24 hours, nor more than 30 days. Where there is an extreme hardship, as determined by the building official or code enforcement officer, the officer may grant additional time to the respondent. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.620 Immediate remedial action required when.

Notwithstanding the remedial time period contained in SMC 15.08.610, if the code enforcement officer determines that the alleged infraction presents an immediate danger to the public health, safety or welfare, or that any continuance of the violation would allow the respondent to profit from the violation or would otherwise be offensive to the public at large, the officer may require immediate remedial action. If, in such cases, the building official or code enforcement officer is unable to serve a notice of infraction on the respondent or, if after such service the respondent refuses or is unable to remedy the infraction, the city may proceed to remedy the infraction as provided in SMC 15.08.790. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.630 Notice – Methods.

If a notice of infraction is given to a respondent pursuant to this article, service of such notice may be made as follows:

A. A notice of the alleged infraction may be given to the respondent in person by the code enforcement officer.

B. Notice of the alleged infraction may be given by a telephone call to the respondent. If notice is given in this manner, the respondent may be given, at the code enforcement officer’s discretion, a notice of infraction by first class mail sent to his last known address as soon as possible after the initial notice by telephone.

C. A notice of the alleged infraction may be given by mailing to the respondent at his last known address.

D. A notice of the alleged infraction may be given by affixing to the main door of the property or premises. If notice is given in this manner, the code enforcement officer or building official may, at his or her discretion, also provide the respondent with a notice of infraction by mail sent to the respondent’s last known address as soon as possible after the initial notice by posting. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.640 Notice – Computation of time period.

A. Where the notice of infraction is delivered in person or by telephone, the time period shall begin to run immediately upon such delivery.

B. Where the notice of infraction is mailed to the respondent, for the purposes of computing any time period prescribed by this article, notice shall be considered complete three days after such mailing, if the address to which it is mailed is within the state, and seven days after mailing if the address to which it is mailed is outside the state.

C. Where the notice of infraction is affixed to the main door of the property or premises, notice shall be considered complete three days after such affixation. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.650 Notice – Information.

A. The following information shall be included in the notice of infraction if one is given:

1. A description or identification of the activity or condition constituting the alleged infraction, and the identification of the recipient as the respondent;

2. A statement that the code enforcement officer has determined the activity or condition to be an infraction;

3. A statement of the action required to remedy or cure the alleged infraction and the time and date by which the remedy must be completed unless a voluntary compliance agreement is executed;

4. A statement advising the respondent that if the required remedy is not completed within the time specified and the respondent has not entered into a voluntary compliance agreement, a civil infraction summons and complaint will be issued and a forfeiture in the maximum amount provided for the particular infraction may be imposed.

B. The following information may be included in the notice of infraction at the discretion of the building official or code enforcement officer: an invitation to contact the city of Silverton to discuss any questions the respondent may have about the alleged violation; the requirements for compliance; and any possibility of entering into a voluntary compliance agreement. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.660 Failure to respond to notice.

If notice is given, and the respondent either receives or rejects the notice of infraction and fails to remedy or cure the alleged infraction within the time specified in the notice of infraction, the code enforcement officer or building official shall serve the respondent with a civil infraction summons and complaint. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.670 Voluntary compliance agreement.

A. Effect of Agreement.

1. The code enforcement officer or building official may enter into a voluntary compliance agreement with the respondent. The agreement shall include time limits for compliance and shall be binding on the respondent.

2. The fact that a person alleged to have committed a civil infraction enters into a voluntary compliance agreement shall not be considered an admission of having committed the infraction for any purpose.

3. The city shall abate further processing of the alleged infraction during the time allowed in the voluntary compliance agreement for the completion of the necessary corrective action. The city shall take no further action concerning the alleged violation if all terms of the voluntary compliance agreement are satisfied, other than steps necessary to terminate the enforcement action.

B. Failure to Comply with Agreement. The failure to comply with any term of the voluntary compliance agreement constitutes an additional and separate infraction, and shall be handled in accordance with the procedures established by this article, except that after the voluntary compliance agreement has been signed no further notice need be given before a civil infraction summons and complaint is issued. The city may also proceed on the alleged infraction that gave rise to the voluntary compliance agreement. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.681 Civil infraction summons and complaint – Timing.

A civil infraction summons and complaint may be served on the respondent:

A. Immediately upon discovery of the infraction;

B. Where a notice of infraction is given and the response period in the violation notification has expired; or

C. Where a voluntary compliance agreement has been executed, whether verbal or written, when the period for compliance has expired and the infraction has not been cured. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.682 Civil infraction summons and complaint – Process requirements.

A. The physical form taken by a civil infraction summons and complaint is not material. What is material is the substance, the information contained therein. The city may utilize various physical formats for the summons and complaint. A long form and a short form are specifically authorized, but other formats may be used. The state uniform citation may be used. Any form prepared by the city should normally contain or solicit the following information, but no complaint or summons shall be considered invalid for failure to comply with these rules, so long as the basic information regarding the infraction and the court date is included.

B. The civil infraction summons and complaint shall contain the following information:

1. The name and address of the respondent;

2. A description of the infraction that can be understood by a person making a reasonable effort to do so;

3. The date, time, and place at which the infraction is alleged to have been committed. If the infraction is alleged to be ongoing, the civil infraction summons and complaint shall so state and shall list a date on which the infraction was observed;

4. A file or reference number;

5. The date the civil infraction summons and complaint was issued;

6. The name of the code enforcement officer or building official issuing the citation;

7. The time, date, and location at which the respondent is to appear in court;

8. A notice that a complaint based on the violation will be filed with the court;

9. The amount of the maximum civil penalty for the infraction;

10. An explanation of the respondent’s obligation to appear at the hearing and that a monetary judgment may be entered for up to the maximum penalties if the respondent fails to make all required court appearances;

11. A space wherein the respondent many admit having committed the alleged infraction;

12. The time period for returning the form to the court;

13. A notice that, if the respondent admits having committed the infraction as charged, payment, in the amount shown on the summons and complaint or as agreed with the code enforcement officer or building official pursuant to SMC 15.08.890, as may be appropriate, must accompany the admission; and

14. A form of verification that the person signing the complaint swears that the person has reasonable grounds to believe, and does so believe, that the respondent committed the alleged infraction. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.683 Civil infraction summons and complaint – Service – Failure to receive – Default.

A. Service of the civil infraction summons and complaint may be made by personal service on the respondent or an agent for the respondent, by substitute service at the respondent’s dwelling or office, by affixing to the main door of the property or premises, or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the respondent at his last known address. In the event of substitute service at the respondent’s dwelling, the person served must be at least 14 years of age and residing in the respondent’s place of abode. Service at the respondent’s office must be made during regular business hours to the person who is apparently in charge. If substitute service is used, a true copy of the summons and complaint, together with a statement of the date, time and place at which service was made, must be mailed to the respondent at the respondent’s last known address. Service will be considered complete upon such a mailing. Service by any other method reasonably calculated, under all the circumstances, to apprise the respondent of the existence and pendency of the infraction and to afford a reasonable opportunity to respond shall be acceptable.

B. Service on particular respondents, such as minors, incapacitated persons, corporations, limited partnerships, the state, other public bodies and general partnerships shall be as prescribed for the service of a civil summons and complaint by the Oregon Rules of Civil Procedure.

C. No default shall be entered against any respondent without proof that the respondent had notice of the civil infraction summons and complaint. A sworn affidavit of the code enforcement officer outlining the method of service, including the date, time and place of service, shall create a rebuttable presumption that the respondent had such notice. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.684 Civil infraction summons and complaint – Respondent’s response required.

A. Response Required. A respondent served with a civil infraction summons and complaint shall respond to the complaint by personally appearing at the scheduled first appearance or by making a written response by mail or personal delivery to the court.

B. Admission. If the respondent admits the infraction, the respondent may so indicate on the summons and forward the form to the court. Payment in the amount of the civil penalty for the infraction, as shown on the summons or as agreed with the code enforcement officer pursuant to SMC 15.08.890, shall be submitted with the response. An appropriate findings shall be entered in the records of the civil infraction hearings officer indicating the receipt of the civil penalty.

C. First Appearance. If the respondent does not admit the infraction, the respondent must appear at the scheduled first appearance. At the first appearance, the respondent may deny the infraction and request a hearing, admit the infraction, or not contest the infraction. If the respondent either admits or does not contest the infraction the respondent shall be given the opportunity to provide a statement. Based on the statement provided by the respondent and any additional information provided by the code enforcement officer or building official, the civil infractions hearings officer shall impose a penalty not to exceed the maximum penalty allowed for the infraction. If the respondent requests a hearing a hearing shall be scheduled. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.690 No right to jury.

Any hearing to determine whether an infraction has been committed shall be held before the civil infraction hearings officer without a jury. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.700 Representation by counsel.

The respondent may be represented by legal counsel; however, legal counsel shall not be provided at public expense. Written notice shall be provided to the hearings officer and code enforcement officer no later than five days prior to any appearance by legal counsel at an appearance or hearing. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.710 Opportunity to be heard – Cross-examination.

At a hearing a respondent shall have the right to present evidence and witnesses in the respondent’s favor, to cross-examine any witnesses who testify against the respondent, and to submit rebuttal evidence. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.720 Witnesses.

A. The respondent may request that witnesses be ordered by subpoena to appear at the hearing. The respondent shall make such request in writing to the court at least five days prior to the scheduled hearing.

B. Subject to the same five-day limitation, the code enforcement officer, the citizen who signed the complaint, or the city attorney, as appropriate, may also request in writing that the court order certain witnesses to appear by subpoena. If a civil penalty is declared in the final order, the order shall also provide that the respondent shall pay any witness fees payable in connection with the hearing. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.730 Hearing – Admissible evidence.

A. Admissible Evidence.

1. Relevant Evidence. The hearing shall be limited to production of evidence only on the infraction alleged in the complaint.

2. Oral Evidence. Oral evidence shall be taken only upon oath or affirmation administered by the civil infractions hearings officer.

3. Admissibility of Evidence. Evidence shall be admitted if it is of the type which responsible persons are accustomed to rely on in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might render such evidence inadmissible in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in this state.

4. Exclusion of Evidence. Irrelevant or unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded.

B. Burden of Proof. The complainant or, if the city is the complainant, the code enforcement officer or building official shall have the burden of proving the alleged civil infraction by a preponderance of the evidence. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.740 Hearing – Decision by hearings officer.

The hearings officer shall determine if the respondent committed the infraction as alleged in the complaint. When the infraction has not been proven, a written order dismissing the complaint shall be entered in the court records. When the hearings officer finds that the infraction was committed, written findings shall be prepared which set out sufficient information to substantiate the commission of the infraction. Written orders, including findings, shall be prepared within 10 working days of the oral decision. The court shall serve true copies of the hearings officer’s finding, order and judgment on all parties, either personally or by mail. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.750 Civil penalty – Abatement requirements.

Upon a finding that the infraction was committed by the respondent, the hearings officer may require the respondent to abate the ordinance infraction within a specified time period identified in the final order. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.760 Civil penalty – Assessment of fees.

Upon a finding that the infraction was committed by the respondent, the hearings officer may assess a civil penalty pursuant to SMC 15.08.830 through 15.08.890, plus hearing costs and witness fees, if any. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.770 Hearing – Records.

The court shall maintain a record of the hearing proceedings. A mechanical recording of the hearing, accompanied by any written documents, correspondence or physical evidence associated with the matter, shall be sufficient to meet the requirements of this section. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.780 Finality of decision – Appeals.

The determination of the hearings officer shall be final. Review of the hearings officer’s determination shall be to the circuit court by writ of review, pursuant to ORS Chapter 34. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.790 Remedial action by city – Costs.

A. Upon finding that an infraction was committed, as determined by a final decision of the hearings officer, the city may, after obtaining a warrant to enter the property and abate the infraction, remedy the infraction and charge the remedial costs back to the respondent. For the purposes of this subsection, “a final decision of the hearings officer” means a final decision for which judicial review was not sought within the time allowed by law or a decision of the hearings officer that was upheld by a final decision in the judicial review and appeal process.

B. In the case of an immediate danger to the public health, safety or welfare declared under SMC 15.08.620, the city may remedy the infraction and charge the remedial cost back to the respondent, after obtaining a warrant to enter the property and abate the infraction. If the immediate danger constitutes an emergency threatening immediate death or physical injury to persons, the city may abate the infraction without obtaining a warrant if the delay associated with obtaining the warrant would result in increased risk of death or injury, and may charge the remedial costs back to the respondent.

C. The code enforcement officer or building official shall have the right at reasonable times to enter into or upon property in accordance with law to investigate or to remedy the infraction. This provision does not authorize a warrantless entry when a warrant is required by state or federal law.

D. The finance officer shall keep an accurate record of all costs incurred by the city in remedying the infraction. The finance officer shall notify the respondent by certified mail, return receipt requested, of these costs, and advise the respondent that the costs will be assessed to and become a lien against the respondent’s property if not paid within 30 days of the notice, and shall further notify the respondent that the respondent is entitled to a hearing to contest the amount of the costs to be assessed.

E. The respondent shall be entitled to request a hearing to consider the amount of the costs assessed to remedy the alleged infraction. That hearing shall be conducted pursuant to the procedures established in SMC 15.08.690 through 15.08.780.

F. If the remedial costs are not paid, the finance officer shall follow the procedures for lien filing and docketing as contained in SMC 15.08.820. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.800 Default judgment.

Subject to the limitations set forth in SMC 15.08.683, a default judgment shall be entered in an amount up to the maximum civil penalty applicable to the charged infraction if the respondent fails to appear at the scheduled hearing. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.810 Enforcement – Rules and regulations.

The code enforcement officer and building official are authorized to promulgate any rules he or she considers necessary to enforce this chapter. To be effective, such rules must be approved by the city council by resolution. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.820 Lien filing and docketing.

A. When a judgment is rendered by the hearings officer in favor of the city for the sum of $10.00 or more, exclusive of costs and disbursements, the code enforcement officer shall, at any time thereafter while the judgment is enforceable, file with the city finance officer a certified transcript of all those entries made in the docket of the hearings officer with respect to the action in which the judgment was entered.

B. Upon receipt of this transcript, the finance officer shall enter the judgment of the hearings officer on the city’s lien docket.

C. From the time of entry of the judgment on the city’s lien docket, the judgment shall be a lien upon the real property of the person against whom the judgment was entered in the hearing. The city’s lien docket shall not thereby extend the lien of the judgment more than 10 years from the original entry of the judgment at the hearing.

D. Whenever a judgment of the hearings officer which has been entered pursuant to this section is renewed by the hearings officer, the lien is automatically extended 10 years from the date of the renewal order.

E. The finance officer shall file the transcript of the judgment with the Marion County clerk for entry in the judgment docket of the circuit court. All costs associated with the filing of the transcript shall be added to the amount of the judgment. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.830 Continuous infractions.

When an infraction is of continuous nature, unless otherwise specifically provided, a separate infraction shall be deemed to occur on each calendar day the infraction continues to exist. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.840 Failure to comply with judgment order.

Failure to abate an infraction or pay the civil penalty or court costs imposed within the time allowed for abatement or payment shall constitute a Class 1 civil infraction. Failure to comply with a judgment order is a continuous infraction and a separate infraction will be deemed to occur each calendar day the failure to comply with an infraction continues to exist past the time allowed in the judgment order. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.850 Penalty – Payment due when.

Any civil penalty assessed shall be paid no later than close of business day after the final order. Such period may be extended upon order of the hearings officer. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.860 Penalty – Classifications.

For the purpose of determining civil penalties, infractions are classified in the following categories:

A. Class 1 infractions;

B. Class 2 infractions;

C. Class 3 infractions. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.870 Penalty – Assessment.

The civil penalty to be assessed for a specific infraction by Resolution No. 04-09. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.880 Penalty – Repeat violations.

The maximum amounts of the civil penalties set forth in SMC 15.08.870 shall be doubled in the event that the respondent is found in violation of a second and similar violation within 24 months of the initial violation and quadrupled in the event of a third or subsequent repetition within 24 months of the initial violation. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.890 Penalty – Prior to hearing.

The code enforcement officer or building official is not authorized to reduce the amount of the penalty to be paid by the respondent if the penalty amount is paid in full on or before the time and date of the first appearance. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


15.08.900 Delinquent civil penalties.

Delinquent civil penalties and those imposed by default judgment which were assessed for infractions may, in addition to any other method, be collected or enforced pursuant to ORS 30.310. (Ord. 04-105 § 3, 2004)


Chapter 15.09 BOARDING UP OF BUILDINGS IN DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL CORE

Sections:

15.09.001    Intent.

15.09.005    Definitions.

15.09.010    Prohibition of boarding up windows and doors.

15.09.020    Order to correct.

15.09.025    Civil penalty.

15.09.030    Violation.

15.09.050    Violation – Separate offenses.


15.09.001 Intent.

The intent of this chapter is to recognize that the boarding up of windows and doorways in buildings within the downtown commercial core is contrary of the intent of the city to foster the economic viability of the commercial downtown core and preserve the integrity of the downtown core’s historic district designation. Boarding up of buildings results in creation of a blighted effect in the downtown core which threatens the overall economic health of the community. (Ord. 01-113 § 1, 2001)


15.09.005 Definitions.

“Downtown commercial core” is defined as being that area which comprises the central business district and all of the National Register Historical District. Its boundaries encompass one contiguous section, beginning on the east side of Silver Creek between City Hall located at 306 S. Water Street and the Fisher Building located at 210 S. Water Street, crossing South Water Street east along Jersey Street to Second Street, then north along Second Street to the intersection with Park Street, then west along Park Street to the intersection with North Water, then along the north property line of property located at 313 N. Water Street, then south along the east side of Silver Creek to the point of beginning.

“Boarding up” means the placement of boards, plywood, particle board, other fibrous material, synthetic material, metallic material, cardboard, or paper over windows and doorways so as to obscure vision into or out of the building and limit ingress and egress of the building or portion of a building. (Ord. 01-113 § 1, 2001)


15.09.010 Prohibition of boarding up windows and doors.

Owners of buildings in the commercial downtown core are prohibited from boarding up the buildings’ windows and doors except during times of actual building renovations for activity covered by a valid building permit, or during times of emergency. (Ord. 01-113 § 1, 2001)


15.09.020 Order to correct.

In the event any person who shall be the owner of, or shall be in possession of, or in responsible charge of any building in the downtown commercial core with windows and/or doors which remain boarded up 30 days after permitted building renovations are either completed, or when a building permit has been inactivated, or work has terminated, or boarded up when a declared period of emergency is no longer in effect shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter, shall receive written notice from the city stating that the building is in violation of this chapter and the abatement must begin. The order to correct shall advise the owner that a civil penalty may be assessed if the condition is not remedied. The order to correct shall be served by certified mail, without return receipt, to the owner, as determined by the most recent roll of the Marion County tax assessor. It shall also be posted on the premises by order of the city manager. (Ord. 01-113 § 1, 2001)


15.09.025 Civil penalty.

A. If compliance with the order to correct is not achieved within the time specified in the order to correct, the city manager is authorized to assess a civil penalty of $2,500 a day, payable to the city, for each day the violation continues to exist after the deadline specified in the order.

B. A civil penalty is assessed by issuing written notice of penalty to the owner of specified property. The notice shall contain the following information:

1. The street address or description sufficient for identification of the property;

2. That the city manager has found the violation continues to exist after the order to correct, with a concise description of the conditions leading to his/her findings;

3. That the owner may request a hearing on the validity of the assessment of the penalty. A hearing request must be in writing and filed with the Silverton city council, 306 S. Water Street, Silverton, Oregon 97381 within 10 days of the mailing of the notice. The request must state the grounds upon which the owner believes that the penalty is not valid. The council may assess the costs of the hearing against the owner if the council determines the penalty is valid. The penalty and hearing costs will become a lien against the property unless paid.

C. The penalty is final when 10 days have elapsed from the date of mailing the notice if a request for hearing is not filed, or upon entry of an order by the city council declaring the penalty valid if a request for hearing is filed.

D. Hearing. The city council shall hold a hearing upon a request filed as provided in this chapter. At the hearing the owner may contest the validity of the penalty. The city shall have the burden of showing the validity of the penalty by a preponderance of the evidence. The council shall enter an order determining whether the penalty is valid or not valid. The action of the council pursuant to this section is final. If the council determines that the penalty is valid, the council may assess costs of the hearing against the owner.

E. Penalty and Costs of Hearing as Lien. The city manager and city council shall forward statements of the assessments for penalties and hearing costs to the city recorder. The city recorder shall notify the owner by mail of the sum of money due to the city. If that sum is not paid within 30 days of the billing date, the recorder shall file with the council a statement of the sum due, plus an additional charge of five percent to cover assessment procedure expense. After a reasonable opportunity to be heard in objection thereto, the council shall then, by ordinance, declare the correctness of such statement and declare the same to be a lien upon the property involved, to be entered in the minor lien docket and enforced against the property, in the same manner provided for enforcement of liens for street improvements. (Ord. 01-113 § 1, 2001)


15.09.030 Violation.

Any person who shall be the owner of, or shall be in possession of, or in responsible charge of any building in the downtown commercial core with windows and/or doors which remain boarded up 30 days after permitted building renovations are either completed, or when a building permit has been inactivated, or work has terminated, or boarded up when a declared period of emergency is no longer in effect shall be liable for a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to notice by the city consistent with the procedures established in SMC 8.04.160 through 8.04.210, except that the enforcement official shall not be the chief of police, but shall be the city manager, or designee. (Ord. 01-113 § 1, 2001)


15.09.050 Violation – Separate offenses.

Each day the violation of this provision continues unabated shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 01-113 § 1, 2001)


Chapter 15.12 UNIFORM FIRE CODE

Sections:

15.12.010    Conformity to state standards.

15.12.020    Permit requirement.

15.12.030    Adoption of State Code.

15.12.040    Definitions.

15.12.050    Appeals.

15.12.060    Penalties.

15.12.070    Repeal of conflicting ordinances.

15.12.080    Validity.

15.12.090    Permit fees.


15.12.010 Conformity to state standards.

The policy of the city is that fire safety activities in the city shall comply at all times with the State Fire Code standards. Notwithstanding any regulation or ordinance contained in a city ordinance, any standard in the State Fire Code, as adopted by the State Fire Marshal, applies as a city requirement in the same manner as that standard applies as a state requirement. (Ord. 96-123, 1996)


15.12.020 Permit requirement.

No person may engage in activity involving conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion for which a permit or inspection is required by the fire code unless such activity complies with all state standards, local regulations, or other requirements hereof. The standards, regulations, and requirements which shall be applicable to any construction or activity shall be those in effect at the time the permit is issued, or the activity occurs if no permit was issued. (Ord. 96-123, 1996)


15.12.030 Adoption of State Code.

The Oregon Uniform Fire Code and Fire Code Standards, effective January 1, 1994, with its state-adopted appendices and separately bound standards, especially Appendix A-1 (Requirements for Permits for Retail/Wholesale and/or Public Display of Fireworks) and Appendix A-2 (Fire Apparatus Access Roads), is hereby adopted. (Ord. 96-123, 1996)


15.12.040 Definitions.

Wherever the word “jurisdiction” is used in the Uniform Fire Code, it shall be held to mean that area included within the city limits of Silverton. (Ord. 96-123, 1996)


15.12.050 Appeals.

Whenever the chief disapproves an application or refuses to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of this code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal the decision of the chief to the board of appeals of the Silverton fire district within 30 days from the date of the decision. (Ord. 96-123, 1996)


15.12.060 Penalties.

A. Any person who violates any of the provision of the Uniform Fire Code as adopted and amended herein or fails to comply therewith, or who violates or fails to comply with any order made thereunder, or who builds in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who fails to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the board of appeals or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the required time, shall severally for each and every violation and noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of a violation, punishable by a fine of not less than $10.00 and no more than $100.00 for each day’s failure or refusal to correct or remove such violation, as provided by ORS 478.990. This imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each five days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.

B. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. (Ord. 96-123, 1996)


15.12.070 Repeal of conflicting ordinances.

All former ordinances or parts thereof conflicting or inconsistent with provisions of this chapter or of the Uniform Fire Code as adopted and amended herein are hereby repealed. (Ord. 96-123, 1996)


15.12.080 Validity.

The city council hereby declared that should any section, paragraph, sentence or word of this chapter or the Uniform Fire Code and Standards as adopted and amended herein be declared for any reason to be invalid, it is the intent of the city that it would have passed all other portions of this chapter independent of the elimination herefrom of any such portions as may be declared invalid. (Ord. 96-123, 1996)


15.12.090 Permit fees.

The council sets fees for permits authorized under this chapter to be equivalent to fees adopted by the county of Marion in effect on July 1, 1996. (Ord. 96-123, 1996)


Chapter 15.16 SIGNS

Sections:

15.16.010    Purpose.

15.16.020    Definitions.

15.16.030    Sign permit required.

15.16.040    General sign requirements.

15.16.050    Exempt from permit requirements.

15.16.060    Prohibited signs.

15.16.070    Nonconforming signs.

15.16.080    Temporary signs.

15.16.090    Reserved.

15.16.100    Sign districts – General.

15.16.110    Residential sign district.

15.16.120    –

15.16.190    Reserved.

15.16.200    Commercial sign district.

15.16.210    Reserved.

15.16.220    Integrated business signs.

15.16.230    –

15.16.290    Reserved.

15.16.300    Industrial sign district.

15.16.310    Reserved.

15.16.400    Public sign district.

15.16.500    Illuminated sign regulations.

15.16.510    Construction and maintenance standards.

15.16.600    Deviations from sign code provisions.

15.16.610    Adjustments.

15.16.620    Variances.

15.16.630    Appeal of decision on sign permit.

15.16.700    Enforcement of sign code – General provisions.

15.16.710    Enforcement – Sign in public right-of-way or on city-owned real property.

15.16.720    Enforcement – Sign on private property or on non-city-owned public property, other than on public right-of-way.

15.16.730    Removal of unsafe signs.

15.16.740    Removal of abandoned signs.

15.16.800    Reserved.

15.16.900    Violations.

15.16.910    Penalties and other remedies.


15.16.010 Purpose.

The purpose of the sign code is to protect the health, safety, property, and welfare of the public; to provide a neat, clean, orderly, and attractive appearance for the community; to improve the effectiveness of signs; to provide for safe construction, location, erection, and maintenance of signs; to prevent proliferation of signs and sign clutter; to minimize adverse visual safety factors to travelers on public streets and on private areas open to public travel; and to achieve this purpose in a manner consistent with state and federal constitutional limits. In the downtown historic district the purpose of the sign code is also to help restore and maintain the character of the district through appropriate signage regulations. In order to achieve these purposes it is necessary to regulate the design, quality of materials, construction, location, electrification, illumination, and maintenance of signs that are visible to the public. (Ord. 09-04 § 2, 2009)


15.16.020 Definitions.

For the purposes of the Silverton sign code, unless the context indicates otherwise: words in the present tense include the future; the singular number includes the plural and the plural number includes the singular; undefined words have their ordinary accepted meanings; and the following words and phrases mean:

“A-frame sign” means a temporary sign composed of one or two self-supporting sign faces typically attached at the top and separated at the bottom, not permanently attached to the ground.

“Abandoned sign” means a sign or structure where the sign is no longer used by the person or business that erected the sign. This includes, but is not limited to: (1) a sign associated with a property which has ended its use for more than 90 days; or (2) the sign has been damaged and repairs and/or restoration are not started within 90 days of the date the sign was damaged, or are not diligently pursued once started.

“Alter” means to make a change to a sign or sign structure, including, but not limited to, changes in area, height, projection, illumination, shape, materials, placement, and location on a site. Altering a sign does not include a change of copy or maintenance.

“Athletic field sign” means a sign erected next to an athletic field by the owner or operator of the field, which is visible to the athletic field spectators.

“Automobile service station” means a retail place of business engaged primarily in the sale of motor fuels.

“Awning” means a shelter projecting from and supported by the exterior wall of a building constructed of rigid material on a supporting framework.

“Awning sign” means a sign attached to or incorporated into an awning.

“Balloon sign” means a sign consisting of a membrane that relies on internal gaseous pressure or a semi-rigid framework for maintaining its form.

“Banner” means a sign made of fabric, vinyl, canvas or other nonrigid material intended for display.

“Bench sign” means a sign on an outdoor bench.

“Billboard” means a sign on which any sign face exceeds 200 square feet in area.

“Blanketing” means blocking a pedestrian’s or motorist’s view of a projecting sign by another projecting sign.

“Boundaries of a site” means the area inside the legal lot lines of a site, not including any property in a public right-of-way.

“Building elevation area” means the area of a single side of a building, measured in square feet and calculated by multiplying the length of the side of the building by the height of the building to the roof line. If the roof line height varies along the side of the building, the average of the lowest and highest roof line height on that side shall be used in the calculation.

“Building frontage, primary” means the dimension of a building face abutting a public or private street as the point of ingress and egress.

“Building frontage, secondary” means the dimension of a building face abutting a public or private street.

“Building official” means the building official or his or her designee.

“Bulletin board” means a permanent sign providing information that can be changed.

“Business” means employment, occupation, profession, industrial or commercial activity engaged in for gain or livelihood.

“Business complex” means a development consisting of one or more lots sharing appurtenant facilities, such as driveways, parking facilities, and pedestrian walkways, and is designed to provide varied products and services at a single location.

“Canopy” means a permanent roofed structure that may be freestanding or be partially attached to a building, for the purpose of providing shelter to patrons on foot and/or in motor vehicles; does not include a completely enclosed structure.

“Changing image sign” means a sign that operates through the use of:

1. Moving structural elements;

2. Flashing or sequential lights;

3. Lights in a dot matrix or LED configuration, which may be changed intermittently; or

4. Other automated method, resulting in movement, the appearance of movement, or change of sign image, message, or display.

“City” means the city of Silverton.

“City council” means the elected governing body of the city of Silverton.

“City engineer” means the city engineer or his or her designee.

“City manager” means the city manager or his or her designee.

“City recorder” means the city recorder or his or her designee.

“Clearance” means the distance between the average grade below a sign to the lowermost portion of the sign.

“Community development director” means the community development director or his or her designee.

“Community event” means an activity or event identified as such by the city council.

“Dark sky fixture” means a lighting fixture that provides a cutoff (shielding) to minimize glare, prevent light trespass, and reduce sky glow.

“Direct illumination” means an illuminated sign in which the source of light for the sign is directly seen by the public, such as a spotlight, floodlight, etc.

“Display surface” means the area made available by the sign structure for the purpose of displaying a message.

“Drive-up/through service sign” means a sign placed at the beginning of a drive-up service lane of an establishment that may include a two-way speaker system or other system of communication allowing for service transactions.

“Dwelling” means a building that has independent living facilities including provisions for sleeping, cooking, and sanitation, and that is designed for residential occupancy by a group of people.

“Electronic message sign” means a sign that uses LED technology to convey a message.

“External illuminated sign” means a sign illuminated by a light source separate from the sign surface and directed to shine upon the sign. External illumination is “direct” when the source of light is directly seen by the public, such as a floodlight, and “indirect” when the source of light is not directly seen by the public, such as cove lighting.

“Filing” means depositing a document in the United States mail, postage prepaid and accurately addressed to the city, or leaving a copy with the city recorder at City Hall during work hours. For purposes of this chapter, a document is “filed” on the date it is received at City Hall.

“Fire marshal” means the fire marshal or his or her designee.

“Flag” means a rectangular piece of fabric of distinctive design that is displayed hanging from a staff, halyard or building to which it is attached.

“Flag lot” means a building lot which is provided access to a public street by means of a narrow strip of land with minimal frontage.

“Flashing sign” means a sign which contains an intermittent or flashing light source, or which includes the illusion of intermittent or flashing light by means of animation, or an externally mounted intermittent light source.

“Freestanding sign” means any ground, ground-mounted, pole, or monument sign supported by one or more uprights or braces placed upon the ground, and not attached to any building.

“Frontage” means the length of a property line of any one parcel along a public right-of-way or in a shopping center the length of visible building wall that the building occupies.

“Grade,” for freestanding signs, is the average level of the ground measured five feet from either end of the base of the sign, parallel to the sign face. For signs mounted on buildings, the grade is the average level of the sidewalk, alley or ground below the mounted sign measured five feet from either end of the sign face.

“Ground sign” means a freestanding sign that is eight feet or less above grade in which either the sign, sign structure, or sign base is affixed to the ground by at least 50 percent of the sign face width or is borne by two or more supports that are a maximum of 30 inches in height. Also see “monument sign.”

“Hand-held sign” means a hand-carried sign of six square feet or less in area, worn or carried by a person when being displayed.

“Hearing body” means the city body authorized by ordinance to consider a matter.

“Height” means the vertical distance measured from grade to the highest attached component of a sign including the supporting structure.

“Historic district” means the area designated as a historic district on the National Register of Historic Places.

“Historical or landmark marker” means a sign constructed in close proximity to a historic place, object, building, or other landmark recognized by an official historical resources entity, where the sign is constructed by the owner of the historic property and does not exceed 20 square feet in size.

“Historical sign” means a sign designated as a historic or cultural resource under city, state, or federal inventory or a sign that is an historical element of a historical landmark.

“Incidental sign” means a sign, generally informational, that has a purpose secondary to the use of the parcel on which it is located. Examples may include “No Parking,” Open,” “Closed,” “Loading Only,” “No Cell Phones,” “Telephone,” etc.

“Indirect illumination” means an illuminated sign in which the source of light for the sign cannot be seen by the public, such as cove lighting, internal lighting within a box sign, etc.

“Integrated business sign(s)” means a sign or group of signs shared by two or more businesses which are located in a building or group of buildings, on one or more parcels which are contiguous or which are separated by a public right-of-way or private access driveway, which are constructed and/or managed as a single entity, and share ownership and/or function.

“Internal illuminated sign” means a sign illuminated by a light source contained within the sign, including dot matrix or LED lighting or other light sources.

“Interior sign” means a sign erected and maintained inside of a building, including, but not limited to, a sign attached to or painted on the inside of windows.

“Lawn sign” means a temporary freestanding sign made of lightweight materials such as cardboard, plasticized corrugated cardboard, vinyl or other similar materials that is supported by a frame, pole or other structure placed directly in or upon the ground.

“LED/LEE” means a semiconductor diode or electrode or similar technology that converts applied electrical power to light.

“Lot” means a legally defined piece of land, other than a tract, that is the result of a subdivision.

“Maintenance” means normal care or servicing needed to keep a sign functional or perpetuate its use, such as cleaning, replacing, or repairing a part.

“Mansard” means a sloped roof or roof-like facade architecturally comparable to a building wall.

“Marker sign” means a plaque, sign, or marker intended to be used to show the location of an event, structure or place judged by the administrator to be of public interest.

“Marquee” means a permanent roofed structure attached to or supported by a building.

“Marquee sign” means any sign attached to, in any manner, or made a part of a marquee.

“Monument sign” means a freestanding sign that is eight feet or less above grade that is affixed to a base which is no more than 30 inches above grade. Also see “ground sign.”

“Name plate” means a permanent wall sign located on the front facade of a residential structure.

“Neon sign” means a sign internally or externally illuminated by a light source consisting of neon or other method that simulates the appearance of a neon tube, except for fluorescent lights.

“Nonconforming sign” means those signs which were lawfully installed, but do not comply with the requirements of this sign code.

“Numeric information sign” means a sign only displaying numeric measurements such as time, date, temperature, or stock indices.

“Off-premises sign” means a sign that advertises a product or service that is not available for purchase from the premises, facilities, property, parcel or lot on which the sign is located.

“Owner” means the person owning title to property on which a sign is located, or the contract purchaser of the real property as shown on the last available complete assessment roll in the office of county assessor, or the possessor of a sign who has a continuing lease of the real property on which the sign is located.

“Parapet” means the extension of a false front or wall above a roof line.

“Parcel” means any piece or parcel of land or a portion of a subdivision, the boundaries of which have been established and intended as a unit for the purpose of transfer of ownership.

“Pennant” means a triangular or other shape of flexible material intended to wave in the wind.

“Permanent sign” means a sign intended for use for more than 30 days or a sign whose intended use is on a permanent basis.

“Planned unit development” means a tract or tracts of land developed with the application of an overlay zone.

“Pole sign” means a sign that is a freestanding sign connected to the ground by one or more supports with the lower edge of the sign separated vertically from the ground by a distance of eight feet or greater as measured from grade.

“Portable sign” means a sign which is not affixed to a building or other structure, or the ground in a permanent manner and is designed to be moved from place to place.

“Principal use” means a nonresidential use of property by an owner or lessee. Multiple principal uses may be located on a lot or development.

“Projecting sign” means a sign, other than a wall sign, that projects from, and is supported by or attached to, a roof or wall of a building or structure.

“Public right-of-way” means a public use area that allows for the passage of people or vehicles. This includes passageways such as highways, pedestrian connections, alleys and all streets. A right-of-way is dedicated or deeded to the public for public use and under the control of a public agency.

“Public sign” means a sign erected, constructed, or placed within the public right-of-way or on public property by or with the approval of the governmental agency having authority over, control of, or ownership of the right-of-way or public property.

“Repair” means mending or replacing broken or worn parts with comparable materials.

“Roof elevation area” means the area of a single plane of a roof, measured in square feet and calculated by multiplying the difference between the height of the ridge and the height of the eave by the distance between opposing rakes.

“Roof line” means means the top edge of a roof or a building parapet, whichever is higher, excluding any cupolas, chimneys or other minor projections.

“Roof sign” means a sign erected upon, against, or over the roof of any building or structure.

“Rotating sign” means a sign in which the sign itself or any portion of the sign moves in a revolving manner.

Sandwich Board Sign. See “A-frame sign.”

“Setback” means the minimum distance required between a sign and another point, measured from lot lines to a sign.

“Sign” means a device, structure, or fixture which incorporates graphics, symbols, or written copy, including those devices, structures, or fixtures which are behind windows or building openings, which are intended to communicate information.

Sign Area. Where there is a sign structure, the area of the structure shall be considered the sign area. In the absence of a structure, the area of a sign shall be determined by placing a rectangle or circle so that all graphic and text is enclosed within the rectangle or circle shape and calculating the area. See the following exhibits.


[IMAGE]


“Sign band” means a continuous horizontal band located on a facade where there are no doors, windows or other architectural features.

“Sign copy” means the message or image conveyed by a sign.

“Sign district” means the districts created for the purpose of regulating signage. See SMC 15.16.100.

“Sign face” means the sum of the surfaces of a sign face as seen from one plane or elevation included within the outer dimensions of the sign board, frame or cabinet.

“Sign height” means the average level of the grade below the sign to the topmost point of the sign including the supporting sign structure, foundations, and supports.

“Site” means the area, tract, parcel, or lot of land owned by or under the lawful control of an owner. Abutting platted lots under the same ownership shall be considered one site.

“Street frontage” means the dimension of a property line abutting a public or private street.

“Structure” means any object constructed in or on the ground. “Structure” includes buildings, decks, fences, towers, flag poles, signs, and other similar objects. “Structure” does not include paved areas or vegetative landscaping materials.

“Subdivision” means a site with four or more lots.

“Subdivision gateway sign” means a sign placed at the entrance of a subdivision for the purpose of identifying said properties.

“Supporting structure” means a structure specifically intended for supporting or containing a sign.

“Suspended sign” means a sign suspended from the underside of a canopy, awning, eave, or marquee.

“Temporarily attached” means a sign attached to a building, structure, vegetation or the ground in a manner that is easily removable.

“Temporary business” means a temporary business as defined by the City of Silverton Municipal Code.

“Temporary sign” means a sign erected for a limited period of time. Some types of temporary signs will only be permitted after issuance of sign permit.

“Traffic sign” means a sign for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic. All traffic signs shall conform to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control and Devices published by the Federal Highway Administration, U.S. Department of Transportation.

“Unlawful sign” means a sign that was erected unlawfully and does not conform to this code.

“Utility sign” means a sign constructed or placed by a public utility on or adjacent to a pole, pipe, or distribution facility of the utility and within the public right-of-way or utility easement.

“Vehicle sign” means a sign placed in or attached to a motor vehicle, trailer, railroad car, etc., or other sign that is used regularly for travel or purposes other than display of signs. Any vehicle that hosts a vehicle sign must comply with all other vehicle and parking regulations.

“Video sign” means a sign providing information through use of pixel and subpixel technology or having the capacity to create continuously changing sign copy or images.

“Vision clearance area” means those areas near intersections of roadways and motor vehicle access points where a clear field of vision is necessary for traffic safety and to maintain adequate sight distance.

“Wall sign” means a sign that is painted on a wall of a building, or attached parallel to the wall of a building and extending no more than six inches from a wall, and is confined within the limits of an outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by such wall or building, and which displays only one sign surface. Window signs that are permanently attached to the outside of a window are wall signs.

“Wayfinding/wayfaring sign” means a sign that is four square feet or less that is provided as a public convenience to assist in locating buildings or other attractions that do not have direct frontage on a public street.

“Window sign” means a sign attached to, or applied onto, a window, or displayed inside the building within six inches of a window or building openings so that it is viewable from the outside of the building.

“Zoning/development ordinance” means the Silverton development code. (Ord. 09-04 § 2, 2009)


15.16.030 Sign permit required.

A. General Provisions. Except as provided in this chapter, a permit is required to erect, construct, or alter a sign. If a sign is for a new development that requires development review under Silverton’s zoning or development regulations, then the sign(s) location(s) shall be reviewed as part of the development review process prior to approval of a sign permit.

B. Sign Permit Application. An application for a sign permit shall be made on a form prescribed by the city and shall be filed with the city. The sign permit application shall be signed by the property owner (or property owner’s authorized legal representative) and the sign owner (or sign owner’s authorized representative). The application may be filed by the property owner, the owner of the sign, or a representative of the sign’s owner. A separate sign permit application is required for each sign. The application shall include the following information and any other information required by the city:

1. A sketch of the site, drawn to scale, showing the approximate location of existing structures, existing signs, and the proposed sign(s);

2. Building frontage elevations drawn to scale, showing the sign(s)’ relative location and placement;

3. An illustration of the proposed sign(s), drawn to scale, showing the design, elevations, sign face dimensions and area, materials and engineering data which demonstrates its structural stability. The illustration of the proposed sign(s) need not show the sign message, but shall show the size, style, and design of the lettering, numbers, and graphics conveying any message. The content of any message shall not be considered in the evaluation of a sign permit application;

4. The names, addresses, contact information, and signatures of the applicant, the owner of the property on which the sign is to be located, the manufacturer of the sign, the person or contractor installing the sign, and the construction contractor’s board number of the installer. The property owner of the site where the sign is to be located shall sign the sign permit application; and

5. A fee in the amount set by city council resolution. When a person begins construction of a sign requiring a sign permit before the permit is approved, the permit fee shall be doubled.

C. Building/Electrical Permits. When deemed necessary by the building official, building or electrical permits shall be obtained as a part of the sign permit application process. As required by building codes and/or electrical code, the approval of the building official and/or fire marshal shall be obtained prior to erecting, constructing or altering a sign.

1. Inspections of all required work shall be performed by the building official in accordance with the building codes and/or electrical code.

D. Time Period to Process Permit. The community development director or his/her designee shall grant or deny the sign permit application based upon the information submitted with the application and other information obtained by or submitted to the city within 30 days of submittal of a complete application.

1. If a decision is not made within the time specified in this section, the applicant may temporarily install the sign as requested, at the applicant’s risk for costs of removal, until such time as the city’s decision is issued and is final.

2. If the application is denied, the community development director or his/her designee shall mail the applicant written notice of the decision and shall explain why the application was denied. The decision shall also include an explanation of the applicant’s appeal rights. The decision shall be mailed to the address of the applicant on the application by regular mail.

E. Sign Permit Approval. A sign permit application shall be approved if:

1. The application complies with all of the applicable provisions of this chapter and any other objective requirement imposed by law. No standard shall be applied to deny a permit if the operation of that standard violates a constitutional right of the applicant. If, as part of the application, an applicant identifies a particular standard alleged to have unconstitutional effect, and provides reasons for that contention, the community development director or his/her designee shall seek the opinion of the city attorney on the contention. If the city attorney concludes that the operation of the standard violates a constitutional right of the applicant, the community development director or his/her designee shall not apply the standard in reviewing the application;

2. The applicable permit fee has been paid.

F. Approval Period. An approved sign shall be constructed and installed within six months of the final approval of the permit, including resolution of any appeal. The sign permit shall be void if installation is not completed within this period or if the sign does not conform to the approved permit.

1. Sign permits mistakenly issued by the city due to a city error that are in violation of this chapter or other provisions of this code will be considered as legal, nonconforming signs.

2. If a sign does not conform to the approved sign permit or the building code after inspection, the sign will be subject to removal under SMC 15.16.720.

G. Permit Revocation. The community development director may revoke a sign permit if the director finds that the constructed sign does not match the approved design, or if there was a material and misleading false statement of fact in the permit application. (Ord. 09-04 § 2, 2009)


15.16.040 General sign requirements.

A. Compliance with Sign Code Required. Except as provided in SMC 15.16.050, no person shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, or use any sign, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of the Silverton sign code.

B. Application Required. All new signs, except as provided in SMC 15.16.050, shall be required to obtain a sign permit prior to installation of the sign. An application for sign permit approval is subject to the procedures set forth in SMC 15.16.030.

C. Computation of Sign Area and Height. Computation of sign area and height shall be as follows:

1. Individual Sign Area. Where there is a sign structure, the area of the structure shall be considered the sign area. In the absence of a structure, the area of a sign shall be determined by placing a rectangle or circle so that all graphic and text is enclosed within the rectangle or circle shape.

2. Multifaced Sign Area. The area shall be determined consistent with individual signs except that for a sign with more than one face, the area shall be determined by adding together the area of all sign faces visible from any one point. When two sign faces are placed back to back, so that both faces cannot be viewed from any point at the same time, and when such sign faces are part of the same sign structure and are not more than 42 inches apart, the sign area shall be computed by the measurement of the largest one of the faces.

3. Height. The height of a sign shall be computed as the distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the top of the highest attached component of the sign. Normal grade shall be construed to be the lower of: (a) existing grade prior to construction; or (b) the newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding, or excavation solely for the purpose of locating the sign. In cases in which the normal grade cannot be reasonably determined, sign height shall be computed on the assumption that the elevation of the normal grade at the base of the sign is equal to the elevation of the nearest point of the crown of a public street or the grade of the land at the principal entrance to the principal structure on the lot, whichever is lower.

D. Sign Code Standards. All new signs shall comply with all applicable provisions of this code, including but not limited to sign districts (SMC 15.16.100 through 15.16.400), illumination regulations (SMC 15.16.500), construction and maintenance standards (SMC 15.16.510), deviation processes (SMC 15.16.600), enforcement provisions (SMC 15.16.700), and violations (SMC 15.16.900).

E. No Expansion of Unlawful Signs. No owner shall erect, construct, or allow a sign to be erected or constructed on a site that contains unlawful signs.

F. Stricter Standards Prevail. The Silverton sign code shall not be construed to permit the placement or maintenance of any sign at any place or in any manner unlawful under any other city code provision or other applicable law. In any case where a part of the Silverton sign code conflicts with a provision of any zoning/development, building, fire, safety or health ordinance or code, the provision which establishes a stricter standard for the protection of the public health and safety shall prevail.

G. Content Neutrality. The Silverton sign code is not intended to, and does not, restrict speech on the basis of its content, viewpoint or message. Any classification of signs in this chapter that permits speech by reason of the type of sign, identity of the sign user or otherwise, shall permit any type of speech on the sign. No part of this chapter shall be construed to favor commercial speech over noncommercial speech. To the extent any provision of this chapter is ambiguous, the term shall be interpreted to not regulate on the basis of speech content, and the interpretation resulting in the least restriction on the content of the sign message shall prevail.

H. Interpretation. The Silverton community development director is authorized to interpret the provisions of this code.

I. Severability. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of the sign code is declared invalid for any reason by a court having jurisdiction under state or federal law, the remaining portions of this chapter shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 09-04 § 2, 2009)


15.16.050 Exempt from permit requirements.

The following signs and activities are allowed in all zoning districts without a permit. Use of these signs does not affect the amount or type of signage otherwise allowed by this chapter. The painting, repainting, cleaning, maintenance and repair of an existing sign shall not require a permit, unless a substantial structural alteration is made. The changing of a sign copy or message shall not require a permit. All signs listed in this section are subject to all other applicable requirements of the Silverton sign code.

A. Signs (including name plates and dates of erection of buildings) on multifamily residential, commercial, industrial, or institutional buildings when the sign is cut into the surface or the facade of a building, or when it is constructed of stone, masonry, bronze or other noncombustible material and projects no more than two inches from a building, so long as the cumulative sign face(s) are eight square feet or less in area;

B. One indirectly illuminated or nonilluminated sign, not exceeding two square feet in area, placed on any nonmultifamily residential lot. This type of sign is typically used as a name plate;

C. Flags less than 75 square feet;

D. Vehicle signs;

E. Signs displayed upon a bus or light rail vehicle owned by a public transit district;

F. Historical sign or historical or landmark markers;

G. Hand-held signs;

H. Incidental signs such as “open/closed,” “no parking,” etc.;

I. Any public notice required by federal, state or local law, regulation or ordinance;

J. Sign within the public right-of-way that is erected by a governmental agency, utility or contractor doing authorized work within the right-of-way;

K. A warning sign that does not exceed eight square feet in area and six feet in height, and is erected on property where there is a danger to the public to which public access is prohibited;

L. Nonilluminated interior signs in nonresidential sign districts designed primarily to be viewed from a sidewalk or street, provided the sign face is less than four square feet in area;

M. Illuminated interior signs in nonresidential sign districts designed primarily to be viewed from a sidewalk or street, provided the sign face is less than four square feet in area;

N. For each principal use on property that has direct exterior pedestrian access, there may be one suspended sign. The sign may either be attached to a first floor awning, canopy, or porch structure, or otherwise be attached to the building, provided the sign does not exceed four square feet in area and has a minimum of eight feet of clearance above the sidewalk;

O. An exterior sign erected next to an entrance, exit, rest room, office door, or telephone, provided the sign is no more than two square feet in area. This type of sign is typically used to identify and locate a property feature;

P. Signs located within a sports stadium or athletic field, or other outdoor assembly area which are intended for viewing by persons within the facility. The signs shall be placed so as to be oriented towards the interior of the field and the viewing stands;

Q. Signs incorporated into vending machines or gasoline pumps;

R. Temporary signs as allowed under SMC 15.16.080;

S. Public signs;

T. Utility signs;

U. Signs for hospital or emergency services, and railroad signs;

V. Wayfaring signs with a maximum sign area of four square feet and one sign per frontage. (Ord. 09-04 § 2, 2009)


15.16.060 Prohibited signs.

Except for nonconforming signs, the following signs are prohibited:

A. Abandoned signs;

B. Billboards;

C. Video signs in the historic district;

D. Roof signs;

E. Off-premises signs, except those allowed per SMC 15.16.050;

F. Any sign constructed, maintained or altered in a manner not in compliance with the Silverton sign code;

G. Any nonpublic sign constructed or maintained which, by reason of its size, location, movement, coloring or manner of illumination may be confused with, or construed as, a traffic control device, or which hides from view any traffic control device;

H. Any sign constructed in such a manner or at such a location that it will obstruct access to any fire escape or other means of ingress or egress from a building, or an exit corridor, exit hallway, or exit doorway. No sign or supporting structure shall cover, wholly or partially, any window or doorway in any manner that it will substantially limit access to the building in case of fire;

I. Any sign located in a manner which could impede traffic on any street, alley, sidewalk, bikeway or other pedestrian or vehicular travel way;

J. Any sign equipped with moving, rotating or otherwise animated parts that change messages more than once per hour, except for multivision signs and athletic field signs;

K. Any sign that is wholly or partially illuminated by flood or spotlights in which light reflects into or upon the traveling ways of any street or alley, flashing or intermittent light, lights, lamps, bulbs, or tubes. Rotary beacon lights, zip lights, strobe lights, or similar devices shall not be erected or maintained, attached to, or incorporated in any sign;

L. Any nonpublic sign within the vision clearance area provisions contained in the development code;

M. Any sign attached to a tree or a plant, a fence or a utility pole, except as otherwise allowed or required by the Silverton sign code or other chapters of the city code;

N. Any sign (includes banners over the public right-of-way) without the approval of the city council and not in conformance with the city council’s policies and guidelines;

O. Unlawful signs;

P. Any sign which is judicially determined to be a public nuisance;

Q. Balloons or similar types of tethered objects;

R. Any sign determined by the building official to be unsafe or otherwise pose a threat to public health, safety or welfare. (Ord. 09-04 § 2, 2009)


15.16.070 Nonconforming signs.

Signs that were legally established prior to the adoption of this code on April 6, 2009, and no longer meet the sign code standards are considered nonconforming signs. Nonconforming signs may continue to be in use, subject to the restrictions in this section:

A. General Requirements for Nonconforming Signs.

1. A nonconforming sign shall not be:

a. Modified, unless the modification brings the sign into compliance with this chapter. A change of copy is allowed, except that any change in a wall sign which is painted on a structure shall comply with SMC 15.16.040.

b. Expanded.

c. Relocated.

2. A nonconforming sign may undergo normal maintenance, except:

a. “Normal maintenance” excludes major structure repairs designed to extend the useful life of the nonconforming sign.

b. If a nonconforming sign is damaged by wind, fire, neglect or by any other cause, and such damage exceeds 60 percent of its replacement value, the nonconforming sign shall not be repaired and shall be removed.

3. Upon change of use of a business or premises, a nonconforming sign shall be brought into compliance with this code within 180 days. (Ord. 09-04 § 2, 2009)


15.16.080 Temporary signs.

A. Temporary Signs – General Provisions. Temporary signs may be erected and maintained in the city only in compliance with the regulations in this chapter, and with the following specific provisions:

1. Except as approved in a sign permit and in connection with a community event, no temporary sign shall be illuminated.

2. A temporary sign shall be attached to the site or constructed in a manner that both prevents the sign from being easily removed by unauthorized persons or being blown or otherwise dislodged so as to create a hazard and allows for the easy removal of the sign by authorized persons.

3. Except as provided in this code, temporary signs shall not be attached to trees, shrubbery, utility poles or traffic control signs or devices.

4. No temporary sign shall be erected or maintained which, by reason of its size, location or construction constitutes a hazard to the public.

5. Except for holiday seasonal decorations, temporary signs shall not be illuminated.

B. Temporary Signs – Residential Sign District – No Permit Required. In any residential district, the following temporary signs shall be allowed without issuance of a permit and shall not affect the amount or type of signage otherwise allowed by this chapter. This signage shall not be restricted by content, but is usually and customarily used to advertise real estate sales, political or ideological positions, garage sales, home construction or remodeling and similar activities. Signage shall be allowed for each parcel as follows:

1. During the period from 45 days before a public election or the time the election is called, whichever is earlier, until seven days after the public election, the maximum total cumulative sign area is 16 square feet and no individual sign may exceed six square feet in area with no component of the sign exceeding five feet above grade.

2. One temporary sign, not exceeding a total of six square feet in area, with no component of the sign exceeding five feet above grade, and which is erected for a maximum of three consecutive days in any calendar month.

3. One temporary banner/pennant, not to exceed 10 square feet in area, displayed for a maximum of 30 days or less in any one calendar year, and in a manner that does not compromise public health and/or safety.

4. During the time of sale, lease or rental of the property and for up to seven days past the sale, lease or rental of the property, one sign not exceeding six square feet in area with no component of the sign exceeding five feet above grade is permitted. An additional sign of the same size may be erected if the property borders a second street and the signs are not visible simultaneously. On lots of more than two acres, the sign area may be increased to 12 square feet. In no case shall the sign or signs be erected for more than a total of 12 months.

5. During the period of construction or remodeling of the property and for up to seven days past completion of the construction or remodeling, one sign not exceeding six square feet in area is permitted. An additional sign of the same size may be erected if the property borders a second street and the signs are not visible simultaneously. On lots of more than two acres, the sign area may be increased to 12 square feet. In no case shall the sign or signs be erected for more than a total of 12 months.

6. Two signs are permitted on flag lots. When two signs are used, one sign shall be placed on the “flag” portion of the lot and one sign shall be placed on the “pole” portion of the lot.

7. Two signs are permitted on corner lots; however, only one sign per street frontage is permitted. Neither sign may exceed six square feet in area nor may any component of the sign exceed five feet above grade during the time of sale, lease or rental of the property.

C. Temporary Signs – Residential Sign District – Permit Required. In any residential sign district, the following temporary signs shall be allowed on a lot only after issuance of a temporary sign permit. This temporary signage shall not affect the amount or type of signage otherwise allowed by this chapter. This signage shall not be restricted by content, but is usually and customarily used to advertise real estate. Signage shall be allowed for each parcel as follows:

1. During the period when property has received subdivision or development approval from the city, until the time that 50 percent of the lots are sold or two years from issuance of the first building permit, whichever occurs first, one temporary sign not exceeding a maximum of 24 square feet in area with no component of the sign exceeding eight feet above grade is permitted on properties less than four acres in size. On properties that are four acres or more in size, two temporary signs not exceeding an area of 24 square feet each shall be permitted, provided no component of the sign exceeds eight feet above grade.

D. Temporary Signs – Commercial and Industrial Sign Districts – No Permit Required. In any commercial or industrial sign district, the following temporary signs shall be allowed on a lot without issuance of a permit and shall not affect the amount or type of signage otherwise allowed by this chapter. This signage shall not be restricted by content, but is usually and customarily used to advertise real estate sales, political or ideological positions, construction or remodeling, special events and similar activities. Signage shall be allowed for each parcel as follows:

1. During the period from 45 days before a public election or the time the election is called, whichever is earlier, until seven days after the public election, no lot may exceed a total cumulative sign area of 16 square feet and no individual sign may exceed six square feet in area with no component of the sign exceeding five feet above grade.

2. One temporary sign not exceeding a total of six square feet in area with no component of the sign exceeding five feet above grade and which is erected for a maximum of three consecutive days in any calendar month.

3. During the time of sale, lease or rental of the property and for up to seven days past the sale, lease or rental of the property, one sign not exceeding 12 square feet in area with no component of the sign exceeding five feet above grade is permitted.

4. During the period of construction or remodeling of the property and for up to seven days past completion of the construction or remodeling, one sign not exceeding 12 square feet in area and five feet above grade is permitted. An additional sign of the same size may be erected if the property borders a second street and the signs are not visible simultaneously. In no case shall the sign or signs be erected for more than a total of 12 months.

5. During the period of a special event such as a grand opening, sale, or closing, one banner, not exceeding a total of 24 square feet in area with no component of the sign extending over a public right-of-way and which is erected for a maximum of three consecutive days in any calendar month and no more than for two separate occasions within any calendar year.

6. Temporary window signs may not exceed more than 20 percent of the total window area on that building elevation.

E. Temporary Signs – Commercial and Industrial Sign Districts – Permit Required. In any commercial or industrial sign district, the following temporary signs shall be allowed on a lot during business hours only after issuance of a temporary sign permit. This temporary signage shall not affect the amount or type of signage otherwise allowed by this chapter. This signage shall not be restricted by content, but is usually and customarily used to advertise a business or to identify merchandise that is a daily special. Signage shall be allowed for each parcel as follows:

1. One temporary sign per business, not exceeding a total of six square feet in area for a one-sided sign or 12 square feet in area for a two-sided sign with no component of the sign exceeding 45 inches above grade and located outside of any public right-of-way and/or any required vision clearance area.

2. In the DC (downtown commercial) district, one temporary sign per business, not exceeding a total of six square feet in area for a one-sided sign or 12 square feet in area for a two-sided sign with no component of the sign exceeding 45 inches above grade, provided all of the following are also met:

a. At least five feet of unobstructed sidewalk or walkway is maintained for pedestrian use; and

b. The sign is located outside of any required vision clearance area; and

c. The sign is constructed of durable materials; and

d. The sign complies with the temporary sign general provisions of subsections (A)(1) through (A)(5) of this section.

3. The community development director may approve an off-site sign location, subject to the following findings:

a. The business does not have adequate frontage on a public right-of-way that would support placement of an on-site temporary sign or there is some other unique physical constraint or unusual circumstance, in the opinion of the community development director, that would support the use of an off-site location; and

b. The proposed off-site location does not create a public health and/or safety concern; and

c. Written permission has been granted from the off-site property owner to allow placement of a temporary off-site sign on their property; and

d. The sign owner agrees to be responsible for removal and proper storage of the sign during nonbusiness hours.

F. Temporary Signs – Public Sign District – No Permit Required. In any public district, the following temporary signs shall be allowed on a parcel without issuance of a permit and shall not affect the amount or type of signage otherwise allowed by this chapter. This signage shall not be restricted by content. Signage shall be allowed for each parcel as follows:

1. Signage directed by a governmental agency;

2. Two or more temporary signs not exceeding a total of 24 square feet in area with no component of the sign exceeding five feet above grade and which is erected for a maximum of three consecutive days in any calendar month;

3. During the period of construction or remodeling of the property and for up to seven days past completion of the construction or remodeling, one sign not exceeding 24 square feet in area is permitted. An additional sign of the same size may be erected if the property borders a second street and the signs are not visible simultaneously;

4. Two A-frame signs, each not exceeding six square feet in area for a one-sided sign or 12 square feet in area for a two-sided sign, with no component of the sign exceeding three feet above grade. (Ord. 09-04 § 2, 2009)


15.16.090 Reserved.

(Ord. 09-04 § 2, 2009)


15.16.100 Sign districts – General.

A. Sign Districts Created. The following sign districts are created and applied to designated land. No permit shall be issued for any sign unless as an allowed sign under the terms of the applicable sign district or otherwise allowed as a nonconforming sign under SMC 15.16.070 or exempted under SMC 15.16.050. Any particular limitation in a sign district regulation shall not be construed to exclude the applicability of other restrictions imposed under this chapter.

B. Sign Districts. The following are the sign districts:

1. The residential sign district includes all lands within the R-1, R-5, RM-10, RM-20, and AR zones.

2. The commercial sign district includes all lands within the downtown commercial (DC), the downtown commercial fringe (DCF), and the general commercial (GC) zones.

3. The commercial historic district is the area within the city of Silverton that is designated as a historic district on the National Register of Historic Places.

4. The industrial sign district includes all lands within the industrial (I) zone, the light industrial (LI) zone, and the industrial park (IP) zone.

5. The public overlay sign district includes all lands within the public overlay (PO) zone.

C. Other Limitations.

1. Property within a newly designated sign district shall be governed by the provisions of the sign code applicable to the new sign district upon the effective date of the ordinance amending the sign district map. Completed applications for sign permits made before the effective date of the sign district change will be considered under the provisions of the Silverton sign code applicable to the sign district existing at the time the application was completed. All signs which are not in compliance with the provisions of the Silverton sign code applicable to the newly established sign district shall be considered nonconforming signs.

2. All signage shall comply with the provisions included within this code. In the event unique circumstances arise that prohibit compliance with these provisions, deviations may be considered in accordance with SMC 15.16.600 through 15.16.620.

a. Deviations from a dimensional standard by 10 percent or less shall be reviewed as an adjustment (SMC 15.16.610).

b. Deviations of more than 10 percent of a dimensional standard or any other deviation from standards shall be reviewed as a variance (SMC 15.16.620). (Ord. 09-04 § 2, 2009)


15.16.110 Residential sign district.

A. General Regulations.

1. The maximum number of signs permitted is one per frontage.

2. Within the residential sign district, illuminated signs are not permitted, unless specifically stated below due to the type of use.

3. Unless otherwise stated, signs within the residential sign district require issuance of permits under SMC 15.16.030 and compliance with general sign requirements in SMC 15.16.040.

4. All illuminated signs must conform to dark sky requirements and the provisions of SMC 15.16.500.

B. Permitted Sign Types, Number, and Area. Signs within the residential sign district are limited as follows:

1. Monument and Ground Signs.

a. Within the R-1 and R-5 zones, a subdivision gateway sign, not to exceed five feet above grade, and consisting of one double-faced monument sign with a combined sign face area of 12 square feet or not more than one single-faced monument sign with a maximum area of six square feet for the sign face shall be permitted on the primary frontage.

b. Within the R-10 and R-20 zones, monument signs, not to exceed five feet above grade, and not more than one 12-square-foot single-faced or 24-square-foot double-faced sign shall be permitted on the primary street frontage. Where a development has multiple street frontages, additional signage may be permitted on each frontage. Total sign face area shall not exceed 48 square feet and no sign face may exceed 12 square feet.

c. Bed and breakfast establishments and other conditional uses are permitted one sign not to exceed six square feet per sign face.

d. Home occupations are permitted one sign not to exceed four square feet per sign face.

e. Externally illuminated monument and ground signs are only permitted with dark sky lighting fixtures.

2. Bulletin Boards/Wall Signs.

a. Bed and breakfasts and other conditional uses are permitted one sign. If the sign is a bulletin board/wall sign, it may not exceed six square feet per sign face.

b. Home occupations are permitted one sign. If the sign is a bulletin board/wall sign, it may not exceed four square feet per sign face.

c. The maximum height for a bulletin board/wall sign is eight feet above grade.

d. Only bed and breakfast establishments and approved conditional uses may have exterior illuminated signs.

3. Awning Signs.

a. Conditional uses are permitted one sign. If the sign is an awning sign, it must be on the primary building frontage with a maximum total sign face area of six square feet.

b. Home occupations are permitted one sign. If the sign is an awning sign, it may not exceed a total sign face area of six square feet.

c. Only bed and breakfast establishments and approved conditional uses may have awning signs.

d. Only bed and breakfast establishments and approved conditional uses may have illuminated awning signs with dark sky lighting fixtures.

4. Projecting Signs.

a. Projecting signs shall not be permitted.

5. Suspended Signs.

a. Suspended signs shall not be permitted.

6. Banner Signs.

a. Permanent banner signs shall not be permitted.

7. Temporary Signs.

a. Temporary signs are permitted in accordance with SMC 15.16.080. (Ord. 09-04 § 2, 2009)


15.16.120 Reserved.

(Ord. 09-04 § 2, 2009)


15.16.130 Reserved.

(Ord. 09-04 § 2, 2009)


15.16.140 Reserved.

(Ord. 09-04 § 2, 2009)


15.16.150 Reserved.

(Ord. 09-04 § 2, 2009)


15.16.160 Reserved.

(Ord. 09-04 § 2, 2009)


15.16.170 Reserved.

(Ord. 09-04 § 2, 2009)


15.16.180 Reserved.

(Ord. 09-04 § 2, 2009)


15.16.190 Reserved.

(Ord. 09-04 § 2, 2009)


15.16.200 Commercial sign district.

A. General Regulations.

1. Unless otherwise stated, signs within the commercial sign district require issuance of permits under SMC 15.16.030.

2. Signage within the downtown historic district shall comply with SDC 3.5.500 and require historic design review.

B. Permitted Sign Types. Wall, bulletin board, electronic message, monument, ground, ground-mounted, projecting, pole, marquee, awning, canopy, freestanding, suspended, window, door, incidental, and temporary signs including A-frame signs are permitted.

C. Basic Allowance – Number and Type of Allowed Signs. Within the commercial sign district, signs are limited in the number and type of signs allowed. The sum of the area of all signs permitted by the code except monument, ground, awning, marquee, temporary, and canopy signs shall not exceed one square foot of signage per one lineal foot of business frontage with a maximum of 100 square feet of signage per building face allowed. Where the use has multiple building frontages, the total signage area on secondary building frontages shall be computed at a rate of one-half square foot of signage per one lineal foot of building frontage, with a maximum sign area of 50 square feet (resulting in a total sign area of 150 square feet for a building with multiple frontages). A sign area of 16 square feet per building face shall be permitted for a business frontage that is less than 16 lineal feet. The following standards apply to each of the permitted sign types:

1. Wall Signs.

a. Wall signs must comply with the basic allowance identified above. The number of wall signs is not limited but the total sign face area for all wall signs, including multiple signs for multiple tenants, shall not exceed 100 square feet. Where the use has multiple building frontages, the total sign area on secondary building frontages shall not exceed one-half square foot of sign area for each lineal foot of building frontage, with a maximum sign face area of 50 square feet.

b. Wall signs projecting more than three inches from the wall and located adjacent to a pedestrian way shall be mounted at least eight feet above the grade of the pedestrian way.

c. For business complexes, wall signs are permitted in accordance with the provisions of this section and the integrated sign plan provisions contained in SMC 15.16.220.

2. Pole Signs.

a. Pole signs shall comply with the basic allowance identified in subsection (C) of this section.

b. A maximum of one pole sign per frontage is permitted.

c. All components of a pole sign, excluding the pole, shall have a minimum height of eight feet above grade.

d. The maximum pole sign size is 40 square feet for a single business sign and 60 square feet for a sign that serves multiple businesses that are not within a business complex.

e. For business complexes, pole signs are permitted in accordance with the provisions of this section and the integrated business sign provisions contained in SMC 15.16.220.

3. Bulletin Boards.

a. Bulletin board signs shall comply with the basic allowance identified above.

4. Electronic Message Signs.

a. Electronic message signs shall comply with the basic allowance identified above.

b. One single- or double-faced electronic message sign per site may be incorporated into a pole, monument, or ground sign. The electronic message portion of the sign may not change messages more than one time in any given hour.

c. For business complexes, one single- or double-faced electronic message sign per complex may be incorporated into a pole, monument, or ground sign approved under the integrated business sign provisions contained in SMC 15.16.220. The sign area of the electronic message portion of the sign shall not exceed 50 percent of the total sign face and may not change messages more than one time in any given hour.

5. Window Signs.

a. Window signs shall comply with the basic allowance identified above and with the following standards:

i. One or more illuminated interior signs may be installed into the windows facing a public street or sidewalk. The sign area of individual interior window signs shall not exceed four square feet; and the cumulative area of all illuminated window signs on the same building elevation shall not exceed 40 percent of the total window area on that elevation.

ii. For business complexes, one or more illuminated interior signs may be installed into the windows facing a public street or sidewalk.

iii. The sign area of individual illuminated interior window signs shall not exceed four square feet; and the cumulative area of all illuminated window signs on the same building elevation shall not exceed 40 percent of the overall window area on that elevation.

6. Projecting Signs.

a. Projecting signs are permitted, provided the projecting sign does not project into a public right-of-way or otherwise project into an area that would create a public safety concern or other public nuisance.

b. If the sign projects into a public right-of-way or other publicly owned land, then permission from the appropriate public agency is required as part of the sign permit application.

c. Projecting signs shall provide a minimum distance of eight feet from the lowest part of the sign above the grade.

d. The maximum sign area for a projecting sign shall not exceed 24 square feet.

7. Roof Signs.

a. Roof signs shall comply with the basic allowance identified above.

b. Roof signs are generally not permitted. However, the community development director may approve one roof sign, in lieu of other building-mounted signs, only upon finding that there are no other reasonable means of providing signage for the business or use, due to extraordinary circumstances related to the physical location or structure of the building, distance from nearby streets, proximity of surrounding buildings or vegetation, or other factors over which the applicant has no control.

c. Approval of a roof sign shall be subject to the following standards:

i. The sign is installed on a gabled, hipped, mansard, or otherwise sloped roof;

ii. The roof sign area shall not exceed eight percent of the roof elevation area, with a maximum sign area of 100 square feet;

iii. The highest point of the roof sign shall not exceed the height of the ridge of the roof; and

iv. Installation of the sign shall require issuance of a building permit and final approval of the installed sign by the building department.

D. Additional Signage – Number and Type of Allowed Signs. In addition to the above allowed signage, the following types of signs – monument, ground, awning, marquee, canopy, and temporary signs – are permitted, in accordance with the below-listed size limitations and other provisions:

1. Monument or Ground Signs.

a. Outside of the historic district, one single- or double-faced monument or ground sign shall be permitted for each parcel along the primary street frontage. Where a use has multiple street frontages, one sign, either single- or double-faced, per frontage shall be permitted. Sign area shall not exceed 50 square feet for each sign face or 100 square feet of total sign face area per frontage.

b. Where up to five principal uses are contained in a building(s) with less than 30,000 gross square feet of building area, one monument or ground sign shall be permitted for each frontage. Sign area shall not exceed 50 square feet for each sign face or 100 square feet of total sign face area per frontage.

c. Monument or ground signs in a business complex shall be permitted in accordance with the integrated business sign provisions contained in SMC 15.16.220.

2. Awning, Marquee, or Canopy Signs.

a. For uses that front on a public right-of-way, the total sign face area for awning, marquee or canopy signs shall not exceed one-half square foot of signage per one foot of business frontage with a maximum sign face area of 100 square feet.

b. For awning, marquee, or canopy signs visible but not fronting on a public right-of-way, the maximum permitted sign area shall not exceed one-fourth square foot of sign area for each lineal foot of frontage, along the smallest business frontage, with a maximum sign face area of 50 square feet.

3. Temporary Signs.

a. Temporary signs are permitted in accordance with SMC 15.16.080(D) and (E).

E. Maximum Sign Height.

1. Monument signs shall be no more than eight feet in height.

2. Ground signs shall be no more than eight feet in height.

3. All other signs shall be limited so that not any part of the sign may project above the building roof line or above the top of the building parapet of any building(s) on the parcel.

F. Other Limitations.

1. Business complexes desiring signage beyond that allowed for each individual building are required to submit an integrated business sign application in compliance with SMC 15.16.220.

2. New business complexes undergoing design review are required to submit an integrated business sign application in compliance with SMC 15.16.220.

G. Commercial Historic District Standards. The following additional standards apply to the area that has been designated as the downtown commercial historic district.

1. Signage within the historic district shall strive to enhance the historic character of the downtown.

2. Signage that can be shown (through photographic or other valid recognized documentation) to be part of the historic past of Silverton can be reestablished or continue to be used provided the integrity of the sign is maintained and the sign does not otherwise pose a hazard to public health, safety, or welfare.

3. Monument and ground signs are not permitted, unless documentation can be provided that shows this type of signage was used at the site at any time during the historic period or prior to 1950.

4. Sign colors shall be reflective of the historic period and shall not incorporate “day-glow” or fluorescent paint hues that were not part of the historic past.

5. Sign design and materials shall be reflective of the historic period and utilize materials and styles that were in use during the historic district’s period of significance (prior to 1950).

6. Interior-lit box signs, electronic message signs, and video signs are prohibited within the historic district. (Ord. 09-04 § 2, 2009)


15.16.210 Reserved.

(Ord. 09-04 § 2, 2009)


15.16.220 Integrated business signs.

Integrated business signs provide more flexible sign regulations for business complexes, multitenant, and/or planned unit development projects. These regulations allow for additional signage allowances to help ensure that business location and identification needs are met. These provisions are allowed due to unique physical characteristics related to multiple tenants, physical site layout, building size, lack of frontage on a public right-of-way, or other physical characteristics that necessitate a flexible approach to signage needs. An integrated business sign plan shall be required for all business complexes, commercial centers, and/or planned unit developments that desire signage for more than one business or institutional uses. Applications for integrated business signs shall be filed at the time permits for permanent signage on the property are sought. If a sign is for a development that requires design review, conditional use review, subdivision approval, etc., under the Silverton development code, SMC Title 18, then signage may be reviewed as part of that discretionary development review process, if desired by an applicant. However, there is no requirement that an integrated business sign application must be reviewed concurrently with a land use request.

If the integrated business sign application is not reviewed as part of a land use application, then an integrated business sign application shall be reviewed under the procedures set out in SMC 15.16.030. A decision on the integrated business sign application is subject to review under the procedures set out in SMC 15.16.030 and is not considered a land use decision.

A. Integrated Business Sign Plan Application. An integrated business sign plan application shall include the following information:

1. All of the information required for a sign permit as identified in SMC 15.16.030;

2. An exhibit showing the location of all proposed signs within the development. This includes all wall, pole, projecting, monument, ground, awning, marquee, canopy, freestanding, and any other signs;

3. A description of the signs including construction materials, color scheme, unifying design elements, and any proposed lighting;

4. An itemization of signs by type, by business ownership, and by sign sizes including height and area at all identified sign locations;

5. The location of any area designated for temporary signs, and documentation of the means by which such signs may be illuminated if approved.

B. Integrated Business Sign Plan Standards. An integrated business sign plan is permitted in the commercial and industrial sign districts for projects that have multiple tenants; for business parks, commercial centers or other types of business centers; developments that have other unique physical characteristics (e.g., lack of frontage on a public right-of-way, unusual site layout, etc.) that necessitates a need for additional signage to provide for efficient business location. The following standards shall be met within an integrated business sign plan:

1. Basic Allowance. Each building in an integrated business sign plan shall be provided with the amount and type of signage permitted in accordance with the standards of the site’s sign district.

2. Additional Signage. The integrated business sign plan also allows for freestanding, ground, or monument signs to be located at business complex entrance locations for each street frontage, and/or entrance locations for individual buildings within the business complex in accordance with the following allowances:

a. Primary Entrance. One freestanding, ground, or monument sign shall be permitted on the primary street frontage.

i. The maximum height of such sign shall be 20 feet.

ii. The maximum area is 100 square feet for a single-faced sign and 200 square feet for a double-faced sign.

iii. When more than five businesses occupy a site, each business in excess of the initial five is permitted an additional five square feet of signage.

b. Secondary Entrances. One freestanding, ground, or monument sign shall be permitted on each secondary street frontage that has a minimum of 500 feet of frontage. There shall be 300 lineal feet of separation between entrance signs, measured along each side of the right-of-way, between the two freestanding signs.

i. The maximum area is 32 square feet for a single-faced sign and 64 square feet for a double-faced sign.

ii. When more than five businesses occupy a site, each business in excess of the initial five is permitted an additional three square feet of signage.

iii. The sign may either be constructed as a monument sign with a maximum six-foot height, or incorporated into a decorative wall.

c. Pad Site or Lot. One ground or monument sign shall be permitted on each pad site or lot located within the business complex.

i. The sign shall not exceed four feet in height and 16 square feet in area for a single-faced sign and 32 square feet in area for a double-faced sign.

ii. When more than five businesses occupy a pad site or lot, each business in excess of the initial five is permitted an additional three square feet of signage.

iii. The individual signs and the signs together with the architectural style of structures in the business complex shall share common design elements. The content of any sign message shall not be considered in determining whether common design elements are present.

iv. The integrated business sign plan shall accommodate future revisions that may be required because of changes in principal uses and/or tenants.

C. Integrated Business Sign Plan Review. An integrated business sign plan shall be reviewed after the approval of a land use action (subdivision, design review, conditional use, etc.) that has approved a development permit for a commercial or industrial building or site. An integrated business sign plan shall be consistent with the approved commercial or industrial development plan. The application shall include the conceptual drawings, illustrations and building elevations that were approved as part of the land use process. The integrated business sign plan shall address the sign standards contained in this chapter. The integrated business sign plan shall be reviewed in accordance with the provisions of SMC 15.16.030, sign permit application, and approved by the community development director within the established time frames in SMC 15.16.030(D) and not be considered as part of a land use action. (Ord. 09-04 § 2, 2009)


15.16.230 Reserved.

(Ord. 09-04 § 2, 2009)


15.16.240 Reserved.

(Ord. 09-04 § 2, 2009)


15.16.250 Reserved.

(Ord. 09-04 § 2, 2009)


15.16.260 Reserved.

(Ord. 09-04 § 2, 2009)


15.16.270 Reserved.

(Ord. 09-04 § 2, 2009)


15.16.280 Reserved.

(Ord. 09-04 § 2, 2009)


15.16.290 Reserved.

(Ord. 09-04 § 2, 2009)


15.16.300 Industrial sign district.

In addition to the temporary and permanent signage allowed without permits, the following signage is allowed subject to the requirements of this chapter:

A. General Regulations. Unless otherwise stated, signs within the industrial sign district require issuance of permits under SMC 15.16.030.

B. Permitted Sign Types. Wall, bulletin board, electronic message, monument, ground, ground-mounted, projecting, pole, marquee, awning, canopy, freestanding, suspended, window, door, incidental, and temporary signs are permitted.

C. Basic Allowance – Number and Type of Allowed Signs. Within the industrial sign district, signs are limited in the number and type of signs allowed. The sum of the area of all signs permitted by the code except monument, ground, awning, marquee, and canopy signs shall not exceed one square foot of signage per one lineal foot of building frontage with a maximum of 100 square feet of signage per building face allowed. Where the use has multiple building frontages, the total signage area on secondary building frontages shall be computed at a rate of one-half square foot of signage per one lineal foot of building frontage, with a maximum sign area of 50 square feet (resulting in a total sign area of 150 square feet for a building with multiple frontages). A sign area of 16 square feet per building face shall be permitted for a business frontage that is less than 16 lineal feet. The following standards apply to each of the permitted sign types:

1. Wall Signs.

a. Wall signs must comply with the basic allowance identified above. The number of wall signs is not limited but the total sign face area for all wall signs, including multiple signs for multiple tenants, shall not exceed 100 square feet. Where the use has multiple building frontages, the total sign area on secondary building frontages shall not exceed one-half square foot of sign area for each lineal foot of building frontage, with a maximum sign face area of 50 square feet.

b. Wall signs projecting more than three inches from the wall and located adjacent to a pedestrian way shall be mounted at least eight feet above the grade of the pedestrian way.

c. For business complexes, wall signs are permitted in accordance with the provisions of this section and the integrated sign plan provisions contained in SMC 15.16.220.

2. Pole Signs.

a. Pole signs shall comply with the basic allowance identified in SMC 15.16.200(C).

b. A maximum of one pole sign per frontage is permitted.

c. All components of a pole sign, excluding the pole, shall have a minimum height of eight feet above grade.

d. The maximum pole sign size is 40 square feet for a single business sign and 60 square feet for a sign that serves multiple businesses that are not within a business complex.

e. For business complexes, pole signs are permitted in accordance with the provisions of this section and the integrated business sign provisions contained in SMC 15.16.220.

3. Bulletin Boards.

a. Bulletin board signs shall comply with the basic allowance identified above.

4. Electronic Message Signs.

a. Electronic message signs shall comply with the basic allowance identified above.

b. One single- or double-faced electronic message sign per site may be incorporated into a pole, monument, or ground sign. The electronic message portion of the sign may not change messages more than one time in any given hour.

c. For business complexes, one single- or double-faced electronic message sign per complex may be incorporated into a pole, monument, or ground sign approved under the integrated business sign provisions contained in SMC 15.16.220. The sign area of the electronic message portion of the sign shall not exceed 50 percent of the total sign face and may not change messages more than one time in any given hour.

5. Window Signs.

a. Window signs shall comply with the basic allowance identified above and with the following standards:

i. One or more illuminated interior signs may be installed into the windows facing a public street or sidewalk. The sign area of individual interior window signs shall not exceed four square feet; and the cumulative area of all illuminated window signs on the same building elevation shall not exceed 40 percent of the total window area on that elevation.

ii. For business complexes, one or more illuminated interior signs may be installed into the windows facing a public street or sidewalk.

iii. The sign area of individual illuminated interior window signs shall not exceed four square feet; and the cumulative area of all illuminated window signs on the same building elevation shall not exceed 40 percent of the overall window area on that elevation.

6. Projecting Signs.

a. Projecting signs are permitted, provided the projecting sign does not project into a public right-of-way or otherwise project into an area that would create a public safety concern or other public nuisance.

b. If the sign projects into a public right-of-way or other publicly owned land, then permission from the appropriate public agency is required as part of the sign permit application.

c. Projecting signs shall provide a minimum distance of eight feet from the lowest part of the sign above the grade.

d. The maximum sign area for a projecting sign shall not exceed 24 square feet.

7. Roof Signs.

a. Roof signs shall comply with the basic allowance identified above.

b. Roof signs are generally not permitted. However, the community development director may approve one roof sign, in lieu of other building-mounted signs, only upon finding that there are no other reasonable means of providing signage for the business or use, due to extraordinary circumstances related to the physical location or structure of the building, distance from nearby streets, proximity of surrounding buildings or vegetation, or other factors over which the applicant has no control.

c. Approval of a roof sign shall be subject to the following standards:

i. The sign is installed on a gabled, hipped, mansard, or otherwise sloped roof;

ii. The roof sign area shall not exceed eight percent of the roof elevation area, with a maximum sign area of 100 square feet;

iii. The highest point of the roof sign shall not exceed the height of the ridge of the roof; and

iv. Installation of the sign shall require issuance of a building permit and final approval of the installed sign by the building department.

D. Additional Signage – Number and Type of Allowed Signs. In addition to the above allowed signage, the following types of signs – monument, ground, ground-mounted, awning, marquee and canopy – are permitted, in accordance with the below-listed size limitations and other provisions:

1. Monument or Ground Signs.

a. One single- or double-faced monument or ground-mounted sign shall be permitted for each parcel along the primary street frontage. Where a use has multiple street frontages, one sign, either single- or double-faced, per frontage shall be permitted. Sign area shall not exceed 50 square feet for each sign face or 100 square feet of total sign face area per frontage.

b. Where up to five principal uses are contained in a building(s) with less than 30,000 gross square feet of building area, one monument or ground or ground-mounted sign shall be permitted for each frontage. Sign area shall not exceed 50 square feet for each sign face or 100 square feet of total sign face area per frontage.

c. Monument or ground or ground-mounted signs in a business complex shall be permitted in accordance with the integrated sign plan provisions contained in SMC 15.16.220.

2. Awning, Marquee, or Canopy Signs.

a. For uses that front on a public right-of-way, the total sign face area for awning, marquee or canopy signs shall not exceed one-half square foot of signage per one foot of business frontage with a maximum sign face area of 100 square feet.

b. For awning, marquee, or canopy signs visible but not fronting on a public right-of-way, the maximum permitted sign area shall not exceed one-fourth square foot of sign area for each lineal foot of frontage, along the smallest business frontage, with a maximum sign face area of 50 square feet.

E. Maximum Sign Height.

1. Monument signs shall be no more than eight feet in height.

2. Ground or ground-mounted signs shall be no more than eight feet in height.

3. All other signs shall be limited so that no sign may project above the building roof line or above the top of the building parapet of any building(s) on the parcel.

F. Other Limitations.

1. Business complexes desiring signage beyond that allowed for each individual building are required to submit an integrated business sign plan in compliance with SMC 15.16.220.

2. New business complexes undergoing design review are required to submit an integrated business sign plan in compliance with SMC 15.16.220. (Ord. 09-04 § 2, 2009)


15.16.310 Reserved.

(Ord. 09-04 § 2, 2009)


15.16.400 Public sign district.

Signs in the public sign district must comply with the commercial sign district standards located in SMC 15.16.200. (Ord. 09-04 § 2, 2009)


15.16.500 Illuminated sign regulations.

A. Sign Illumination Limitations. No sign shall be erected or maintained which, by use of lights, light source, or illumination, creates an unduly distracting and hazardous condition to motorists, pedestrians, or the general public. In addition:

1. No exposed reflective-type bulb, par spot, or incandescent lamp shall be exposed to direct view from a public street or highway, but may be used for indirect light illumination of the display surface of a sign.

2. When fluorescent tubes or neon tubing is employed, the light source shall not be unduly distracting to surrounding uses.

B. Illumination Prohibitions – Flashing, Intermittent, and Chaser Effects. The following types of sign illumination are prohibited:

1. Rotary beacon lights, zip lights, strobe lights, or similar devices shall not be attached to, nor be incorporated in, any sign nor shall they be erected or maintained in the city of Silverton, Oregon.

2. No sign shall contain or be wholly or partially illuminated by a flashing or intermittent light, lights, lamps, bulbs, or tubes.

3. No sign illumination shall be permitted that creates a chaser effect (produces an apparent motion in a direction or path) or other effect of motion, including, but not limited to, animation, scintillation, or speller effects.

C. Other Illumination Regulations. All illuminated signs shall conform to the following standards:

1. No sign, light, lamp, bulb, tube, or illumination device shall be used or displayed in violation of this section.

2. Signs may be illuminated by internal or external sources. All sign illumination shall be shielded or deflected so as not to shine into residential dwelling units or structures, or impair the road vision of the driver of any vehicle.

3. Illumination of signs within the commercial and industrial sign districts may not shine into any residential property or residential sign zone.

4. External light sources for a sign shall be directed and shielded to limit direct illumination of any object other than the sign.

5. All new lighting fixtures shall comply with the dark sky requirements and should incorporate energy efficiency fixtures and/or technology.

6. Except for holiday seasonal decorations, temporary signs shall not be illuminated. (Ord. 09-04 § 2, 2009)


15.16.510 Construction and maintenance standards.

A. Building Code Compliance. All permanent signs shall be constructed and erected in accordance with the requirements of the Uniform Building Code.

B. Electrical Code Compliance. All illuminated signs must be installed subject to the requirements of the State Electrical Code. All electrically illuminated signs shall be listed, labeled, and tested by a testing agency recognized by the state of Oregon.

C. Permits Responsibility of Applicant. Building and electrical permits shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Prior to obtaining building and electrical permits, the applicant shall obtain a sign permit or demonstrate an exception from the permit requirements of this chapter.

D. Inspections. If a building permit is required, the building official shall perform a sign inspection.

1. Inspections shall be performed upon notification by the permit holder that the construction is ready for inspection.

2. Failure of the permit holder to notify the building official of the progress of construction for inspection purposes may result in the revocation of the sign permit.

3. A final inspection of a sign shall be made upon completion of all construction work and prior to its illumination.

4. All signs may be inspected or reinspected at the discretion of the building official. The building official or his/her designee shall inspect all components of construction that require permits in accordance with the adopted building and/or electrical codes. The building official or his/her designee may enter at reasonable times upon the premises for the purpose of inspection of signs under construction.

E. Good Repair and Maintenance. All signs, together with all of their supports, braces, guys, and anchors, shall be kept in good repair and be maintained in a safe condition. All signs and the site upon which they are located shall be maintained in a neat, clean, and attractive condition. Signs shall be kept free from excessive rust, corrosion, peeling paint or other surface deterioration. The display surfaces of all signs shall be kept neatly painted or posted. Signs that are faded, torn, damaged, or otherwise unsightly, or in a state of disrepair, shall be immediately repaired or removed.

F. No Obstructions. No sign shall be erected or maintained in such a manner that any portion of its surface or supports will interfere in any way with the free use of any fire escape, exit, or standpipe. No signs shall be erected or maintained so as to obstruct any building opening to such an extent that light or ventilation is reduced below minimums required by any applicable law or provisions of this code. (Ord. 09-04 § 2, 2009)


15.16.600 Deviations from sign code provisions.

A. General Provisions. Deviations from sign code provisions may be considered through a sign code adjustment and/or sign code variance procedure. Adjustments and variances to the numeric standards of this chapter shall be allowed only in compliance with this section.

1. Adjustments may be requested to allow relocation of a sign, on the subject property, reducing or increasing the height of a sign, or enlarging the area of a sign by 10 percent or less of a dimensional standard.

2. Variances may be requested when the amount of deviation exceeds 10 percent.

3. Adjustments or variances allowing the use of prohibited signs, or allowing signage other than that specifically allowed by this code, are not permitted. (Ord. 09-04 § 2, 2009)


15.16.610 Adjustments.

A. Adjustments. Requests for adjustments shall be filed with the city, on a form provided by the community development department, and accompanied by a fee as approved by the city council. The request shall include the information required for a sign permit, as specified in SMC 15.16.030, the specific standard from which the adjustment is requested, and the numeric amount of the adjustment, and written responses to the following approval criteria:

1. The requested adjustment is for 10 percent or less of a numerical standard.

2. The need for the requested adjustment is created by the configuration of an existing or proposed structure on the site.

3. The need for the requested adjustment is created by the configuration of the existing lot boundaries or topography of the site.

4. The design and operating characteristics of the proposed sign are reasonably compatible with the placement of surrounding development and land uses, and any negative impacts have been sufficiently minimized.

B. Review. The community development director shall conduct a review of the request for sign adjustments. The community development director shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the adjustment, based upon the evidence in the application. The community development director may impose such conditions as are deemed necessary to mitigate any adverse impacts which may result from approving the adjustment.

C. Notice of Decision. The community development director shall issue a decision in writing explaining the reasons why the adjustment was approved or denied. The decision shall be mailed to the address of the applicant on the application by regular mail. The decision of the community development director is final, unless appealed to the city council. (Ord. 09-04 § 2, 2009)


15.16.620 Variances.

A. Variances. Requests for variances shall be filed with the city, on a form provided by the community development department, and accompanied by a fee as established by the city council. The request shall include the information required for a sign permit, as specified in SMC 15.16.030, the specific standard from which the variance is requested, the numeric amount of the variance, and written responses to the following review criteria:

1. Strict application of the code requirement would deny the applicant a reasonable opportunity to communicate by sign in a manner similar to like persons or uses because of an unusual or unique circumstance relating to the property or the proposal, such as site or building location, building design, physical features on the property, or some other circumstance.

2. The sign which would result from the variance will not affect the surrounding neighborhood or other property affected by the request in a manner materially inconsistent with the purpose of the sign code as stated in SMC 15.16.010.

3. The degree of the variance is limited to that reasonably necessary to alleviate the problem created by the unique or unusual circumstance identified pursuant to subsection (A)(1) of this section.

B. Review. The city council shall review requests for sign variances. The city council shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the variance. The city council may impose such conditions as are deemed necessary to mitigate any adverse impacts which may result from approving the variance.

C. Notice of Decision. The city council shall issue its decision in writing explaining the reasons why the variance was approved or denied. The decision shall be mailed to the address of the applicant on the application by regular mail. The decision of the city council shall be final. (Ord. 09-04 § 2, 2009)


15.16.630 Appeal of decision on sign permit.

A. An applicant may appeal the denial of an application for a sign permit, conditions of permit approval, or revocation of a permit.

An appeal may be initiated by filing a form prescribed by the city council, which is filed within 20 days of the date of mailing of the sign permit decision by the community development director. The form shall specify the bases for the appeal. In considering the appellant’s contentions, the city council shall exercise only the review authority listed in SMC 15.16.620(A).

B. The city council shall conduct a review of the appeal within 60 days following the receipt of the filed notice of appeal.

C. The city council shall grant or deny the permit based upon evidence provided in the application or information gained through its review.

D. The city council shall issue its decision in writing explaining the reasons why the permit was granted or denied. The decision shall be mailed to the address of the applicant on the application by regular mail. (Ord. 09-04 § 2, 2009)


15.16.700 Enforcement of sign code – General provisions.

A. The following referenced code sections may be utilized for enforcement of this sign code, in regard to the types of sign violations referenced:

1. Sign in public right-of-way or on city-owned real property: SMC 15.16.710.

2. Sign on private property or on non-city-owned public property, other than on public right-of-way: SMC 15.16.720.

3. Removal of unsafe sign: SMC 15.16.730.

4. Removal of abandoned sign: SMC 15.16.740.

B. In addition to any other provisions contained herein, the community development director or his/her designee is authorized to undertake such action as the community development director or his/her designee deems necessary and convenient to carry out the provisions of this sign code, as is permitted by law.

C. Nothing contained herein shall preclude the issuance of citations for civil violations of this chapter, either prior to, concurrently with, or after action is commenced to declare a sign to be unlawful or to removal an unlawful sign.

D. The community development director or his/her designee may promulgate reasonable rules and regulations necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter.

E. When a sign is removed, altered, and/or stored under these enforcement provisions, fees to recover costs for removal and storage may be collected against the sign owner and/or the person responsible for the placement of the sign. The city council shall establish the fees for removal and storage of signs, and for other associated fees, by resolution, from time to time.

F. This chapter shall not be construed to create mandatory enforcement obligations for the city. The enforcement of this chapter shall be a function of the availability of sufficient financial resources consistent with adopted budgetary priorities and prosecutorial priorities within the range of delegated discretion to the community development director or his/her designee. (Ord. 09-04 § 2, 2009)


15.16.710 Enforcement – Sign in public right-of-way or on city-owned real property.

A. Any sign installed or placed in a public right-of-way or on city-owned real property, except in conformance with the requirements of this chapter, may be immediately removed by the community development director or his/her designee without prior notice to the owner of the sign.

B. The city may store any sign removed by the community development director or his/her designee for a period of 30 days when the sign is constructed of durable materials and contains sufficient information to contact the person responsible for placement of the sign. The city shall continue to store such sign for any additional period during which an appeal or review thereon is before the community development director or his/her designee. When signs are of durable materials and contain sufficient contact information, then the person responsible shall be notified as provided in subsection (C) of this section. Signs that are constructed of nondurable materials and/or lack sufficient contact information may be immediately disposed.

C. If a telephone number or address of the sign owner, person responsible, or person or business that is the subject of the communication on the sign is on the text of a sign, the city shall contact said person or business by telephone and/or mail (based on the manner of contact stated on the sign) to advise that:

1. The sign was found in a location the city believes to be a public right-of-way or city-owned real property;

2. That no permit was issued for the placement of the sign in said location, and that the sign is not otherwise lawfully permitted to be in said location.

The communication shall advise said person or business that the city has confiscated the sign and shall destroy the sign after 30 days from the time the person responsible is notified, unless either the sign is claimed and the removal and notice fees are paid in full or a request for hearing is submitted by the reputed sign owner to the community development director.

If no telephone number or mailing address is stated for the owner of the sign on the sign, the city shall retain signs of durable materials for a period of 15 days to permit the sign owner to ascertain that the sign has been removed and to claim the sign after paying the appropriate fee and/or filing a request for hearing with the city manager. The city, at its own discretion, may waive the fees associated with this enforcement activity.

D. Upon receipt of a request for hearing, the city manager shall determine that that applicable fee is paid, and shall then schedule a hearing before the municipal judge within 30 calendar days. The city manager shall notify the reputed sign owner and the appropriate city staff of the date, time, and place of the hearing to review the conditions related to the sign’s removal.

1. The hearing shall be conducted by the municipal judge. The procedures for the hearing shall be established by the municipal judge sufficient to provide the parties not less than the minimum due process required under state and federal law.

2. A prima facie code violation shall be found if it is shown that:

a. The sign was located in a public right-of-way or city-owned real property; and

b. The sign owner is not a public entity or other public entity authorized to install and maintain public signs within the public right-of-way under this sign code.

3. The sign owner may rebut the prima facie violation upon a showing that the sign was lawfully permitted within the public right-of-way or city-owned real property, or that the law does not require the sign owner to obtain a permit under this sign code.

4. The municipal judge shall issue a written decision within seven days following close of the hearing. The decision shall be based upon substantial evidence in the record. A copy of the decision shall be mailed to the reputed sign owner at such address as provided on the request for hearing. The decision of the municipal judge shall be the final decision of the city.

5. If the municipal judge determines that the sign was not lawfully placed within the public right-of-way or city-owned real property, then, following any applicable appeal or review period, the sign shall either be destroyed in such manner as the community development director determines appropriate or if the person responsible for the sign or other interested person desires to reclaim the sign, they must request the sign in writing within three days.

6. To reclaim any sign removed by the community development director, the person reclaiming the sign shall pay the city the fee as established by the city council resolution to recover costs for sign code enforcement and storage actions. If the owner of the sign has not reclaimed the sign as provided herein, the community development director may destroy the sign or dispose of it in any manner deemed appropriate. Destruction of the sign is in addition to any fees and penalties that may be imposed under separate proceedings for civil violation of this sign code.

7. If the municipal judge determines that the sign was lawfully placed within the public right-of-way or city-owned real property, then the city shall reinstall the sign to the same place that it was removed within three business days of the issuance of the decision and the fee for the request for hearing shall be refunded to the payer of the fee.

8. The city has the right to appeal the decision of the municipal judge. Should the city appeal the municipal judge’s decision, reinstallation of sign shall be delayed until the appeal period has passed.

9. Costs, as determined by SMC 15.16.700, shall be the responsibility of the sign owner and the person responsible for the placement of the sign, collectively and individually. (Ord. 09-04 § 2, 2009)


15.16.720 Enforcement – Sign on private property or on non-city-owned public property, other than on public right-of-way.

A. The community development director may order the removal of any sign erected or maintained on private property or on non-city-owned public property, other than on public right-of-way, in violation of the provisions of this chapter or other applicable provisions of this code. If necessary to enter the premises to inspect the sign, the community development director shall seek an administrative warrant for entry to the premises.

B. An order to bring a sign into compliance or to remove a sign shall be in writing and mailed or delivered to the owner of the sign, if known, and the owner of the building, structure or premises on which the sign is located, if the owner of the sign is not known.

C. The order shall inform the owner of the sign, if known, and the owner of the building, structure or premises on which the sign is located, if the owner of the sign is not known, that the sign violates the regulations in this chapter and must be brought into compliance or be removed within 30 days of the date of the order, or such earlier date as shall be stated in the order. The order shall also state the reasons why the community development director concludes the sign violates the regulations in this chapter and shall inform the owner of the sign, if known, and the owner of the building, structure or premises on which the sign is located, if the owner of the sign is not known, of the right to submit a request for hearing, to determine whether or not the sign is in violation of this sign code.

D. A request for hearing shall be filed by the reputed owner of the sign, or owner of the building, structure or premises on which the sign is located, within 15 days following mailing or delivery of the order. The request for hearing shall be filed with the city manager.

E. Upon receipt of the request for hearing, the city recorder shall proceed in the manner specified in SMC 15.16.630, and a hearing shall be held, and decision issued, in the manner specified in SMC 15.16.630.

1. A prima facie violation of this code shall be met if it is shown that the sign:

a. Does not conform to the requirements of this code; or

b. Is posted by a person that is not authorized to post the sign in the specific location.

2. The prima facie violation may be rebutted upon a showing that the sign was lawfully permitted or authorized under this code, or is otherwise required to be installed and maintained by state or federal law.

F. If the municipal judge determines that the sign is not permitted or authorized by this sign code, or by other applicable state or federal law, then within 10 days following any applicable appeal or review period, the owner of the sign, or owner of the building, structure or premises on which the sign is located, shall cause the sign to be removed, or altered in such a manner as to be made to conform to the requirements of this sign code. A sign which is not removed or altered in such a manner as to be made to conform to the requirements of this sign code is defined as a public nuisance.

G. The city manager may:

1. Exercise all rights and remedies to cause the removal of the sign, including but not limited to removal of public nuisance, injunctive order, or as otherwise existing under Oregon law; and/or

2. Seek judgment against the owner of the land and the sign owner, individually, or collectively, for the removal and other costs pursuant to SMC 15.16.700, and may collect upon the judgment in the manner provided by Oregon law; and/or

3. Seek such additional orders from a court of competent jurisdiction to permit entry upon the premises and removal of the sign.

H. Costs, as determined by SMC 15.16.700, shall be the responsibility of the sign owner and the person responsible for the placement of the sign, collectively and individually. The costs shall be made a lien against the land or premises on which such sign is located, and may be collected or foreclosed in the same manner as liens otherwise entered in the liens docket of the city. (Ord. 09-04 § 2, 2009)


15.16.730 Removal of unsafe signs.

A. If the community development director or building official finds that any sign by reason of its condition presents an immediate and serious danger to the public, the community development director may, without prior written notice, order the immediate removal or repair of the sign within a specified period. The community development director shall follow the procedures provided in SMC 15.16.720, except that the community development director may shorten the time deadlines as reasonable, considering the risk to the public from the sign if the sign were to fail.

B. If the community development director or building official determines that the sign presents an immediate and serious danger to the public, then within such time as set by the community development director and/or municipal judge, the owner of the sign, or owner of the building, structure or premises on which the sign is located, shall cause the sign to be removed, or altered in such a manner as to be made to eliminate the threat of death, injury, or damage to the public and its property. A sign which is not removed or altered in such a manner as to be made safe is defined as a public nuisance.

C. Costs, as determined by SMC 15.16.700, shall be the responsibility of the sign owner and the person responsible for the placement of the sign, individually and collectively. The costs shall be made a lien against the land or premises on which such sign is located, and may be collected or foreclosed in the same manner as liens otherwise entered in the liens docket of the city. (Ord. 09-04 § 2, 2009)


15.16.740 Removal of abandoned signs.

A. Abandoned Sign Removal. An owner of a sign shall remove the sign when it is abandoned.

B. Ordering the Removal of Abandoned Signs. The community development director or building official may order the removal of abandoned signs in the same manner as provided in SMC 15.16.720, and the procedures for requesting a hearing, and the decision issued, shall be as set forth therein.

C. Abandonment of a Sign. Abandonment of a sign shall be made when it is shown that:

1. The sign is no longer used by the person or business that constructed the sign or the property where the sign is located is no longer being used for the purpose identified on the sign. The sign owner may rebut the determination of abandonment upon showing that a reasonable effort is under way to continue the use of the property or sign;

2. The sign has been damaged, and repairs and restoration are not started within 90 days of the date the sign was damaged, or are not diligently pursued, once started.

D. Sign Owner Responsible. Costs, as determined by SMC 15.16.700, shall be the responsibility of the sign owner and the person responsible for the placement of the sign, collectively and individually. When payment of enforcement or other fees related to this chapter are not made in a timely manner, then these costs shall be made as a lien against the land or premises on which such sign is located, and may be collected or foreclosed in the same manner as liens otherwise entered in the liens docket of the city. (Ord. 09-04 § 2, 2009)


15.16.800 Reserved.

(Ord. 09-04 § 2, 2009)


15.16.900 Violations.

A. Violation Actions. It shall be a violation of this code for any person to perform, undertake, allow, or suffer the following:

1. Installing, creating, erecting, suffering, or maintaining any sign in a manner that is not in conformance with the provisions of this code;

2. Altering an existing nonconforming sign in such a manner that it does not conform to the provisions of SMC 15.16.070;

3. Failing to remove any nonconforming sign after being ordered to do so.

B. Continuing Violation. Each day of a continued violation shall be considered a separate violation when applying the penalty provisions of this code. (Ord. 09-04 § 2, 2009)


15.16.910 Penalties and other remedies.

A. The municipal court is empowered to hear and determine violations of this chapter.

B. In addition to any other penalty of law, the municipal court or any other court of competent jurisdiction may issue a judgment necessary to ensure cessation of the violation, including but not limited to injunctive order and/or monetary penalty.

C. Any person who places a sign on property in violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine established by the Silverton city council. (Ord. 09-04 § 2, 2009)


Chapter 15.20  BUILDING CODE ENFORCEMENT

Sections:

15.20.010    Conformity to state standards.

15.20.020    Permit requirement.

15.20.030    Adoption of state code.

15.20.040    Adoption of Appendix J of the International Building Code.

15.20.050    Adoption of One and Two Family Dwelling Code.

15.20.060    Adoption of State Mechanical Specialty Code.

15.20.070    Repealed.

15.20.080    Adoption of State Electrical Specialty Code.

15.20.090    Adoption of State Plumbing Code.

15.20.100    Adoption of Oregon Fire Code (OFC).

15.20.110    Repealed.

15.20.120    Manufactured Dwelling Installation Specialty Code.

15.20.130    Adoption of 1997 Administrative Rules Governing Mobile Home Parks.

15.20.140    Transitional housing standards.


15.20.010 Conformity to state standards.

The policy of the city is that building construction and related activities in the city shall comply at all times with the State Building Code standards. Notwithstanding any standard affecting construction contained in a city ordinance or city policy, any standard in the State Building Code, as adopted by the Administrator of the Building Codes Agency, applies as a city requirement in the same manner as that standard applies as a state requirement. (Ord. 10-07 § 1, 2010; Ord. 10-03 § 1, 2010; Ord. 05-07 § 1, 2005; Ord. 04-110 § 1, 2004; Ord. 99-100 § 1, 1999; Ord. 95-114 § 1, 1995)


15.20.020 Permit requirement.

No person shall engage in construction or other activity for which a permit is required by the building code, unless such construction or activity complies with all state standards, local regulations, city policies, or other requirements hereof. The standards, regulations, and requirements which shall be applicable to any construction or activity shall be those in effect at the time of permit application. (Ord. 10-07 § 1, 2010; Ord. 10-03 § 1, 2010; Ord. 05-07 § 1, 2005; Ord. 04-110 § 1, 2004; Ord. 00-116 § 1, 2000; Ord. 99-100 § 1, 1999; Ord. 95-114 § 2, 1995)


15.20.030 Adoption of state code.

The Oregon Structural Specialty Code, effective July 1, 2010, with its state-adopted appendices, except Table No. 1-A, Building Permit Fees, and except as modified below, is adopted as part of this chapter. The foregoing is referred to as the “structural code” and is composed of the 2009 International Building Code, published by the International Code Council and amended by the State Building Codes Agency. (Ord. 10-07 § 1, 2010; Ord. 10-03 § 1, 2010; Ord. 05-07 § 1, 2005; Ord. 04-110 § 1, 2004; Ord. 00-116 § 1, 2000; Ord. 99-100 § 1, 1999; Ord. 95-114 § 3, 1995)


15.20.040 Adoption of Appendix J of the International Building Code.

Appendix J, Grading, of the International Building Code (IBC), 2009 Edition, published by the International Code Council is adopted as part of this chapter. (Ord. 10-07 § 1, 2010; Ord. 10-03 § 1, 2010; Ord. 05-07 § 1, 2005; Ord. 04-110 § 1, 2004; Ord. 00-116 § 1, 2000; Ord. 99-100 § 1, 1999)


15.20.050 Adoption of One and Two Family Dwelling Code.

The Oregon One and Two Family Dwelling Specialty Code, effective April 1, 2008, with its administrative rules and appendices, is adopted as part of this chapter. The foregoing is referred to as the “one and two family dwelling code” and is composed of the 2007 Edition of the One and Two Family Dwelling Code, published by the International Code Council, as amended by the State Building Codes Agency. (Ord. 10-07 § 1, 2010; Ord. 10-03 § 1, 2010; Ord. 05-07 § 1, 2005; Ord. 04-110 § 1, 2004; Ord. 00-116 § 1, 2000; Ord. 99-100 § 1, 1999)


15.20.060 Adoption of State Mechanical Specialty Code.

The Oregon Mechanical Specialty Code, effective July 1, 2010, with its state-adopted appendices, is adopted as part of this chapter. The foregoing is referred to as the “mechanical code” and is composed of the 2009 Edition of the International Mechanical Code with appendices and standards, published by the International Code Council and amended by the State Building Codes Agency. (Ord. 10-07 § 1, 2010; Ord. 10-03 § 1, 2010; Ord. 05-07 § 1, 2005; Ord. 04-110 § 1, 2004; Ord. 00-116 § 1, 2000; Ord. 99-100 § 1, 1999; Ord. 95-114 § 5, 1995)


15.20.070 Adoption of Model Dangerous Building Code.

Repealed by Ord. 04-105. (Ord. 95-114 § 6, 1995)


15.20.080 Adoption of State Electrical Specialty Code.

The Oregon Electrical Specialty Code, effective April 1, 2008, with its bound administrative rules and standards, is adopted as part hereof. The foregoing is referred to as the “electrical code” and is composed of the 2008 Edition of the National Electrical Code and Electrical Standards, published by the National Fire Protection Association, and the state amendments and administrative rules published by the State Building Codes Division. (Ord. 10-07 § 1, 2010; Ord. 10-03 § 1, 2010; Ord. 05-07 § 1, 2005; Ord. 04-110 § 1, 2004; Ord. 00-116 § 1, 2000; Ord. 99-100 § 1, 1999; Ord. 95-114 § 7, 1995)


15.20.090 Adoption of State Plumbing Code.

The Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code, effective April 1, 2008, with its administrative rules, appendices and standards, is adopted as part hereof. The foregoing is referred to as the “plumbing code” and is composed of the 2006 Edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code, with appendices and standards published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials and amended by the State Building Codes Agency. (Ord. 10-07 § 1, 2010; Ord. 10-03 § 1, 2010; Ord. 05-07 § 1, 2005; Ord. 04-110 § 1, 2004; Ord. 00-116 § 1, 2000; Ord. 99-100 § 1, 1999; Ord. 95-114 § 8, 1995)


15.20.100 Adoption of Oregon Fire Code (OFC).

The effective date July 1, 2010, written by the International Code Council with its state-adopted appendices, is adopted as part of this chapter. (Ord. 10-07 § 1, 2010; Ord. 10-03 § 1, 2010; Ord. 05-07 § 1, 2005; Ord. 04-110 § 1, 2004; Ord. 00-116 § 1, 2000)


15.20.110 Adoption of Appendix Chapter 9 Divisions I and II of the 1997 Uniform Building Code.

Repealed by Ord. 10-07. (Ord. 10-03 § 1, 2010; Ord. 05-07 § 1, 2005; Ord. 04-110 § 1, 2004; Ord. 02-105 § 1, 2002; Ord. 00-116 § 1, 2000)


15.20.120 Manufactured Dwelling Installation Specialty Code.

The 2010 Edition Manufactured Dwelling Installation Specialty Code, as adopted by the Administrator of the State Building Codes Agency, with administrative rules, with an effective date of April 1, 2010. (Ord. 10-07 § 1, 2010; Ord. 10-03 § 1, 2010; Ord. 05-07 § 1, 2005; Ord. 04-110 § 1, 2004; Ord. 99-100 § 1, 1999; Ord. 95-114 § 11, 1995)


15.20.130 Adoption of 1997 Administrative Rules Governing Mobile Home Parks.

The April 1, 1997, Administrative Rules Governing Mobile Home Parks, as adopted by the Administrator of the State Building Codes Agency, are adopted as part of this chapter. (Ord. 10-07 § 1, 2010; Ord. 10-03 § 1, 2010; Ord. 05-07 § 1, 2005; Ord. 04-110 § 1, 2004; Ord. 99-100 § 1, 1999; Ord. 95-114 § 12, 1995)


15.20.140 Transitional housing standards.

The Oregon Transitional Housing Standard 2017 adopted by the State of Oregon Building Codes Division is modified and adopted by city council as set forth in Exhibit B to the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 18-25 § 1 (Exh. A), 2018)


Title 16 (RESERVED)


Title 17 SUBDIVISIONS

(Repealed by Ord. 06-03)


Title 18 DEVELOPMENT CODE AND ZONING MAP

Chapters:

Article 1. Introduction

1.1    Official Name and Map

1.2    Purpose

1.3    How to Use the Development Code

1.4    General Administration

1.5    Definitions

1.6    Use Categories

1.7    Enforcement

Article 2. Land Use (Zoning) Districts

2.1    Organization of Land Use Districts

2.2    Residential (R) Districts

2.3    Commercial Districts

2.4    Industrial (I) Districts

2.5    Floodplain Overlay District

2.6    Hillside Protection (/H) Overlay District

2.7    Wetlands and Riparian (/WP) Overlay District

2.8    Public (/P) Overlay District

Article 3. Community Design Standards

3.0    Design Standards Administration

3.1    Access and Circulation

3.2    Landscaping, Street Trees, Fences and Walls

3.3    Parking and Loading

3.4    Public Facilities

3.5    Historic Landmarks

Article 4. Administration of Land Use and Development

4.1    Types of Review Procedures

4.2    Land Use Review and Design Review

4.3    Land Divisions and Property Line Adjustments

4.4    Conditional Uses

4.5    Planned Developments

4.6    Modifications to Approved Plans and Conditions of Approval

4.7    Zoning Map and Development Code Text Amendments

4.8    Code Interpretations

4.9    Miscellaneous Permits

4.10    Annexations

4.11    Urban Growth Boundary Amendments

4.12    Comprehensive Plan Amendments

4.13    Vacations

Article 5. Exceptions to Code Standards

5.1    Adjustments and Variances

5.2    Nonconforming Uses and Developments

5.3    Lots of Record


Chapter 1.1 OFFICIAL NAME AND MAP

Sections:

1.1.010    Code and map titles.


1.1.010 Code and map titles.

The official name of this title is Title 18, Development Code and Zoning Map. It may be referred to as development code or this code or Title 18 of the Revised Silverton Municipal Code (RSMC). The map may be referred to as zoning map, zoning district map or land use district map. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


Chapter 1.2 PURPOSE

Sections:

1.2.010    Generally.


1.2.010 Generally.

The general purpose of this code is to set forth and coordinate city regulations governing the development and use of land. The code is more specifically intended to do the following:

A. Serve as the principal vehicle for implementation of the city’s comprehensive plan in a manner which protects the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Silverton.

B. Satisfy relevant requirements of federal law, state law, statewide goals, and administrative rules.

C. Facilitate prompt review of development proposals and the application of clear and specific standards.

D. Provide for public information, review, and comment on development proposals which may have a significant impact on the community.

E. Guide public and private planning policies and actions to ensure provision of adequate water, sewerage, transportation, drainage, parks, open space and other public facilities and services for each development.

F. Establish procedures and standards requiring that the design of site improvements and building improvements be consistent with applicable standards and flexible design guidelines.

G. Provide for review and approval of the relationship between land uses and traffic circulation in order to minimize congestion, with particular emphasis on not exceeding the planned capacity of residential streets.

H. Require that permitted uses and development designs provide reasonable protection from fire, flood, landslide, erosion, or other natural hazards as well as prevent the spread of blight, and aid in the prevention of crime.

I. Protect and enhance the city’s aesthetic beauty and character.

J. Protect constitutional property rights, provide due process of law, and give consideration in all matters to affected property owner interests in making land use decisions. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


Chapter 1.3 HOW TO USE THE DEVELOPMENT CODE

Sections:

1.3.010    Applicability – Organization.


1.3.010 Applicability – Organization.

The city of Silverton development code governs all uses of land within the incorporated limits of the city of Silverton. The five articles of the code are used together to review land use applications. They are organized as follows:

Article 1. In addition to this brief introduction, Article 1 provides definitions for selected terms, land use classifications and categories, and information on the legal construct of the code. It also explains the city’s authority to enforce the development code.

Article 2. Every parcel, lot, and tract of land within the city’s incorporated boundaries is also within a land use district. (Land use districts are shown on the city’s official zoning map.) Article 2 identifies the land uses that are permitted within each district, and the standards that apply to each type of land use (e.g., lot standards, setbacks, and use-specific design standards). As required by state law, the zones or land use districts conform to the city of Silverton comprehensive plan. Other land use procedures such as the overlay zones are included within Article 2. These regulations implement planned land uses and development densities, provide compatibility between uses, and establish urban design requirements for specific types of uses.

Article 3. The design standards contained in Article 3 apply throughout the city. They are used to help prepare development plans and review development applications. The community design standards will help to ensure compliance with city standards for access and circulation, landscaping, parking, public facilities, stormwater management, housing densities, and sensitive lands.

Article 4. Article 4 provides application requirements and administrative procedures for obtaining permits and approvals under this code. Four types of permit procedures are covered: Type I (nondiscretionary, ministerial decisions); Type II (discretionary, administrative decisions); Type III (quasi-judicial decisions with public hearing); and Type IV (legislative decisions). Other land use procedures such as appeals, code interpretations, miscellaneous permits, etc., are included within Article 4. This article also identifies the process and requirements for each type of review procedure.

Article 5. Article 5 contains standards and procedures for variances and nonconforming situations (i.e., existing uses or developments that do not comply with the code). This code cannot provide standards to fit every potential development situation. The city’s varied geography and complexities of land development require flexibility. Article 5 provides that flexibility, while maintaining the purpose and intent of the code. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


Chapter 1.4 GENERAL ADMINISTRATION

Sections:

1.4.100    Severability.

1.4.200    Compliance and scope.

1.4.300    Consistency with plan and laws.

1.4.400    Use of a development.

1.4.500    Pre-existing approvals.

1.4.600    Demolition permit, building permit and certificate of occupancy.

1.4.700    Official action.

1.4.800    Approval compliance.


1.4.100 Severability.

The provisions of this development code are severable. If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of the development code is adjudged to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, that decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of the development code. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


1.4.200 Compliance and scope.

A. Compliance with the Provisions in the Development Code. Land and structures may be used or developed only as this development code (“code”) or any amendment thereto permits. No plat shall be recorded or no building permit shall be issued or valid without compliance with the provisions of this code and all permits, approvals, and conditions of approval issued under it.

B. Obligation by Successor. The requirements of this code apply to the owner(s) of record, persons undertaking the development or the use of land, and to those persons’ successors in interest. Development approvals and applicable conditions shall run with the land. The approval transfers to a new owner if the property is sold or otherwise transferred, unless specifically conditioned otherwise.

C. Transfer of Development Standards Prohibited. No lot area, yard, landscaping, or open space that is required by this code for one use shall be a required lot area, yard, landscaping, or open space for another use, except as otherwise specifically allowed by this code. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


1.4.300 Consistency with plan and laws.

This development code is designed to implement the city of Silverton comprehensive plan. All provisions of this code shall be construed in conformity with the adopted comprehensive plan and applicable state and federal laws. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


1.4.400 Use of a development.

A development shall be used only for a lawful use. A lawful use of a development is one that is permitted by this code and has received the applicable approvals (e.g., design review, land division, public improvement permits, state and federal regulations) and is not prohibited by law. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


1.4.500 Pre-existing approvals.

A. Legality of Pre-Existing Approvals. Developments and uses for which approvals were granted prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this code (“pre-existing approvals”) may occur pursuant to such approvals. Pre-existing approvals may be extended pursuant to the standards in effect at the time of the original approval notwithstanding any state or federal law or rule precluding such extension. Modifications to pre-existing approvals shall comply with Chapter 4.6 SDC, Modifications to Approved Plans and Conditions of Approval.

B. Subsequent Development Applications. All developments and uses begun on or after November 5, 2008, shall conform to the provisions of this code. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


1.4.600 Demolition permit, building permit and certificate of occupancy.

A. Demolition Permit. A demolition permit shall not be issued until the community development director has issued a land use review or design review approval in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 4.2 SDC, or has otherwise found that such review is not required.

B. Building Permit. A building permit shall not be issued until the community development director has issued a land use review or design review approval in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 4.2 SDC, or has otherwise found that such review is not required.

C. Certificate of Occupancy Required. To ensure completion of a development or use in the manner approved, a building shall not be occupied and a use shall not begin until the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy following completion of the work in substantial conformance to the applicable approvals and permits.

D. Prior to Final Completion. Prior to the final completion of all work, the building official, at his or her discretion, may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy and/or a certificate of occupancy for a portion of the structure, conditioned upon further work being completed by a date certain. At the building official’s discretion, security in the form of a bond, contract, escrow funds, or other considerations may be required to ensure the final completion of all required work. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


1.4.700 Official action.

A. Official Action. The city official and his or her designees are vested with authority to issue permits or grant approvals in conformance with this code, and shall issue no permit or grant approval for any development or use which violates or fails to comply with conditions or standards imposed to carry out this code.

B. Declaring a Prior Decision Void. Any permit or approval issued or granted that fails to comply with the provisions of this code or the code in force at the time the permit or approval was granted may be declared void by the city. The reviewing body shall determine when an approval is void and may direct cessation of building activity or use or may direct modification in order to attain conformance to the code.

C. Notice. The failure of any person to receive mailed notice or failure to post a notice shall not invalidate any actions pursuant to this code, provided a good faith effort was made to notify all parties entitled to notice.

D. Fees. The city council shall establish application and review fees and fee policies by separate resolution for the performance of the actions and reviews required by this code. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


1.4.800 Approval compliance.

A. Application Materials. Application materials and other information (such as oral and/or written testimony) submitted by an applicant and relied upon by the city staff and/or the decision-making body during the review and approval process in order to gain development approval are considered part of the application and any commitment contained within this material shall become legally binding upon the applicant.

B. Conditions of Approval. Developments that have been granted approval subject to conditions of approval are required to comply with said conditions of approval. As these conditions run with the land, future owners, lessees, renters, etc., will also be required to comply with said conditions of approval. In the event that these conditions require reconsideration, then the appropriate application and review procedures must be followed for reconsideration of said conditions in accordance with the provisions of this code. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


Chapter 1.5 DEFINITIONS

Sections:

1.5.100    Purpose.

1.5.200    Applicability.

1.5.300    Definitions.


1.5.100 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to define terms that are used frequently in the city of Silverton development code, to assist decision makers in interpreting and applying the code. Some of the terms that are defined here may have different meanings in other communities. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


1.5.200 Applicability.

A. Definitions. The definitions in this chapter apply to all actions and interpretations under the city of Silverton development code. The meanings given terms in this chapter may, in certain contexts in which they are used, be clearly inapplicable. In such cases the context in which a term is used will indicate its intended meaning, and that intent shall control. Where a term used in this code is already defined in another part of the city of Silverton code (e.g., the International Building Code, etc.) the term is not redefined herein for purposes of that other code.

B. Land Use Categories. Chapter 1.6 SDC provides descriptions of the land use categories used in Article 2.

C. Interpretation. Terms not defined in this code shall have their ordinary accepted meanings within the context in which they are used. Webster’s Third New International Dictionary of the English Language, Unabridged, shall be considered a standard reference. In some situations, the community development director may find it necessary to make a formal code interpretation or similar use ruling under Chapter 4.8 SDC. In such cases, the director’s decision shall be processed through either a Type I or Type II procedure and a written record of it shall be kept on file with the development code. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


1.5.300 Definitions.

The following definitions are organized alphabetically and some related terms are also grouped together and cross-referenced under group headings (e.g., Transportation-Related, Environment-Related, etc.). See also Chapter 1.6 SDC for descriptions of the land use categories used in Article 2.

A. “A” Definitions.

“Abutting” means contiguous or adjoining. It shall include the terms “adjacent,” “adjoining” and “contiguous.”

“Access” means a way or means of approach to provide pedestrian, bicycle, and/or motor vehicular entrances or exits to a property.

“Accessory” means secondary or incidental to a primary use or structure.

Accessory Dwelling Unit. See Residential Structure Types.

“Accessory parking facility” means a parking facility that provides parking for a specific use or uses. The facility may be located on or off the site of the use or uses to which it is accessory. A fee may or may not be charged. An accessory parking facility need not be in the same ownership as the specific uses to which it is accessory. See also commercial parking in Chapter 1.6 SDC, Use Categories.

“Accessory structure” means a structure of secondary importance or function on a site. In general, the primary use of the site is not carried on in an accessory structure. Accessory structures are detached from the primary structure. Examples of accessory structures include but are not limited to: garages, decks, fences, arbors, gazebos, heat pumps, and other structures. See also “Primary structure.”

“Accessory use” means a use or activity that is a subordinate part of a primary use and that is clearly incidental to a primary use on a site. Does not include an accessory dwelling. See also “Primary structure.”

“Adjacent” means abutting or located directly across a street right-of-way.

“Adjustment” means a discretionary approval that modifies or waives a specific development standard, as expressly allowed under this code (e.g., SDC 4.2.510, Design review – Adjustments (performance option)).

“Administrative” means a discretionary action or permit decision made without a public hearing, but requiring public notification and an opportunity for appeal.

“Adult foster care” means a family home or facility in which residential care is provided for five or fewer adults who are not related to the provider by blood or marriage. “Provider” means any person operating an adult foster care home. See also “Group living structure” under Residential Structure Types.

“Adverse impact or effect” means negative effect that can be measured (e.g., noise, air pollution, vibration, dust, glare, emissions, etc.).

“Affordable” means housing affordable to a certain percentage of the population earning a specified level of income and spending no more than 30 percent of their income on housing expenses. For more information, contact the federal Department of Housing and Urban Development and the Oregon Department of Housing and Community Services.

“Aged person” means an individual 65 years of age or older.

Agriculture. See use category under Chapter 1.6 SDC and ORS 215.203(2)(a).

Alley. See Transportation-Related Definitions.

Alteration. See Development-Related Definitions.

“Ambient” means the normal or background environmental condition, as in the level of light, dust or noise.

“Applicant” means a person who applies for a land use review or building permit. An applicant can be the owner of the property or someone who is representing the owner, such as a builder, developer, optional purchaser, consultant, or architect.

“Arborist” means a professional listed as a certified arborist or a registered consulting arborist.

Arterial. See Transportation-Related Definitions.

“Articulate/articulation” means the joining and interrelating of building spaces through offsets, projections, overhangs, extensions and similar features.

Attached House (Townhome or Rowhouse). See Residential Structure Types.

Attached Structure. See Development-Related Definitions.

Automobile-Dependent/Oriented Development. See Development-Related Definitions.

B. “B” Definitions.

“Basement” means a portion of a building, not deemed a story, where the floor level directly above is six feet or less above grade for more than 50 percent of the total perimeter and is less than 10 feet above grade at every point.

“Bed and breakfast inn” means any establishment located in a structure designed for a single-family residence and structures appurtenant thereto that:

1. Has rooms for rent on a daily basis to the public;

2. Offers a breakfast meal as part of the cost of the room; and

3. Is developed in accordance with SDC 2.2.200.

“Berm” means a small rise or hill in a landscape that is intended to buffer or visually screen certain developments, such as parking areas.

“Block” means all of the property bounded by streets, rights-of-way, and water features, but not divided or separated in any way by streets or water features.

“Block frontage” means all of the property fronting on one side of a street that is between intersecting or intercepting streets, or that is between a street and a water feature or end of a dead-end street. An intercepting street determines the boundary of the block frontage only on the side of the street that it intercepts. See Figure.

Block Frontage
[IMAGE]


“Bollard” means a permanent or removable post of metal, wood or masonry that is used to separate or direct traffic (vehicles, pedestrians and/or bicycles); may contain sidewalk or pathway lighting.

Boulevard. See Transportation-Related Definitions.

“Building” means a structure that has a roof and is enclosed on at least 50 percent of the area of its sides. See Development-Related Definitions for related definitions.

“Building official” means the person who enforces the building ordinances and regulations for the city, and other ordinances and regulations as assigned.

Build-to Line. See Development-Related Definitions.

“Business street” means any block length along any street, other than an arterial, within which there is or will be provided access to one or more commercial structures which in the judgment of the planning commission will result in a high volume of business traffic on such street.

C. “C” Definitions.

“Canopy” means a permanent roofed structure that may be free-standing or be partially attached to a building, for the purpose of providing shelter to patrons on foot and/or in motor vehicles; does not include a completely enclosed structure. See also “Tree canopy” under Environment-Related Definitions.



“Capacity” means maximum holding or serviceability, as used for transportation, utilities, parks and other public facilities.

“Carport” means a stationary structure consisting of a roof, its supports, and not more than one wall or storage cabinets substituting for a wall, used to shelter motor vehicles, recreational vehicles, or boats.

“Centerline radius” means the radius of a centerline of a street right-of-way.

“Certificate of occupancy” means a certificate of occupancy or a certificate of inspection issued by the city at the completion of a building permit or change of occupancy.

“Change in occupancy” means a change in the use of a structure that results in a different classification as defined by this code or the International Building Code.

“Change of use” means a change in the primary type of use on a site.

Child Care Center, Family Child Care. See use categories, SDC 1.6.430 and 1.6.440.

“City” means the city of Silverton, Oregon.

“Clear and objective” means decision criteria and standards that do not involve substantial discretion or individual judgment in their application.

“Clear zone” means the ground area under the approach surface which extends from the end of the runway to a point where the approach surface is 50 feet above the runway in elevation.

Clearing. See Development-Related Definitions.

Collector. See Transportation-Related Definitions.

“Commercial” means land use involving buying/selling of goods or services as the primary activity.

“Common area” means land commonly owned, to include open space, landscaping or recreation facilities (e.g., typically owned by a homeowners’ association).

“Comprehensive plan” means the current adopted comprehensive plan of the city of Silverton.

“Conditional use” means a use that requires a conditional use review. See Chapter 4.4 SDC.

Condominium. See Residential Structure Types.

Conservation Easement. See Environment-Related Definitions.

Corner Lot. See “Lot, Corner lot.”

“Corner radius” means the radius of a street corner, as measured around the curb or edge of pavement.

Cottage. See Residential Structure Types.

“Council” means the city council of Silverton, Oregon.

Courtyard. See Development-Related Definitions.

Crown Cover. See Environment-Related Definitions.

D. “D” Definitions.

“Days” means calendar days, unless specifically stated as working days. Working days include Monday through Friday, excluding holidays.

Dead-End Street. See Transportation-Related Definitions.

“Dedication” means the designation of land by its owner for any public use as shown on a subdivision plat or deed. The term may also be used for dedications to a private homeowners’ association.

“Density(ies)” means a measurement of the number of dwelling units in relationship to a specified amount of land. As used in this code, density is determined based on the gross parcel or lot area, which includes land that will be dedicated as right-of-way through the development process. It does not include land previously dedicated as right-of-way. Density is a measurement used generally for residential uses.

“Design review” means a development review that addresses site and building design requirements of the applicable land use district and the design standards and public improvement requirements of this code. See Chapter 4.2 SDC.

Development-Related Definitions.

• “Alteration” means a physical change to a structure or site. Alteration does not include normal maintenance and repair or total demolition. (See also “Interior/exterior alteration.”) Alteration does include the following:

- Changes to the exterior of a building;

- Changes to the interior of a building;

- Increases or decreases in floor area of a building;

- Changes to other structures on the site, or the development of new structures;

- Changes to exterior improvements;

- Changes to landscaping; and

- Changes in the topography of the site.

• “Arcade” means an arched or covered passageway, e.g., along building fronts or between streets.

• “Attached structure” means any structure that is attached to another structure by a common wall, by a roof, or by structural connections that allow pedestrian access to both structures. For example, decks or stairways are attached structures when they are connected to another structure. A garage may be attached to another structure by sharing a wall or by a breezeway. Structures connected by an “I” beam or similar connections are not considered attached.

• “Automobile-dependent development” means primary or accessory uses servicing motor vehicles, or patrons in motor vehicles, such as motor vehicle repair, gas stations, car washes, auto and truck sales, drive-up windows, kiosks, and similar uses.

• “Automobile-oriented development” means development in which the site layout and design gives preference to automobiles as the primary mode of transportation; generally discouraged in all residential areas and most commercial and light industrial areas.

• “Building” means a structure that has a roof and is enclosed on at least 50 percent of the area of its sides.

• “Building area” means the total area of a building, both above and below ground, measured from the exterior faces of a building or structure. Gross building area does not include the following:

- Roof area;

- Rooftop mechanical equipment; and

- Roofed porches, exterior balconies, or other similar areas, unless they are enclosed by walls that are more than 42 inches in height, for 50 percent or more of their perimeter.

• “Building coverage” means the area that is covered by buildings, and decks, stairways and entry bridges that are more than 30 inches above grade. Eaves are not included in building coverage. Building coverage is included within lot coverage. See also “Lot coverage.”

• “Building envelope” means area outside of all required setbacks, easements or other constraints on a lot, which could accommodate a structure(s).

• “Building footprint” means the outline of a building, as measured around its foundation, or building coverage, whichever is greater.

• “Building height” means the vertical distance from the grade plane to the average height of a gabled roof, or the top of a mansard or flat roof including the parapet walls.


[IMAGE]


• “Building height step-down” means a development standard that requires a transition in allowable building height, whereby the buildings in a specific land use district must “step-down” in elevation where they abut a lower-intensity land use district.

• “Building line” means a line running parallel to a lot line that is the same distance from the lot line as the closest portion of a building on the site. See Figure.

Building Lines
[IMAGE]


• “Building mass” means the aggregate size of a building, or the total height, width, and depth of all its parts.

• “Building pad” means a vacant building site on a lot with other building sites.

• “Building scale” means the dimensional relationship of a building and its component parts to other buildings.

• “Build-to line” means a maximum distance, or range within which, a building must be set back from a street right-of-way for pedestrian-orientation and human-scale design.

• “Clearing” means any activity that removes existing vegetation or strips surface material from any portion of the site.

• “Cornice” means the projecting horizontal element that tops a wall or flat roof.

• “Courtyard” means a court or enclosure adjacent to a building, which usually provides amenities such as gardens, planters, seating, or art.

• “Develop” means to construct or alter a structure or to make a physical change to the land including excavations and fills.

• “Development” means all improvements on a site, including buildings, other structures, parking and loading areas, landscaping, paved or graveled areas, and areas devoted to exterior display, storage, or activities. Development includes improved open areas such as plazas and walkways, but does not include natural geologic forms or unimproved land. See also “Exterior improvements.”

• Driveway. There are two types of driveways:

a. The area that provides vehicular access to a site from a street. A driveway is the same width as the curb cut excluding any aprons or extensions of the curb cut. This type of driveway begins at the street and extends into the site. A driveway does not include parking, maneuvering, or circulation areas in parking areas, such as aisles; and

b. The area that provides vehicular circulation between two or more noncontiguous parking areas. A driveway does not include maneuvering or circulation areas within the interior of a parking area. Where required by this code for fire safety, a driveway must be used exclusively for circulation, with no abutting parking spaces.

• “Driveway apron/approach” means the edge of a driveway where it abuts a public way; usually constructed of concrete.

• “Eave” means a projecting overhang at the lower border of a roof extending from a primary wall or support. See Figure.

Eave
[IMAGE]


• “Exterior alteration” means an alteration that is outside any buildings.

• “Exterior improvements” means all improvements except buildings or other roofed structures. Exterior improvements include surface parking and loading areas, paved and graveled areas, and areas devoted to exterior display, storage, or activities. It includes improved open areas such as plazas and walkways, but does not include vegetative landscaping, natural geologic forms, or unimproved land. See also “Development.”

• “Facade” means the front or street-facing elevation of a structure.

• “Fire apparatus lane” or “fire lane” means a road or other way developed to allow the passage of fire apparatus. A fire lane is not necessarily intended for vehicular traffic other than fire apparatus.

• “Fire code” means the State of Oregon 2007 Fire Code Amendments, based on the International Fire Code, 2006 Edition, or as amended by the city of Silverton.

• “Floor area” means the total floor area of a building, both above and below ground, with a clear ceiling height of at least seven feet. Floor area is measured from the interior walls of a building or structure and does not include the following:

- Roof area;

- Rooftop mechanical equipment; and

- Roofed porches, exterior balconies, or other similar areas, unless they are enclosed by walls that are more than 42 inches in height, for 50 percent or more of their perimeter.

• “Foundation plane” means the surface area defined by a structure’s foundation, including the perimeter of all footings, slabs and pads.

• “Grading” means all cuts, fills, embankments, stockpile areas, and equipment maneuvering areas associated with development.

• “Impervious surface” means surface area that does not allow for water infiltration or has a runoff coefficient of 0.90 or more (i.e., nonpermeable pavement, solid rock, roofs, foundations, underground tanks and vaults, and similar areas). Gravel is deemed an impervious surface unless the city engineer finds otherwise.

• “New development” means development of a site that was previously unimproved or that has had previously existing buildings demolished; e.g., not a remodel of an existing building.

• “Paved area” means an uncovered, hard-surfaced area or an area covered with a perforated hard surface (such as porous concrete or pavers) that is able to withstand vehicular traffic or other heavy-impact uses. Graveled areas are not paved areas but are typically impervious.

• “Pedestrian amenity(ies)” means areas and objects that serve as places for public socializing and enjoyment and are usually closed to motorized vehicles. Examples include plazas, building frontage areas (extra-wide sidewalks), street furnishings (e.g., benches, drinking fountains, bus waiting shelters), and pocket parks adjacent to a street, and similar areas and objects. Sidewalks designed to meet the minimum sidewalk width standards under Chapter 3.4 SDC are not “amenities” for the purpose of this code.

• “Pedestrian-oriented development” means development that is designed with an emphasis primarily on the street sidewalk and on pedestrian access to the site and building, rather than on auto access and parking areas. The building is generally placed close to the street and the main entrance is oriented to the street sidewalk. There are generally windows or display cases along building facades which face the street. Typically, buildings cover a large portion of the site. Although parking areas may be provided, they are generally limited in size and they are not emphasized by the design of the site.

• “Ridgeline (building)” means the top of a roof at its highest elevation.

• “Roof pitch” means the slope of a roof, usually described as a ratio (e.g., one foot of rise per two feet of horizontal distance equals 6:12 roof pitch).

• “Shared driveway” means when land uses on two or more lots or parcels share one driveway. An easement or tract (owned in common) must be created and recorded for this purpose.

• “Shared parking” means required parking facilities for two or more uses, structures, lots or parcels, which are satisfied jointly with the same facilities. See Chapter 3.3 SDC.

• “Shopping street” means a driveway in a commercial development that is designed to mimic a public street with sidewalks, tree wells, pedestrian lighting, and street furnishings. A shopping street may also have on-street parking.

• “Storefront character” means the character expressed by buildings placed close to the street with ground-floor display windows, weather protection (e.g., awnings or canopies), corner building entrances or recessed entries, and similar features.

• “Stormwater facility” means a facility designed to improve the quality and manage the quantity of stormwater runoff. Stormwater facilities include vegetated swales and sand filters, wet or dry ponds, marshes, infiltration facilities, and structural storm sewer devices. Stormwater facilities do not include conveyance systems that are meant only for conveying the stormwater from one place to another and do not affect the quality or quantity of the stormwater.

• “Street-facing facade/wall” means all the wall planes of a structure as seen from one side or view that are at an angle of 45 degrees or less from a street lot line. See Figure.

Street-Facing Facade
[IMAGE]


• “Street furniture/furnishings” means benches, lighting, bicycle racks, drinking fountains, mailboxes, kiosks, and similar pedestrian amenities; may be located within a street furnishings zone or building front zone of a sidewalk or in a plaza. See also “Pedestrian amenity(ies).”

• “Structure” means any object constructed in or on the ground. “Structure” includes buildings, decks, fences, towers, flagpoles, signs, and other similar objects. “Structure” does not include paved areas or vegetative landscaping materials.

• “Structure height” means the height of a structure, and the cumulative height of a building with any appurtenant structures.

• “Swale” means a type of stormwater facility, usually a broad, shallow depression with plants that filter and process contaminants.

• “Vehicle areas” means all of the areas on a site where vehicles may circulate or park including parking areas, driveways, drive-through lanes, and loading areas. See also “Driveway” and “Parking area.”

“Development review” is a generic term meaning any type of review undertaken to ensure compliance with this code.

Disabled Person. For the purposes of this code, a “disabled person” is a person who has a condition of physical or mental disability that substantially limits one or more major life activities as stated in Section 504 of the Federal Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and state law.

“Discontinued use” means a use that physically left the land it was on, a permitted use that ceased, or a use terminated at the end of a lease or contract. See Chapter 5.2 SDC, Nonconforming Uses and Developments. A use is considered temporarily discontinued during the first year after it ceases, after which it is considered permanently discontinued.

“Discretionary” means a permit action or decision that involves substantial judgment or discretion.

Disturbance Area. See Environment-Related Definitions.

Drainage Way. See Environment-Related Definitions.

Drip-Line. See Environment-Related Definitions.

“Drive-through/drive-up facility” means a facility or structure that is designed to allow drivers to remain in their vehicles before and during an activity on the site. Drive-through facilities are a type of site development that is usually found in conjunction with a quick vehicle servicing use or a retail sales and service use. Drive-through/drive-up facilities also include facilities designed for the rapid servicing of vehicles, where the drivers may or may not remain in their vehicles, but where the drivers usually either perform the service for themselves or wait on the site for the service to be rendered. Drive-through facilities may serve the primary use of the site or may serve accessory uses. Examples are drive-up windows; automatic teller machines; coffee kiosks and similar vendors; menu boards; order boards or boxes; gas pump islands; car wash facilities; auto service facilities, such as air compressor, water, and windshield washing stations; quick-lube or quick-oil change facilities; and drive-in theaters.

Driveway. See Development-Related Definitions for examples and related definitions.

“Drought-tolerant/drought-resistant plants” or “xeriscaping” means as listed and described in the Sunset Western Garden Book (latest edition) or similar authoritative regional resource approved by the city.

Duplex. See Residential Structure Types.

“Dwelling unit” means a building, or a portion of a building, that has independent living facilities including provisions for sleeping, cooking, and sanitation, and that is designed for residential occupancy by a group of people. Buildings with more than one set of cooking facilities are considered to contain multiple dwelling units or accessory dwelling units, unless the additional cooking facilities are clearly accessory to the primary use, such as an outdoor grill. See also Residential Structure Types for examples and related definitions.

E. “E” Definitions.

“Easement” means a grant of rights by a property owner that allows others to use the owner’s land for a specific purpose, such as access, or to locate utilities. Recorded and on record at Marion County.

Eave. See Development-Related Definitions for illustration and related definitions.

“Elevation” means a scaled drawing of the outside wall of a building or structure, from grade to roof ridgeline, typically specifying materials, color, and dimensions.

“Emergency” means any event or circumstances posing an imminent threat to person or property, or including but not limited to: fire, explosion, flood, wind, landslide, severe weather, drought, earthquake, volcanic activity, improper storage, stockpiling, spill, or release of flammable or hazardous materials, contamination, utility or transportation emergencies, disease, blight, and civil disturbance.

Environment-Related Definitions.

• “Conservation easement” means an easement that protects identified conservation values of the land, such as wetlands, woodlands, significant trees or groves, floodplains, wildlife habitat, and similar resources, typically in perpetuity.

• “Crown cover” means the area directly beneath the crown and within the drip-line of a tree or shrub. The crown consists of the aboveground branches, stems, and leaves.

• “Detention facility (stormwater)” means the temporary storage of stormwater (i.e., as in a stormwater detention facility) before it is released through an engineered system that is designed to slow runoff. Detention facilities may be designed to filter or biologically process stormwater runoff, improving water quality before it is released. See also “Retention facility (stormwater).”

• “Disturbance area” means an area that contains all temporary and permanent development, exterior improvements, and staging and storage areas on the site, both existing and proposed. Vegetation planted for resource enhancement and agricultural and pasture land is not included.

• “Drainage land” means land required for drainage ditches or required along a natural stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the flow of water therein to safeguard the public against flood damage or the accumulation of surface water.

• “Drainage way” means an open linear depression, whether constructed or natural, that functions for the collection and drainage of surface water. It may be permanently or temporarily inundated.

• “Drip-line” means an imaginary line around a tree or shrub at a distance from the trunk equivalent to the canopy (leaf and branch) spread.

• “Ecologically/scientifically significant natural areas” means land and water that has substantially retained its natural character, but is not necessarily completely natural or undisturbed, and which is significant for historical, scientific, paleontological, archeological, or natural features.

• “Fish and wildlife habitat areas” means lands that contain significant food, water, or cover for native terrestrial and aquatic species of animals. Examples include forests, fields, riparian areas, wetlands, and water bodies.

• “Flood” or “flooding,” as designated by the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, means the general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:

- The overflow of streams, rivers or other inland water.

- The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.

- Mudslides (i.e., mudflows).

- “Flooding” also means the collapse or subsidence of land along a water body as a result of erosion or undermining exceeding anticipated levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level.

• “Flood elevation determination” means a determination by the Federal Insurance Administrator of the water surface elevations of the base flood from the best available data source.

• “Flood hazard area” means areas subject to periodic water inundation, as identified on the flood insurance rate map for Marion County and its incorporated communities.

• Flood Hazard Map. The official map of Silverton is the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) for Marion County and incorporated communities. The FIRM delineates a special flood hazard area or floodplain where regulations apply.

• “Floodplain” is a physical geographic term describing any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source.

• “Floodplain management” means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventative measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations.

• “Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures that reduce or eliminate flood damage to real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents.

• “Floodway, regulatory” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the waters of a base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation.

• “Identified natural features (e.g., wetlands or streams)” means natural features that are identified in the National Wetlands Inventory, and/or other references used by the city or natural resource regulatory agency, as being significant and in need of protection.

• “Retention facility (stormwater)” means the infiltration of stormwater (i.e., as in a stormwater retention facility) in an engineered system that is designed to contain runoff on a development site. Retention facilities are typically designed to filter or biologically process stormwater runoff, improving water quality before it is released. See also “Detention facility (stormwater).”

• “Riparian areas” means lands adjacent to rivers, streams, lakes, ponds, and other water bodies. They are transitional between aquatic and upland zones, and as such, contain elements of both aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems. They have high water tables because of their close proximity to aquatic systems, soils that are usually made up largely of water-carried sediments, and some vegetation that requires free (unbound) water or conditions that are more moist than normal.

• “Sensitive lands” means wetlands, significant vegetation, steep slopes, floodplains and other natural resource areas designated for protection or conservation by the development code, comprehensive plan, refinements to the comprehensive plan, or individual site inventory or study as may be required by the city, state or federal natural resource agency through the development review process.

• “Shoreline” means banks and other areas adjacent to a river, stream, creek, lake or similar water body.

• “Shoreline stabilization” means the protection of a shoreline by city-approved vegetative or structural means.

• “Stream” means an area where enough natural surface water flows to produce a stream channel, such as a river or creek that carries flowing surface water either intermittently or during most of the year. This includes:

- The water itself, including any vegetation, aquatic life, or habitat;

- Beds and banks below the high water level that may contain water, whether or not water is actually present;

- The floodplain between the high water levels of connected side channels;

- Beaver ponds, oxbows, and side channels if they are connected by surface flow to the stream during a portion of the year; and

- Stream-associated wetlands.

• “Stream channel” means an area with evidence of perennial or seasonal water passage. The depression between the banks worn by the regular and usual flow of the water. The channel need not contain water year-round. This definition does not include irrigation ditches, canals, storm or surface water runoff devices, or other entirely artificial watercourses.

• “Top of bank” means the first major change in the slope of the incline from the ordinary high water level of a water body. A “major change” is a change of 10 degrees or more. If there is no major change within a distance of 50 feet from the ordinary high water level, then the top of bank will be the elevation two feet above the ordinary high water level.

• “Tree canopy” means the ground area that, when viewed from above the crown of one or more trees, is mostly covered by the tree(s). For deciduous trees, canopy area is based on the time of year when foliage is present.

• “Water bodies” means permanently or temporarily flooded lands that may lie below the deepwater boundary of wetlands. Water bodies include rivers, streams, creeks, sloughs, drainage ways, lakes, and ponds.

• “Wetland” means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas.

“Evidence” means application materials, plans, data, testimony and other factual information used to demonstrate compliance or noncompliance with a code standard or criterion.

“Excavating or filling” means the removal, placement, or replacement of earth, concrete, asphalt, and similar nondecomposable materials whether permanent or temporary in nature. “Excavating or filling” does not include the movement of earth or placement of gravel, asphalt, or other paving materials that is done in conjunction with road improvements. It does not include the excavation of mineral or aggregate resources. “Excavating or filling” includes the terms “grading,” “preloading,” “surcharging,” and “stockpiling.”

“Exterior display” includes the outdoor display of products, vehicles, equipment, and machinery for sale or lease. “Exterior display” is an outdoor showroom for customers to examine and compare products. There is variety or a distinction among the goods on display, through different products, brands, or models. The display area does not have to be visible to the street. “Exterior display” does not include goods that are being stored or parked outside, if there is no variety or distinction among the goods, and the goods are not examined and compared by customers. It does not include damaged or inoperable vehicles, vehicles or equipment being serviced, bulk goods and materials, and other similar products. “Exterior display” does not include car and boat sales and leasing when such vehicles are not accessible to customers to inspect and compare; this situation is considered exterior storage. Examples of uses that often have exterior display are car and boat sales and leasing, and plant nurseries. See also “Exterior work activities” and “Exterior storage.”

Exterior Improvements. See Development-Related Definitions.

“Exterior storage” means the outdoor storage of goods that generally have little or no differentiation by type or model. The goods may be for sale or lease, but if so, they are the type that customers generally do not inspect and compare. Exterior storage also includes the outdoor storage of goods for sale, lease or rent that may be differentiated by type or model, but that are not accessible for customers to inspect or compare. Exterior storage includes the storage of raw or finished goods (packaged or bulk), including gases, oil, chemicals and gravel; building materials and packing materials; salvage goods; machinery, tools, and equipment; vehicles that are for sale, lease or rent, which are not accessible to the customer to inspect or compare; vehicles that have been unloaded at port facilities and are waiting transport to off-site locations; vehicles that have been towed and are being kept in an impound lot; and other similar items. The storage of recreational vehicles outdoors is also considered exterior storage. Damaged or inoperable vehicles, or vehicles that have missing parts, which are kept outside are also included as exterior storage. Examples of uses that often have exterior storage are lumber yards, wrecking yards, tool and equipment rental, bark chip and gravel sales, car dealerships or car rental establishments, and port facilities. See also “Exterior display” and “Exterior work activities.”

“Exterior work activities” include the outdoor processing, assembly, or fabrication of goods; the maintenance, repair, and salvage of vehicles and equipment; and other similar activities that generally have an industrial orientation. “Exterior work activities” do not include normal pick-up and deliveries to a site, parking, excavation and fills, exterior eating areas, outdoor recreation, or outdoor markets. See also “Exterior display” and “Exterior storage.”

F. “F” Definitions.

“Facade” means the front or street-facing elevation of a structure. See Development-Related Definitions for related definitions.

Family Daycare. See Child Care Center, Family Child Care.

Farming or Farm Use. As used in this code, “agriculture” is the same as “farm use.” [See ORS 215.203(2)(a).] Includes utilization of land to raise, harvest, or sell crops; feed, breed, manage, and sell livestock, poultry, fur-bearing animals, honeybees, or their produce; dairies and selling dairy products; or any other agricultural or horticultural use, animal husbandry, timber agricultural use, or combination thereof. Farm uses include preparation or processing and storage of products raised on such land, but do not include construction or use of dwellings and other buildings customarily provided in conjunction with farm uses.

“Fence” means an accessory structure, including landscape planting, wood, vinyl, masonry, or any other material, designed and intended to serve as a barrier or as a means of enclosing a yard or other area, or other structure, or to serve as a boundary feature separating two or more properties.

“Festoon light” means a group of two or more incandescent light bulbs hung or strung overhead, not on a building or structure, that is exposed to persons on a public right-of-way, or that are not shaded or hooded to prevent the direct rays of the light from being visible from the property line.

“Final plat” means the diagrams, drawings, and other writing containing all the descriptions, locations, dedications, provisions and information concerning a land division.

“Fire apparatus lane” or “fire lane” means a road or other way developed to allow the passage of fire apparatus. A fire lane is not necessarily intended for vehicular traffic other than fire apparatus.

“Flag” means a piece of cloth or other flexible material attached to a staff, cord, bracket, or structure.

“Flag lot” means a lot with two distinct parts:

• The flag, which is the only building site; and is located behind another lot; and

• The pole, which connects the flag to the street; provides the only street frontage for the lot; and at any point is less than the minimum lot width for the zone. See “Lot.”

Flood Hazard Area. See Environment-Related Definitions.

Floor Area. See Development-Related Definitions for examples and excluded areas.

“Foot-candle” means a unit of illumination (light standards), equal to one lumen per square foot, or the amount of light from a source of one candela directly thrown on a square foot of surface at a distance of one foot.

Foundation Plane. See Development-Related Definitions.

“Frontage” means the dimension of a property line abutting a public or private street.

“Frontage street or road” means a minor street that parallels an arterial street or highway in order to provide access to abutting properties and minimize direct access onto the arterial or highway.

“Functional classification” means the classification given to streets by the road authority (e.g., local, collector or arterial). See Transportation-Related Definitions and SDC 3.4.100 for street standards.

“Future division plan” or “future development plan” means a document that shows lot, tract and right-of-way boundaries for all potential future phases of a land division. The plan is not binding on the city or the applicant. The purpose of the plan is to document that the design of the first phase of the plan does not preclude future phases from meeting city standards.

G. “G” Definitions.

“Garage” means a covered structure designed to provide shelter for vehicles, and which is accessory to a use in these structure types: houses, attached houses, duplexes, mobile homes, or houseboats. Carports are considered garages. Floor area adjacent to the space designed to provide shelter for vehicles, if not entirely separated from the garage area by floor-to-ceiling walls, is considered part of the garage. A garage may be attached to or detached from another structure.

“Gas station/fuel station” means a facility selling fuel and lubricants for street motor vehicles which does not include services such as oil changes and mechanical repairs to automobiles. See also definition of “Service station” and see Chapter 1.6 SDC for specific land use categories.

“Grade” means a reference plane representing the average finished grade elevation. This elevation is to be measured on the fire lane side of the building along a point six feet from the building or along the property line, whichever is closer to the building.

Grading. See Development-Related Definitions.

“Ground cover” means living or processed plant material (e.g., mulch, bark chips) that is used to cover bare ground. See Chapter 3.2 SDC, Landscaping, Street Trees, Fences and Walls.

Group Living Structure. See Residential Structure Types.

H. “H” Definitions.

“Half-story” means a story under a gable, gambrel, or hip roof, the wall plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than two feet above the floor of such story.

“Hardscape” means nonvegetative landscape materials or installations, including pathways, decorative pavers, benches, drinking fountains, arbors, pergolas, playgrounds, plazas, and similar amenities.

“Hazardous substances” means any substance, material, or waste listed in this definition:

• Nuclear or radioactive materials or waste;

• Chemicals subject to reporting under Title III of the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act (SARA) of 1986, published July 1987, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; and

• Hazardous Materials Table in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Title 49, Part 172.101.

Historic Landmark-Related Definitions.

• “Alteration” means an addition, removal, or reconfiguration which significantly changes the character of an historic resource, including new construction in historic districts. Does not include normal maintenance and repair.

• “Contributing historic resource” means a resource that retains its architectural integrity and is within the period of significance as defined in that resource’s National Historic Register nomination application.

• “Demolition” means the razing, destruction, or dismantling of a resource to the degree that its historic character is substantially obliterated.

• “Designated landmark” means a property officially recognized by the city of Silverton, Marion County, as important in its history.

• “Designated landmark register” means the list of, and record of information about, properties officially recognized by the city of Silverton, Marion County, as important in its history.

• “Historic significance” means an individual building, structure, site, tree, landscape, or other object that has been determined to have importance because of its past relationship to any of the following:

- The importance of its designer, previous owners, or builder in local, state or national history;

- The quality of its architecture or landscaping;

- The fact that it is one of a few remaining examples of a building type that is of significance in local, state, or national history;

- Association with a significant cultural or ethnic group or the role that it has played in shaping local, state or national history.

• “Historic integrity” means the quality or wholeness of historic location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and/or association of a resource, as opposed to its physical condition.

• “Historic resource” means a building, structure, object, site, or district which meets the significance and integrity criteria for designation as a landmark. Resource types are further described as:

- “Building” means a construction made for purposes of shelter or habitation, e.g., house, barn, store, theater, train station, garage, school, etc.

- “Structure” means a construction made for functions other than shelter or habitation, e.g., bridge, windmill, dam, highway, boat, kiln, etc.

- “Object” means a construction which is primarily artistic or commemorative in nature and not normally moveable or part of a building or structure, e.g., statue, fountain, milepost, monument, sign, etc.

- “Site” means the location of a significant event, use, or occupation which may include associated standing, ruined, or underground features, e.g., battlefield, shipwreck, campsite, cemetery, natural feature, garden, food gathering area, etc.

- “District” means a geographically defined area possessing a significant concentration of buildings, structures, objects, and/or sites which are unified historically by plan or physical development, e.g., downtown, residential neighborhood, military reservation, ranch complex, etc.

• “Historic resource of statewide significance” means buildings, structures, objects, sites, and districts which are listed on the National Register of Historic Places.

• “Inventory of Historic Resources” means the record of information about resources potentially significant in the history of the city of Silverton, Marion County.

• “Noncontributing resource” means new construction or construction that has occurred in a period outside that identified as the significant period in the resource’s National Historic Register Nomination or a resource that has lost its architectural integrity through modification.

• “Relocation” means the removal of a resource from its historic context and placement in a different location.

“Home occupation” and “home occupation site” mean a business activity that is carried out on the same site as a dwelling unit, and which is accessory to the household living use on the site, subject to the provisions of Chapter 2.2 SDC, Residential (R) Districts.

“Hotel/motel” means a building or portion thereof designed and used for occupancy of transient individuals lodged with or without meals. (See ORS 446.310.)

House. See “Dwelling unit” under Residential Structure Types.

“Household” means one or more persons related by blood, marriage, civil union, legal adoption or guardianship, plus not more than five additional persons, who live together in one dwelling unit; or one or more handicapped persons as defined in the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988, plus not more than five additional persons, who live together in one dwelling unit.

“Human-scale design/development” means site and building design elements that are dimensionally related to pedestrians, such as: small building spaces with individual entrances (e.g., as is typical of downtowns and main street developments); larger buildings that have articulation and detailing to break up large masses; narrower streets with tree canopies; smaller parking areas or parking areas broken up into small components with landscaping; and pedestrian amenities, such as sidewalks, plazas, outdoor seating, lighting, weather protection (e.g., awnings or canopies), and similar features. These features are all generally smaller in scale than those that are primarily intended to accommodate automobile traffic. (See also “Pedestrian-oriented development” under Development-Related Definitions.)

I. “I” Definitions.

Impervious Surface. See Development-Related Definitions.

“Incidental and subordinate to” means secondary to, and less apparent than, the primary use or other portion of the development.

“Infill” means the development of vacant, bypassed, or underdeveloped lands located in an area that is mainly developed.

J. “J” Definitions.

“Junk yard” means: (1) any property or establishment on which one or more persons are engaged in breaking up, dismantling, sorting, storing, distributing, buying, or selling scrap or waste materials; (2) any establishment or place of business on which two or more inoperable motor vehicles or an equivalent volume of waste or refuse are maintained, stored, bought, or sold. Includes wrecking yards, automobile graveyards, garbage dumps, and scrap metal processing facilities.

K. “K” Definitions.

“Kennel” means any location where five or more dogs or cats aged six months or older are boarded or bred. The sale of these animals may be a part of the kennel use. Establishments where animals are offered for sale as the primary use, such as pet stores, are not classified as kennels.

L. “L” Definitions.

“Land division” means the process of dividing land to create parcels or lots. See Chapter 4.3 SDC.

“Landing (stairs)” means a level part of a staircase, usually at the end of a flight of stairs.

Landmark, Historic. Historic landmark designations may include buildings, sites, trees; a portion of a building or site; statues, signs, or other objects or spaces that the city or the keeper of the National Register of Historic Places has designated or listed for their special historic, cultural, archaeological, or architectural merit. See Chapter 3.5 SDC and Historic Resource-Related Definitions for examples and related definitions.

“Landscaping” means any combination of living plants such as trees, shrubs, plants, vegetative ground cover or turf grasses, and may include structural features such as walkways, fences, benches, plazas, works of art, reflective pools, fountains or the like. Also includes irrigation systems, mulches, topsoil, and re-vegetation or the preservation, protection and replacement of trees.

“Land use” means the activity or activities that occur on a piece of land. Activities may be individually identified as primary or accessory uses. See also Chapter 1.6 SDC, Use Categories.

“Land use approval” means a land use decision for approval or approval with conditions. It includes any time limits or other restrictions that may apply to the land use decision.

Land Use District. As used in this code, a “land use district” is the same as a zoning district.

“Land use review” means an application for land use approval under Chapter 4.2 SDC, or the review of such application.

“Lane, mid-block” is similar to an alley. See Transportation-Related Definitions.

Legislative. A legislative action or decision is the making of law, as opposed to the application of existing law to a particular use (e.g., adoption of, or amendment to, a comprehensive plan or development regulation). See also SDC 4.1.500, Type IV procedure.

“Livestock” means animals customarily kept on farms and includes, but is not limited to, all breeds and sizes of fowl, poultry, ostrich, emus, cattle, pigs, sheep, goats, horses, donkeys, mules, llamas, alpacas, and similar animals. See “Agriculture.”

“Living area” means the habitable floor area of a residential structure conforming to applicable building codes; typically does not include garage area, and attic and basement areas with substandard ceiling height or substandard egress.

“Loading area” means the area for the maneuvering and standing of vehicles engaged in delivering and loading goods, freight, or other articles. See also Chapter 3.3 SDC, Parking and Loading.

“Local improvement district (LID)” means a small public district formed for the purpose of carrying out local improvements (paving of streets, construction of storm sewers, development of a park, etc.). Property owners within the LID are assessed for the cost of the improvements in accordance with ORS 223.387 through 223.485.

“Longest street-facing wall” means the longest wall that faces a street. If two or more street-facing walls are of equal length, then the applicant chooses which is to be the longest street-facing wall for purposes of applying regulations of the development code. See also “Facade” and SDC 2.3.150, Commercial districts – Building orientation and commercial block layout.

“Lot” means a legally defined piece of land other than a tract that is the result of a subdivision. The following definitions for “lot” apply to the state definition of both lot (result of subdividing), and parcel (result of partitioning). See also “Ownership” and “Site.”

• “Corner lot” means a lot that has frontage on more than one intersecting street. A street that curves with angles that are 120 degrees or less, measured from the center line of the street, is considered two intersecting streets for the purpose of evaluating whether a lot is a corner lot. See Figures.

• “Flag lot” means a lot with two distinct parts (See Figure):

- The flag, which is the only building site; and is located behind another lot; and

- The pole, which connects the flag to the street; provides the only street frontage for the lot; and at any point is less than the minimum lot width for the zone.

• “Interior lot” means a lot that abuts other lots on two or more sides.

• “Through lot” means a lot that has frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets.

• “Lot lines” or “property lines” means the property lines along the edge of a lot or site.

• “Front lot line” means a lot line, or segment of a lot line, that abuts a street. On a corner lot, the front lot line is the shortest of the lot lines that abut a street. If two or more street lot lines are of equal length, then the applicant or property owner can choose which lot line is to be the front lot line. However, a through lot has two front lot lines regardless of whether the street lot lines are of equal or unequal length. See Figures.

• “Rear lot line” means a lot line that is opposite a front lot line. A triangular lot has two side lot lines but no rear lot line. For other irregularly shaped lots, the rear lot line is the longest lot line that is most nearly opposite the front lot line. See Figures.

• “Side lot line” means a lot line that connects front and rear lot lines. On a corner lot, the longer lot line that abuts a street is a side lot line. See Figures.

• “Side street lot line” means a lot line that is both a side lot line and a street lot line. See Figures.

• “Street lot line” means a lot line, or segment of a lot line, that abuts a street. “Street lot line” does not include lot lines that abut an alley. On a corner lot, there are two (or more) street lot lines. “Street lot line” can include front lot lines and side lot lines. See Figures.

See lot types and lot line graphics on the following pages.

Corner Lots
[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]


Flag Lot
[IMAGE]


Front and Side Lot Lines
[IMAGE]


Street Lot Lines
[IMAGE]


Lot Lines on Irregular Lots
[IMAGE]


“Lot of record” means a plot of land:

• That was not created through an approved subdivision or partition;

• That was created and recorded before October 6, 2008; and

• For which the deed, or other instrument dividing the land, is recorded with the appropriate county recorder.

See Chapter 5.3 SDC, Lots of Record.

Lot, Double-Frontage. See “Lot” and “Through lot.”

“Lot area” means the total surface area (measured horizontally) within the boundary lines of a lot.

“Lot coverage” means the total area of a lot covered by the foundation plane, as allowed by the applicable land use district development standards. Does not include overhangs, eaves, projecting (e.g., cantilevered) decks, and similar projections beyond the foundation plane.

Lot Line Adjustment. See “Property line adjustment.”

M. “M” Definitions.

“Main/primary building entrance” means the entrance to a building that most pedestrians are expected to use. Generally, each building has one main entrance. Main entrances are the widest entrance of those provided for use by pedestrians. In multitenant buildings, main entrances open directly into the building’s lobby or principal interior ground level circulation space. When a multitenant building does not have a lobby or common interior circulation space, each tenant’s outside entrance is a main entrance. In single-tenant buildings, main entrances open directly into lobby, reception, or sales areas.

“Major partition” means a partition which includes the creation of a road or street and which does not result in the creation of more than two or three lots within a calendar year. See also “Partition” and “Subdivision.”

“Major remodeling” means projects where the floor area is being increased by 50 percent or more, or where the cost of the remodeling is greater than the assessed value of the existing improvements on the site. “Assessed value” is the value shown on the applicable county assessment and taxation records for the current year.

“Maneuvering area/aisle” means the driving area in a parking lot where motor vehicles are able to turn around and access parking or loading spaces.

“Manufactured home/dwelling” includes residential trailers, mobile homes, and manufactured homes. See also Residential Structure Types.

“Manufactured home/dwelling park” means any place where four or more manufactured dwellings are located within 500 feet of one another on a lot, tract or parcel of land under the same ownership, the primary purpose of which is to rent or lease space or keep space for rent or lease to any person for a charge or fee paid or to be paid for the rental or lease or use of facilities or to offer space free in connection with securing the trade or patronage of such person. “Manufactured dwelling park” does not include a lot or lots located within an approved subdivision being rented or leased for occupancy by no more than one manufactured dwelling per lot. See also ORS Chapter 446.

“Marijuana processor” means a facility licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission or registered by the Oregon Health Authority to process, compound or convert marijuana into cannabinoid products, cannabinoid concentrates or cannabinoid extract. Marijuana processing is a manufacturing and production use.

“Marijuana producer” means a facility that is licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission or the Oregon Health Authority to manufacture, plant, cultivate, grow or harvest marijuana. Marijuana production is an agricultural use.

“Marijuana retailer” means a facility licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission who sells marijuana to a consumer. Marijuana retailers are a retail sales and services use.

“Marijuana wholesaler” means a facility licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission who purchases marijuana items in this state for resale to a person other than a consumer. Marijuana wholesalers are a retail sales and services use.

“Master road plan” means the plan(s) adopted by the council of the city according to the procedures provided for this title.

“Medical marijuana dispensary” means a facility registered with the Oregon Health Authority or for which an application has been submitted to the OHA that transfers usable marijuana, immature marijuana plants, seeds, and cannabinoid products, concentrates and extracts to registrants and primary caregivers. Dispensaries also receive transfers of cannabinoid products, concentrates and extracts from marijuana processing sites. Dispensaries receive transfers of usable marijuana, immature marijuana plants and seeds from registrants and primary caregivers. Medical marijuana dispensaries are a retail sales and services use.

“Medical marijuana grow site” means a specific location registered by the OHA used by a medical marijuana grower to manufacture, plant, cultivate, grow, or harvest marijuana or dry marijuana leaves or flowers for medical use by a specific patient.

“Ministerial” means a routine administrative action or decision that involves little or no discretion. The issuance of a building permit is generally such an action. See SDC 4.1.200, Type I procedure (ministerial).

“Mitigation” means to avoid, rectify, repair, or compensate for negative impacts that result from other actions (e.g., improvements to a street may be required to mitigate for transportation impacts resulting from development).

“Mixed-use” means the combination on a site of residential uses with commercial (e.g., office, retail, or services), civic, or industrial uses.

Mobile Home. See Residential Structure Types.

“Mobile home park” means two or more mobile homes that are located on a single site for 30 days or more and intended for residential use. “Mobile home park” does not include sites where unoccupied mobile homes are offered for sale or lease. See also “Recreational vehicle park.”

“Mobile home space” means the area occupied by a mobile home and its accessory uses and structures in a mobile home park.

Motor Home. See “Recreational vehicle” under Vehicle Types.

Motor Vehicle. See Vehicle Types.

Multidwelling Development. See Residential Structure Types.

Multidwelling Structure. See Residential Structure Types.

“Multi-use pathway” means a transportation facility serving pedestrians, bicycles and, where allowed, equestrian usage.

N. “N” Definitions.

“Natural hazard” means natural areas that can cause dangerous or difficult development situations. For example, natural hazard areas include steep slopes, unstable soils, and areas prone to landslides, floodways and floodplains.

Natural Resource Areas/Natural Resources. See “Sensitive lands” under Environment-Related Definitions.

“Neighborhood” means a residential area usually having distinguishing character or geography.

“Nonconforming development” means an element of a development, such as a setback, height, or parking area, that was created in conformance with development regulations but which subsequently, due to a change in the zone or zoning regulations, is no longer in conformance with the current applicable development standards. “Nonconforming development” includes development that is over a maximum allowed amount of floor area, as long as the development does not include an amount of floor area that is specifically prohibited by the current development standards. See Chapter 5.2 SDC.

“Nonconforming residential density” means a residential use that is an allowed use in the zone and that was constructed at a lawful density, but which subsequently, due to a change in the zone or zoning regulations, now has greater density than is allowed in the zone. See Chapter 5.2 SDC.

“Nonconforming situation” means a nonconforming residential density, nonconforming development, or nonconforming use. A situation may be nonconforming in more than one aspect. For example, a site may contain a nonconforming use and also have some nonconforming development. See also “Nonconforming development,” “Nonconforming residential density,” and “Nonconforming use.” See Chapter 5.2 SDC.

“Nonconforming use” means a use that was allowed by right when established or a use that obtained a required land use approval when established, but that subsequently, due to a change in the zone or zoning regulations, the use or the amount of floor area of the use is now prohibited in the zone. See Chapter 5.2 SDC.

“Nonnative invasive plants” means plants listed under current Oregon State University Extension Service Bulletins as nonnative, invasive plants in Oregon.

O. “O” Definitions.

“Off-street parking” means all off-street areas designed, used, required or intended to be used for the parking of motor vehicles. See Chapter 3.3 SDC for parking standards.

“On-street parking” means parking in the street right-of-way, typically in parking lanes or bays. Parking may be “parallel” or “angled” in relation to the edge of the right-of-way or curb. See Chapter 3.3 SDC for parking standards.

“Open space (public/private/dedicated in common)” means land that has been dedicated in common to the ownership within a development or to the public, or privately held, specifically for the purpose of providing places for recreation, conservation or other open space uses. Includes parks and mini-parks and incorporates the classifications found in the city of Silverton parks and recreation master plan.

“Orientation” means to cause to face toward a particular point of reference (e.g., “a building oriented to the street”). See also “Pedestrian-oriented development” under Development-Related Definitions.

“Outdoor commercial use” means a use supporting a commercial activity that provides goods or services, either wholesale or retail, where the amount of site area used for outdoor storage of materials or display of merchandise exceeds the total floor area of all buildings on the site. Examples of outdoor commercial uses include automobile sales or services, nurseries, lumber yards and equipment rental businesses.



“Outlying commercial pad” means a small, free-standing commercial use (e.g., bank, restaurant, gas station, car wash, etc.) adjacent to larger commercial use(s), either on the same parcel or on a separate parcel, and typically oriented and designed to take advantage of internal driveways and surface parking that the uses share; may include a drive-up/drive-through facility.

Overlay Zone/District. Overlay zones impose and/or relax requirements of an underlying land use district, or base zone, where characteristics of the land or neighborhood, or the types of development planned for an area, require special regulations. See Chapters 2.5, 2.6, 2.7 and 2.8 SDC.

“Owner” means the owner of the title to real property or the contract purchaser of real property of record, as shown on the latest assessment records in the office of the county assessor. “Owner” also includes a deed holder or contract purchaser whose name does not appear in the latest assessment records, but who presents to the city a copy of a deed or contract of sale showing date, book, and page of recording.

“Ownership” means one or more contiguous lots that are owned by the same person, partnership, association, or corporation. “Ownership” also includes lots that are in common ownership but are separated by a right-of-way. See also “Lot” and “Site.”

P. “P” Definitions.

“Parcel” means a legally defined area of land created through a partition.

“Parking” means areas designed and developed in accordance with Chapter 3.3 SDC for automobile or bicycle parking, as applicable.

“Parking area” means all the area devoted to the standing, maneuvering, and circulation of motor vehicles. Parking areas do not include driveways or areas devoted exclusively to nonpassenger loading.

“Parking bay” means a parking area with a concrete curb forming one side of the parking stall(s). Bays are typically adjacent and accessible to a sidewalk or walkway within a development.

“Parking lot perimeter” means the boundary of a parking lot area that usually contains a landscaped buffer area.

“Parking space” means a space designed to provide standing area for a motor vehicle. See Chapter 3.3 SDC for parking space standards.

Parking versus storage. “Parking” is to leave a motor vehicle for a temporary time, no longer than 72 hours. “Storage” is to place or leave in a location for maintenance, repair, sale, rental, or future use more than 72 hours in the future. See also “Exterior display.”

“Partition” means to divide an area or tract of land into two or three parcels within a calendar year when such area or tract of land exists as a unit or contiguous units of land under single ownership at the beginning of such year. (See ORS 92.010(8))

Pathway. See Transportation-Related Definitions.

Pedestrian Amenity(ies). See Development-Related Definitions for examples and related definitions.

“Planning office” means the Silverton City Hall, Silverton, Oregon.

“Planter strip” means a landscaped area for city-approved street trees and other plantings within the public right-of-way, usually a continuous planter area between the street and a sidewalk. See also “Tree well.” Refer to the city of Silverton list of recommended trees.

“Plat” means diagrams, drawings and other writing containing all the descriptions, locations, dedications, provisions, and information concerning a land division. This term includes the state law definitions of “partition plat” and “subdivision plat.” See also Chapter 4.3 SDC, Land Divisions and Property Line Adjustments.

“Plaza” means an area generally open to the public on a controlled basis and used for passive recreational activities and relaxation. Plazas are paved areas typically provided with amenities, such as seating, drinking and ornamental fountains, art, trees, and landscaping for use by pedestrians. See also “Pedestrian amenities” under Development-Related Definitions.

“Practicable” means capable of being done after taking into consideration cost, existing technology, and logistics in light of overall project purposes.

“Primary structure” means a structure or combination of structures of chief importance or function on a site. In general, the primary use of the site is carried out in a primary structure. The difference between a primary and accessory structure is determined by comparing the size, placement, similarity of design, use of common building materials, and the orientation of the structures on a site.

“Primary use” means an activity or combination of activities of chief importance on the site; one of the main purposes for which the land or structures are intended, designed, or ordinarily used. A site may have more than one primary use.

“Project” means an existing or proposed use or development.

“Project, major” means a project that requires design review (Chapter 4.2), subdivision or partition review (Chapter 4.3), conditional use review (Chapter 4.4), or planned development review (Chapter 4.5).

“Project, minor” means a project that requires land use review but does not require design review (Chapter 4.2), subdivision or partition review (Chapter 4.3), conditional use review (Chapter 4.4), or planned development review (Chapter 4.5).

“Property line adjustment” means the relocation of a single common property line between two abutting properties, in conformance with ORS 92.010(11). See Figure.

Property Line Adjustment
[IMAGE]


Property Line, Front, Rear, Interior Side, Street Side. See “Lot lines” under “Lot.”

“Public access easement” means an easement recorded for the purpose of providing vehicle, bicycle, and/or pedestrian access from a public street to a parcel across intervening property under separate ownership from the parcel being provided access. See also Transportation-Related Definitions.

“Public safety facility” means a facility necessary to respond to an immediate hazard to the public health and safety, and that is owned, leased, or operated by the city of Silverton. Public safety facilities include fire and police stations, flood control facilities, water towers and pump stations needed for emergency service, and emergency communication broadcast facilities.

“Public improvements” means development of public infrastructure, as required by the city, county, special district, or road authority, as applicable. See Chapter 3.4 SDC.

“Public right-of-way” means land dedication or easement conveyance to the city or other public entity for public use; typically for streets, utilities, parkland and/or similar facilities. Permanent structures, objects and buildings are not allowed to project over or encroach into public rights-of-way, except as allowed by the city for landscaping and trees.

Q. “Q” Definitions.

“Quasi-judicial” means an action or decision that requires substantial discretion or judgment in applying the standards or criteria of this code to the facts of a development proposal, and usually involves a public hearing. See SDC 4.1.400, Type III procedure.

R. “R” Definitions.

“Recreation camp” means: (1) An area devoted to facilities and equipment for recreation purposes, including swimming pools, tennis courts, playgrounds, and similar uses, either open to the public upon payment of a fee, or limited to private membership; (2) an area designated by the landowner for picnicking or overnight camping and offered to the general public, with or without a fee or charge. (See ORS Chapter 446.)

Recreational Vehicle. See Vehicle Types.

“Recreational vehicle park” means a commercial use providing space and facilities for motor homes or other recreational vehicles for recreational use or transient lodging. There is no minimum required stay in a recreational vehicle park. Uses where unoccupied recreational vehicles are offered for sale or lease, or are stored, are not included as recreational vehicle parks. See also “Mobile home park.”

“Residence” means the same as “Dwelling unit.” See under Residential Structure Types.

Residential Structure Types.

• “Accessory dwelling unit” means a second dwelling unit created on lot with a house, attached house, or manufactured home. The second unit is created auxiliary to, and is always smaller than, the house, attached house, or manufactured home.

• “Attached duplex” means a duplex located on its own lot that shares one or more common or abutting walls with one other duplex (for a total of four dwelling units). The common or abutting wall must be shared for at least 50 percent of the length of the side of the dwelling.

• “Attached house (townhome or rowhouse)” means a dwelling unit located on its own lot that shares one or more common or abutting walls with one or more dwelling units. The common or abutting wall must be shared for at least 50 percent of the length of the side of the dwelling. An attached house does not share common floor/ceilings with other dwelling units. An attached house is also called a rowhouse or a common-wall house.

• “Condominium” means a building or group of buildings in which dwelling units, offices, or floor area are owned individually, and the structure, common area, and facilities are owned by all the owners on a proportional, undivided basis.

• “Cottage” means a small house, generally containing not more than 1,200 square feet of floor area.

• “Cottage cluster” means a group of two or more cottages on one lot.

• “Duplex” means a building that contains two primary dwelling units on one lot. The units must share a common wall or common floor/ceiling.

• “Dwelling unit” means a building, or a portion of a building, that has independent living facilities including provisions for sleeping, cooking, and sanitation, and that is designed for residential occupancy by a group of people. Buildings with more than one set of cooking facilities are considered to contain multiple dwelling units or accessory dwelling units, unless the additional cooking facilities are clearly accessory to the primary use, such as an outdoor grill.

• “Group living structure” means a structure that contains sleeping areas and at least one set of cooking and sanitary facilities that is used as a residence for group living uses:

- “Residential facility/group care facility” means a residence for six to 15 physically, mentally or socially dependent/disabled persons, and for staff persons. The facility may provide residential care alone, or in conjunction with training or treatment. This definition includes the state definition of “residential facility” but also includes, but is not limited to, nursing homes, convalescent homes, retirement homes, assisted care facilities, etc.

- “Residential home/group care home” means a residence for five or fewer physically, mentally or socially dependent/disabled persons, and for staff persons. The residence may provide residential care alone, or in conjunction with training or treatment. This definition includes the state definition of “residential home.”

- “Residential institution/group care institution” means a residence for more than 15 physically, mentally or socially dependent/disabled persons, and for staff persons. The facility may provide residential care alone, or in conjunction with training or treatment. This definition includes the state definition of “residential facility” but also includes, but is not limited to, nursing homes, convalescent homes, retirement homes, assisted care facilities, etc.

• “Mobile home” means a dwelling unit constructed off of the site and that is not constructed to the standards of the Uniform Building Code. Mobile homes include residential trailers and manufactured homes.

- “Manufactured home” means a mobile home constructed in accordance with federal manufactured housing construction and safety standards (HUD code) in effect after June 15, 1976.

- “Residential trailer” means a mobile home that was not constructed in accordance with federal manufactured housing construction and safety standards (HUD code) in effect after June 15, 1976. This definition includes the state definitions of “residential trailers” and “mobile houses,” as stated in ORS Chapter 446.

• “Multidwelling development” means a grouping of individual structures where each structure contains one or more dwelling units. The land underneath the structures is not divided into separate lots. A multidwelling development project may include an existing single-dwelling detached building with one or more new detached structures located to the rear or the side of the existing house. It might also include a duplex in front with either one or more single-dwelling houses behind or one or more duplex units or multidwelling structures behind. There is no requirement for the structures on the sites to be attached.

• “Multidwelling structure” means a structure that contains three or more dwelling units that share common walls or floor/ceilings with one or more units. The land underneath the structure is not divided into separate lots. “Multidwelling structure” includes structures commonly called garden apartments, apartments, and condominiums.

• “Senior housing” means housing designated and/or managed for persons over a specified age. Specific age restrictions vary.

• “Single-family house/dwelling” means a detached dwelling unit located on its own lot.

• “Single-room-occupancy housing (SRO)” means a structure that provides living units that have separate sleeping areas and some combination of shared bath or toilet facilities. The structure may or may not have separate or shared cooking facilities for the residents. SRO includes structures commonly called residential hotels and rooming houses.

• “Zero-lot-line house” means a single-family detached dwelling with one “zero” side yard setback.

“Review body” means the person or group who is assigned to make decisions on land use reviews, whether initially or on appeal. “Review body” includes the community development director, the planning commission, and the city council.

Right-of-Way. See Transportation-Related Definitions.

Riparian Areas. See Environment-Related Definitions.

Roadway; Road Authority. See Transportation-Related Definitions.

Rooftop Structures. Include towers, spires, steeples and other structures when built according to Section 1509 of the International Building Code. (May extend 20 feet past the roof height limit of this code when approved through a conditional use, and subject to fire department approval.)

Rowhouse (Rowhome). See Residential Structure Types.

S. “S” Definitions.

Senior Housing. See Residential Structure Types.

Sensitive Lands. See Environment-Related Definitions.

“Service station” means a gas station that also offers services such as oil changes and mechanical repairs to automobiles.

“Setback” or “setback yard” means the minimum distance required between a specified object, such as a building, and another point, measured from lot lines to a specified object. Typically, a setback refers to the minimum distance (yard dimension) from a building to a specified property line.

Shared Driveway. See Development-Related Definitions.

Shared Parking. See Development-Related Definitions.

“Shipping container or converted vehicle” means a shipping container, bus, rail car, or other vehicle originally intended for storage or moving of people or goods that has been converted for residential use.

Shopping Street. See Development-Related Definitions.

Shoreline. See Environment-Related Definitions.

Sign. Signs are regulated under Chapter 15.16 SMC.

“Significant trees” and “significant vegetation” mean any tree, shrub, or combination thereof, meeting the threshold standards in SDC 3.2.200, and those that are located within a sensitive land area as identified by the comprehensive plan or any refinement of the comprehensive plan, or as inventoried through the development review process. See also Environment-Related Definitions in this chapter and SDC 3.2.200, Landscape conservation.

Single-Room-Occupancy Housing (SRO). See Residential Structure Types.

Site. For land divisions, property line adjustments, and lot consolidations, the site is the lot, lot of record, parcel, or tract proposed to be divided or reconfigured. For all other purposes, the site is an ownership, except as follows:

• If a proposed development includes multiple ownerships, then the site is the combined area of all the ownerships.

• If a proposed development includes only a portion of an ownership, and the balance of the ownership is vacant, then the applicant may choose to define the site as the portion of the ownership that is proposed for development.

• If a proposed development includes only a portion of an ownership, and there is other development on the ownership, then the applicant may choose to define the site as the portion of the ownership that is currently developed plus the portion proposed for development.

“Site frontage” means the part of a site that abuts a street. See also “Block frontage.”

“Specific area plan” means an adopted plan for a subarea of the city and/or urban growth area providing a framework and standards for future land uses, densities, blocks, typical lot patterns, public improvements and streets, and site design; may also include architectural design guidelines or standards.

Standards and Criteria. Both are code requirements for how to develop uses and structures on land. A “standard” is a quantitative requirement, or a qualitative requirement that is used in interpreting a subjective criterion. (Example criterion: All developments subject to design review shall comply with the Article 3 parking standards. Standard: Medical and dental office uses must provide one vehicle parking space for each x square feet of gross floor area.)

“Steep slopes” means slopes exceeding 12 percent or as regulated by hillside development regulations.

Step-Down. See Building Height in Development-Related Definitions.

Storefront Character. See Development-Related Definitions.

Stormwater Facility. See Development-Related Definitions.

“Stormwater management system” means a stormwater facility (e.g., conveyance, detention/retention, treatment system or outfall).

“Story” means a portion of a building between any floor and the next floor or ceiling above. If the floor level directly above a basement or unused under-floor space is more than six feet above grade for more than 50 percent of the total perimeter or is more than 10 feet above grade at any point, such basement or unused under-floor space shall be considered as a story.

Stream. See Environment-Related Definitions.

Street. See Transportation-Related Definitions.

Street Connectivity. See Transportation-Related Definitions.

Street-Facing Facade/Wall. See Development-Related Definitions.

Street Furniture/Furnishings. See Development-Related Definitions.

Structure. See Development-Related Definitions.

“Subdivision” means to divide land into four or more lots within a single calendar year. See also Chapter 4.3, Land Divisions and Property Line Adjustments, and ORS 92.010(13).

“Surface water management” means storm drainage and/or storm drainage facilities that are functioning in accordance with the city of Silverton storm drainage master plan.

Swale. See Development-Related Definitions.

T. “T” Definitions.

“Tangent” means meeting a curve or surface in a single point.

“Terrace” means a porch or promenade supported by columns, or a flat roof or other platform on a building.

Through Lot. See “Lot.”

Through Street. See Transportation-Related Definitions.

Top of Bank. See Environment-Related Definitions.

“Topographical constraint” means where existing slopes, landforms (e.g., streams, canals, rock outcropping, etc.) or manmade features (e.g., embankment or berm) make conformance with a code standard impracticable.

Townhome. See Residential Structure Types.

“Tract” means a piece of land within a platted subdivision reserved for open space, utility corridor, recreation facilities, sensitive lands, or other purpose; may be dedicated to a homeowners’ association or other entity for maintenance.

Transitional Shelter Communities. Per ORS 446.265. Accommodations that may consist of separate facilities, in the form of sleeping pods or other approved structures, for use as living units by one or more individuals or by families. The person establishing the accommodations shall provide access to water and toilet through separate or shared facilities, and may provide access to shower, laundry, cooking, telephone or other services either through separate or shared facilities. The accommodations shall provide parking facilities and walkways. Transitional housing accommodations shall be limited to persons who lack permanent shelter and cannot be placed in other low income housing.

Transportation-Related Definitions.

• “Access” means a way or means of approach to provide pedestrian, bicycle, and/or motor vehicular entrances or exits to a property.

• “Access easement” means an easement recorded for the purpose of providing vehicle, bicycle, and/or pedestrian access from a public street to a parcel across intervening property under separate ownership from the parcel being provided access. “Cross access” is a service drive providing vehicular access between two or more separate sites, so that the driver need not enter the public street system between sites.

• “Access management” means the systematic control of the location, spacing, design, and operation of driveways, median openings, interchanges, and street connections to a roadway to minimize conflicts between turning and through vehicles, bicyclists and pedestrians. The purpose of access management is to provide vehicular access to land development in a manner that preserves the safety and efficiency of the transportation system. Public facility measures to support access management include roadway design applications, such as median treatments and auxiliary lanes, and the appropriate spacing of traffic signals. Measures that may be included as conditions of approval for development decisions include but are not limited to (1) standards such as minimum spacing of driveways and on-site vehicle storage requirements, (2) mitigations related to site conditions such as right-in-right-out-only approaches, medians, dedicated turn lanes, and shared access approaches, and (3) provision for future opportunities for mitigation by land dedication or easement.

• “Access spacing” or “intersection spacing” means the minimum required distance from an intersection of a public or private street to the nearest driveway or other access connection, measured from the closest edge of the pavement of the intersecting street to the closest edge of the pavement of the connection along the traveled way.

• “Access way” means a walkway or multi-use pathway providing a through connection for pedestrians between two streets, between two lots, or between a development and adjoining public right-of-way. It may be an access way for pedestrians and bicyclists (with no vehicle access), or a walkway on public or private property (i.e., with a public access easement). See also “Walkway.”

• Accessible. Two meanings are possible depending on the specific code provision. In general, “accessible” means approachable by pedestrians, vehicles or other transportation modes, as applicable. “Accessible” may also mean approachable and usable by people with disabilities, in conformance with the federal Americans with Disabilities Act. Either or both definitions may apply in a particular situation. See “Accessible route.”

• “Accessible route” means a route that can be used by a disabled person using a wheelchair and that is also usable by people with other disabilities.

• “Alley” means a right-of-way that provides vehicle access to a lot or common parking area. Generally, alleys provide secondary vehicle access; however, where vehicle access from the street is not allowed, not possible, or not desirable the alley may provide primary vehicle access.

• “Arterial” means the highest order classification of streets; includes highways and other major streets with limited or no direct access from adjoining properties. Also includes streets designated as arterial within the city of Silverton transportation system plan.

• Bicycle Facility. There are different types of bicycle facilities. In general, a “bicycle facility” is a public or private way designed for and dedicated to bicycle use. It may consist of a road, a lane within or on the shoulder of a road, a path, a multi-use path, or other way that is specifically designated for bicycle travel or shared bicycle/pedestrian travel.

• “Boulevard” means a street with broad open space areas; typically with planted medians. See standards under SDC 3.4.100.

• “Bus stop” means a location where bus service stops to load and unload passengers. For purposes of measuring, the bus stop is the location of a sign denoting the bus stop.

• “Collector” means a type of street that serves traffic within commercial, industrial, and residential neighborhood areas, connecting local neighborhood or district streets to the arterial network and is part of the street grid system. Also includes streets designated as “collector” within the city of Silverton transportation system plan.

• “Common green” means a courtyard that provides for pedestrian and bicycle access, but not vehicle access, to abutting property, and generally provides a common area for use by residents. A common green may function as a community yard. Hard and soft landscape features may be included in a common green, such as ground cover, trees, shrubs, surfaced paths, patios, benches, or gazebos.

• “Curb cut” means a driveway opening delineated by a concrete apron along a street.

• “Dead-end street” means a street that connects to another street at only one end and does not have a city-approved turnaround on its other end. A pedestrian connection may extend from the end of a dead-end street to connect with another street of any type, or with another pedestrian connection.

• “Lane, mid-block” means a narrow, limited use roadway facility, similar to an alley in design, usually used to access a limited number of dwelling units.

• “Level of service (LOS)” means a quantitative standard for transportation facilities describing operational conditions. Level of service may be described for intersections (signalized or unsignalized) or street segments (between signalized intersections).

• “Local” means a type of street that serves traffic within a residential neighborhood, connecting residential streets as part of a grid system. Also includes streets designated as “local” within the Silverton transportation system plan.

• “Multi-use pathway” means a transportation facility serving pedestrians, bicycles and, where allowed, equestrian usage.

• “Pathway” means a walkway conforming to Chapter 3.1 SDC that is not within a street right-of-way.

• “Public access easement” means an easement granted to the public for all the purposes for which a public sidewalk may be used, including but not limited to pedestrian and bicycle travel.

• “Rail right-of-way” means a public or private right-of-way, for the purpose of allowing rail travel.

• “Right-of-way” means a public use area that allows for the passage of people or vehicles. “Right-of-way” includes passageways such as freeways, pedestrian connections, alleys, and all streets. A right-of-way may be dedicated or deeded to the public for public use and under the control of a public agency, or it may be privately owned. A right-of-way that is not dedicated or deeded to the public may be in a tract.

• “Roadway” means the portion of a right-of-way that is improved for motor vehicle travel. Roadway includes vehicle travel lanes and on-street parking areas. “Roadway” does not include area devoted to curbs, parking strips, or sidewalks.

• “Road authority” means the city (typically the public works director or his/her designee) or other agency (e.g., Oregon Department of Transportation, Marion County, a special purpose district, or other agency) with jurisdiction over a road or street.

• “Sidewalk” means a paved walkway within a public street right-of-way that is generally located adjacent to and separated from the roadway by a curb or curb and planter strip.

• “Sight distance” means the unobstructed viewing distance measured from one object or location to another object or location, usually required for the purpose of traffic safety.

• “Street” means a right-of-way that is intended for motor vehicle, pedestrian or bicycle travel or for motor vehicle, bicycle or pedestrian access to abutting property. For the purposes of this code, “street” does not include alleys, rail rights-of-way that do not also allow for motor vehicle access, or freeways and their onramps.

• “Street connectivity” is expressed as the number of street and/or access way connections within a specific geographic area. Higher levels of connectivity provide for more direct transportation routes and better dispersion of traffic, resulting in less traffic on individual streets and potentially slower speeds through neighborhoods.

• “Street stub” means a temporary street ending where the street will be extended through adjacent property in the future, as that property develops. Not a permanent street end or dead-end street.

• “Street tree” means a city-approved tree planted in a planter strip or tree well in a city right-of-way. See the city of Silverton recommended list of trees.

• “Through street” means a street that connects to other streets at both ends.

• “Transportation mode” means the method of transportation (e.g., automobile, bus, walking, bicycling, train, etc.).

• “Turnaround” means a vehicle-maneuvering area at the end of a dead-end street (e.g., hammerhead, cul-de-sac, or other configuration) that allows for vehicles to turn around. See SDC 3.4.100 for related standards.

• “Walkway” means a sidewalk or pathway, including access ways, providing a pedestrian connection that is improved to city standards, or to other roadway authority standards, as applicable. See also “Access way,” “Pathway,” and “Sidewalk.”

Travel Trailer. See Vehicle Types.

“Travel trailer/recreational vehicle park/campground” means a lot or parcel on which two or more travel trailers, recreational vehicles, motor homes, tent trailers, tent sites, campers, and/or similar vehicles or devices are permitted outright, with or without a charge or fee.

“Tree well” means a planter area cut out of a sidewalk within the street furnishing zone, planted with a street tree and including ground cover or a grate cover; typically used in commercial districts where on-street parking or pedestrian traffic makes the use of a planter strip impracticable.

U. “U” Definitions.

“Use” means the purpose for which land or a structure is designed, arranged, intended, occupied, or maintained. See also Chapter 1.6 SDC, Use Categories.

Utilities. For the purposes of this code, “utilities” are telephone, cable, natural gas, electric, and telecommunication facilities.

V. “V” Definitions.

“Vacate plat/street” means to abandon a subdivision or street right-of-way. For example, vacation of a public right-of-way that is not needed or cannot be used for a street or other public purpose. Vacation of a plat typically returns the property to the adjoining owners and restores it to an undivided condition and ownership.

“Vacation home rental” means a commercial use of a single-family or duplex dwelling unit where the unit is rented for periods of time of 28 or fewer consecutive days.

“Variance” means an administrative or quasi-judicial decision to lessen or otherwise modify the requirements of this code. See Chapter 5.1 SDC.

Vehicle Areas. See Development-Related Definitions.

Vehicle Types.

• “Motor vehicle” means vehicles that have their own motive power and that are used for the transportation of people or goods on streets. “Motor vehicle” includes motorcycles, passenger vehicles, trucks, and recreational vehicles, except all-terrain vehicles, off-road vehicles, snowmobiles, and similar vehicles are not allowed on streets.

• “Passenger vehicle” means a motor vehicle designed to carry 10 persons or less including the driver. “Passenger vehicles” are passenger cars and multipurpose passenger vehicles as defined by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Chapter V, Section 571.3. See also “Recreational vehicle” and “Truck.”

• “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle with or without motive power that is designed for sport or recreational use, or that is designed for human occupancy on an intermittent basis. “Recreational vehicle” is divided into two categories as follows:

- “Motor home” includes motorized vehicles designed for human occupancy on an intermittent basis. A camper is considered a motor home when it is on the back of a pick-up or truck. Motor homes are regulated as trucks unless the regulations specifically indicate otherwise. See also “Truck.”

- “Accessory recreational vehicle” includes nonmotorized vehicles designed for human occupancy on an intermittent basis such as vacation trailers and fifth-wheel trailers. A camper is considered an accessory recreational vehicle when it is standing alone. “Accessory recreational vehicle” also includes vehicles designed for off-road use, such as all-terrain vehicles, dune buggies, and recreational boats.

• “Travel trailer” means a vacation structure or self-propelled vehicle equipped with wheels for street or highway use; intended for human occupancy; equipped with plumbing, sink or toilets; used for vacation and recreational purposes; and not used as a residence. (See ORS 446.003(5), (24).)

• “Truck” means a motor vehicle that is designed primarily for the movement of property or special purpose equipment, or a motor vehicle that is designed to carry more than 10 persons. “Truck” includes vehicles commonly called trucks, pick-ups, delivery vans, buses, motor homes and other similar vehicles. See also National Highway Traffic Safety Administration in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Chapter V, Section 571.3.

- “Light truck” means trucks and similar vehicles with single rear axles and single rear wheels.

- “Medium truck” means trucks and similar vehicles with single rear axles and dual rear wheels. Truck tractors are in the heavy truck category.

- “Heavy truck” means trucks, including truck tractors, and similar vehicles with two or more rear axles and all truck tractors and truck trailers.

• “Truck trailer” means trucks including utility trailer(s).

• “Utility trailer” means a vehicle designed to be pulled by a motor vehicle that is used to carry property, trash, or special equipment and that is 16 feet or less in length. Boat trailers are included as utility trailers. Utility trailers that are longer than 16 feet are considered industrial vehicles and are regulated as heavy trucks.

“Vision clearance area” means those areas near intersections of roadways and motor vehicle access points where a clear field of vision is necessary for traffic safety and to maintain adequate sight distance. See standards in SDC 3.1.200.

W. “W” Definitions.

“Waste collection areas” include areas set aside or designed to be used for garbage collection and collection of materials for recycling. “Waste collection areas” include areas occupied by dumpsters and other solid waste receptacles.

“Window” means a transparent or semi-transparent (not more than 50 percent opaque) glazing on a building facade. For the purpose of this code, a window may be a display window (e.g., for merchandise, art, etc.) that is integral to a building design, but a window is not a display box mounted onto the exterior of a building.

“Wireless communication equipment” means cellular towers, antennas, monopoles, and related facilities used for radio signal transmission and receiving.

X. “X” Definitions.

Reserved.

Y. “Y” Definitions.

“Yard” means the area defined by setbacks (i.e., between the setback line and nearest property line). See “Setbacks.”

Z. “Z” Definitions.

Zero-Lot-Line House. See Residential Structure Types. (Ord. 18-22 § 1, 2018; Ord. 16-04 § 1, 2016; Ord. 16-01 § 1, 2016; Ord. 14-01 § 1 (Exh. A), 2014; Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


Chapter 1.6 USE CATEGORIES

Sections:

Part I. Introduction to the Use Categories

1.6.010    Purpose.

Part II. Residential Use Categories

1.6.100    Group living.

1.6.110    Household living.

Part III. Commercial Use Categories

1.6.200    Commercial outdoor recreation.

1.6.210    Commercial parking.

1.6.220    Quick vehicle servicing.

1.6.230    Major event entertainment.

1.6.235    Educational services, commercial.

1.6.240    Office.

1.6.250    Retail sales and service.

1.6.260    Self-service storage.

1.6.270    Vehicle repair.

Part IV. Industrial Use Categories

1.6.300    Industrial service.

1.6.305    Heavy industrial.

1.6.310    Manufacturing and production.

1.6.320    Warehouse, freight movement, and distribution.

1.6.330    Waste-related.

1.6.340    Wholesale sales.

Part V. Institutional Use Categories

1.6.400    Basic utilities.

1.6.410    Renewable energy facilities.

1.6.420    Nonrenewable energy facilities.

1.6.430    Colleges.

1.6.440    Community services.

1.6.450    Daycare – Family daycare.

1.6.460    Daycare – Nonfamily daycare.

1.6.470    Medical centers.

1.6.480    Parks, open areas and cemeteries.

1.6.490    Religious institutions and places of worship.

1.6.500    Schools.

1.6.510    Jails and detention facilities.

1.6.520    Wildlife rehabilitation facility.

Part VI. Other Use Categories

1.6.600    Agriculture.

1.6.610    Mining.

1.6.620    Radio frequency transmission facilities.

1.6.630    Rail lines and utility corridors.

1.6.640    Railroad yards.

Part I. Introduction to the Use Categories


1.6.010 Purpose.

This chapter classifies land uses and activities into use categories on the basis of common functional, product, or physical characteristics, as follows:

A. Categorization. Uses are assigned to the category whose description most closely describes the nature of the primary use. The characteristics subsection of each use category describes the characteristics of each use category. Developments may have more than one primary use. Developments may also have one or more accessory uses.

B. Interpretation. When a use’s category is not clearly identifiable, the city of Silverton community development director, through a Type II procedure, determines the applicable use category. The following is considered to determine the appropriate use category the use is in, and whether the activities constitute primary use or accessory use:

1. The description of the activity(ies) in relationship to the characteristics of each use category;

2. The relative amount of site or floor space and equipment devoted to the activity;

3. Relative amounts of sales from each activity;

4. The customer type for each activity;

5. The relative number of employees in each activity;

6. Hours of operation;

7. Building and site arrangement;

8. Vehicles used with the activity;

9. The relative number of vehicle trips generated by the activity;

10. Signs;

11. How the use advertises itself; and

12. Whether the activity would function independently of the other activities on the site.

C. Developments with Multiple Primary Uses. When all primary uses of a development fall within one use category, then the development is assigned to that use category. For example, a development that contains a retail bakery and a cafe would be classified in the retail sales and service category because all the primary uses are in that category. When the primary uses of a development fall within different use categories, each primary use is classified in the applicable category and is subject to the regulations for that category.

D. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses are allowed by right in conjunction with the use unless stated otherwise in the regulations. Also, unless otherwise stated, they are subject to the same regulations as the primary use. Typical accessory uses are listed as examples with the categories.

E. Use of Examples. The examples subsection of each use category provides a list of examples of uses that are included but not necessarily limited to each use category. The names of uses on the lists are generic. They are based on the common meaning of the terms and not on what a specific use may call itself. For example, a use whose business name is “Wholesale Liquidation,” but that sells mostly to consumers, would be included in the retail sales and service category rather than the wholesale sales category. This is because the actual activity on the site matches the description of the retail sales and service category. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)

Part II. Residential Use Categories 


1.6.100 Group living.

A. Characteristics. Group living is characterized by the residential occupancy of a structure by a group of people who do not meet the definition of household living. The size of the group will be larger than the average size of a household. Tenancy is arranged on a month-to-month basis or for a longer period. Uses where tenancy may be arranged for a shorter period are not considered residential. They are considered to be a form of transient lodging (see the retail sales and service and community service categories). Generally, group living structures have a common eating area for residents. The residents may or may not receive any combination of care, training, or treatment, as long as they also reside at the site. Group living may include the state definition of “residential facility” (see SDC 1.5.300, Definitions).

B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses commonly found are recreational facilities, parking of autos for the occupants and staff, and parking of vehicles for the facility.

C. Examples. Examples include dormitories; fraternities and sororities; monasteries and convents; nursing and convalescent homes; some group homes for the physically and/or mentally disabled; some residential programs for drug and alcohol treatment; and alternative- or post-incarceration facilities.

D. Exceptions.

1. Lodging where tenancy may be arranged for periods less than one month is considered a hotel or motel use and is classified in the retail sales and service category. However, in certain situations, lodging where tenancy may be arranged for periods less than one month may be classified as a community service use such as short-term housing.

2. Lodging where the residents meet the definition of household, and where tenancy is arranged on a month-to-month basis or for a longer period, is classified as household living.

3. Facilities for people who are under judicial detainment and are under the supervision of sworn officers are included in the detention facilities category. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


1.6.110 Household living.

A. Characteristics. Household living is characterized by the residential occupancy of a dwelling unit by a household. Where units are rented, tenancy is arranged on a month-to-month basis, or for a longer period. Uses where tenancy may be arranged for a shorter period are not considered residential. They are considered to be a form of transient lodging (see the retail sales and service and community service categories). Apartment complexes that have accessory services such as food service, dining rooms, and housekeeping are included as household living. Single-room-occupancy (SRO) housing, that does not have totally self-contained dwelling units, is also included if at least two-thirds of the units are rented on a monthly basis. Single-room-occupancy apartments/rooming houses (SROs) may have a common food preparation area, but meals are prepared individually by the residents. In addition, residential care homes are included in the household living category. “Residential care home” means any home licensed by or under the authority of the Department of Human Resources as defined in ORS 443.400, a residential home registered under ORS 443.480 to 443.500 or an adult foster home licensed under ORS 443.505 to 443.825 which provides residential care for not more than five individuals who need not be related, excluding required staff persons.

B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses commonly found are recreational activities, home gardening, raising of pets, hobbies, and parking of the occupants’ vehicles. Home occupations, accessory dwelling units/guest houses with kitchen facilities, and bed and breakfast facilities are accessory uses that are subject to additional regulations.

C. Examples. Uses include living in houses, duplexes, apartments, condominiums, retirement center apartments, manufactured housing, and other structures with self-contained dwelling units. Examples also include living in single-room-occupancy apartments/rooming houses (SROs) if the provisions are met regarding length of stay and separate meal preparation.

D. Exceptions.

1. Lodging in a dwelling unit or SRO where less than two-thirds of the units are rented on a monthly basis is considered a hotel or motel use and is classified in the retail sales and service category.

2. SROs that provide common dining only are classified as group living.

3. In certain situations, lodging where tenancy may be arranged for periods less than one month may be classified as a community service use, such as short-term housing or mass shelter. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)

Part III. Commercial Use Categories


1.6.200 Commercial outdoor recreation.

A. Characteristics. Commercial outdoor recreation uses are large, generally commercial uses that provide continuous recreation- or entertainment-oriented activities. They generally take place outdoors. They may take place in a number of structures that are arranged together in an outdoor setting.

B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include concessions, restaurants, parking, caretaker’s quarters (limited to 800 square feet), and maintenance facilities.

C. Examples. Examples include amusement parks, theme parks, golf driving ranges, miniature golf facilities, and marinas.

D. Exceptions.

1. Golf courses providing less than 2,000 square feet of commercial use (e.g., clubhouse, restaurant, rental shop, similar use) and not hosting professional or professional/amateur (pro-am) competitions may be classified as parks and open space. See also subsection (D)(2) of this section.

2. Uses that draw large numbers of people to periodic events, rather than on a continuous basis, are classified as major event entertainment. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


1.6.210 Commercial parking.

A. Characteristics. Commercial parking facilities provide parking that is not accessory to a specific use. A fee may or may not be charged. A facility that provides both accessory parking for a specific use and regular fee parking for people not connected to the use is also classified as a commercial parking facility.

B. Accessory Uses. In a parking structure only, accessory uses may include car washing and vehicle repair activities.

C. Examples. Examples include short- and long-term fee parking facilities, commercial district shared parking lots, commercial shuttle parking, and mixed parking lots (partially for a specific use, partly for rent to others).

D. Exceptions.

1. Parking facilities that are accessory to a use, but that charge the public to park for occasional events nearby, are not considered commercial parking facilities.

2. Parking facilities that are accessory to a primary use are not considered commercial parking uses, even if the operator leases the facility to the primary use or charges a fee to the individuals who park in the facility. See “Accessory parking facilities” in SDC 1.5.300, Definitions.

3. Public transit park-and-ride facilities are classified as basic utilities. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


1.6.220 Quick vehicle servicing.

A. Characteristics. Quick vehicle servicing uses provide direct services for motor vehicles where the driver generally waits in the car before and while the service is performed. The development will include a drive-through facility, the area where the service is performed (See SDC 1.5.300, Definitions). Full-serve and mini-serve gas stations are always classified as a primary use (quick vehicle servicing), rather than an accessory use, even when they are in conjunction with other uses.

B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include auto repair and tire sales.

C. Examples. Examples include full-serve and mini-serve gas stations, unattended card key stations, car washes, and quick lubrication services.

D. Exceptions.

1. Truck stops are classified as industrial service.

2. Refueling facilities for the vehicles that belong to a specific use (fleet vehicles), that are on the site where the vehicles are kept, are accessory to the use. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


1.6.230 Major event entertainment.

A. Characteristics. Major event entertainment uses are characterized by activities and structures that draw large numbers of people to specific events or shows. Activities are generally of a spectator nature.

B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include restaurants, bars, concessions, parking, and maintenance facilities.

C. Examples. Examples include sports arenas, race tracks (auto, horse, dog, etc.), auditoriums, exhibition and meeting areas, outdoor amphitheaters, and fairgrounds.

D. Exceptions.

1. Exhibition and meeting areas with less than 10,000 square feet of total event area are classified as retail sales and service.

2. Banquet halls that are part of hotels or restaurants are accessory to those uses, which are included in the retail sales and service category.

3. Theaters, including drive-in theaters, are classified as retail sales and service. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


1.6.235 Educational services, commercial.

A. Characteristics. Commercial educational service uses are characterized by activities conducted in an office setting and generally focusing on serving students with supplemental education, enrichment, and/or tutoring.

B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include incidental retail (e.g., sale of instructional materials), parking, or other amenities primarily for the use of employees and customers.

C. Examples. Examples include tutoring centers, computer classes, after school math and reading centers, and arts and crafts classes. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


1.6.240 Office.

A. Characteristics. Office uses are characterized by activities conducted in an office setting and generally focusing on business, government, professional, medical, or financial services.

B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include cafeterias, health facilities, parking, or other amenities primarily for the use of employees in the firm or building.

C. Examples. Examples include professional services such as lawyers, accountants, engineers, or architects; financial businesses such as lenders, brokerage houses, bank headquarters, or real estate agents; data processing; sales offices; government offices and public utility offices; TV and radio studios; medical and dental clinics, and medical and dental labs.

D. Exceptions.

1. Offices that are part of and are located with a firm in another category are considered accessory to the firm’s primary activity. Headquarters offices, when in conjunction with or adjacent to a primary use in another category, are considered part of the other category.

2. Contractors and others who perform construction or similar services off site are included in the office category if equipment and materials are not stored on the site and fabrication, services, or similar work is not carried on at the site.

3. Mobile health screening uses are considered temporary uses. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


1.6.250 Retail sales and service.

A. Characteristics. Retail sales and service firms are involved in the sale, lease or rent of new or used products to the general public. They may also provide personal services or entertainment, or provide product repair or services for consumer and business goods.

B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include offices, storage of goods, manufacture or repackaging of goods for on-site sale, and parking.

C. Examples. Examples include uses from the four subgroups listed below:

1. Sales-Oriented. Stores selling, leasing, or renting consumer, home, and business goods including art, art supplies, bicycles, clothing, dry goods, electronic equipment, fabric, furniture, garden supplies, gifts, groceries, hardware, home improvements, household products, jewelry, pets, pet food, pharmaceuticals, plants, printed material, stationery, and videos; food sales, and sales or leasing of consumer vehicles including passenger vehicles, motorcycles, light and medium trucks, and other recreational vehicles.

2. Personal Service-Oriented. Branch banks; urgency medical care; laundromats; photographic studios; photocopy and blueprint services; hair, tanning, and personal care services; tax preparers, accountants, real estate, legal, financial services; business, martial arts, and other trade schools; dance or music classes; taxidermists; mortuaries; veterinarians; kennels limited to boarding, with no breeding; and animal grooming.

3. Entertainment-Oriented. Restaurants, cafes, delicatessens, taverns, and bars; indoor or outdoor continuous entertainment activities such as bowling alleys, ice rinks, and game arcades; pool halls; indoor firing ranges; theaters, health clubs, gyms, membership clubs, and lodges; hotels, motels, recreational vehicle parks, and other temporary lodging with an average length of stay of less than 30 days.

4. Repair-Oriented. Repair of TVs, bicycles, clocks, watches, shoes, guns, appliances and office equipment; photo or laundry drop-off; quick printing; recycling drop-off; tailor; locksmith; and upholsterer.

D. Exceptions.

1. Lumber yards and other building material sales that sell primarily to contractors and do not have a retail orientation are classified as wholesale sales.

2. The sale of landscape materials, including bark chips and compost, not in conjunction with a primary retail use, is classified as industrial service.

3. Repair and service of consumer motor vehicles, motorcycles, and light and medium trucks is classified as vehicle repair. Repair and service of industrial vehicles and equipment and heavy trucks is classified as industrial service.

4. Sales, rental, or leasing of heavy trucks and equipment is classified as wholesale sales.

5. Hotels, restaurants, and other services that are part of a truck stop are considered accessory to the truck stop that is classified as industrial service.

6. In certain situations, hotels and motels may be classified as a community service use, such as short-term housing or mass shelter. See SDC 1.6.420, Community services.

7. When kennels are limited to boarding, with no breeding, the applicant may choose to classify the use as retail sales and service or agriculture. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


1.6.260 Self-service storage.

A. Characteristics. Self-service storage uses provide separate storage areas for individual or business uses. The storage areas are designed to allow private access by the tenant for storing personal property.

B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include security and leasing offices. Living quarters for one resident manager per site are allowed. Other living quarters are subject to the regulations for residential uses. Use of the storage areas for sales, service and repair operations, or manufacturing is not considered accessory to the self-service storage use. The rental of trucks or equipment is also not considered accessory to a self-service storage use.

C. Examples. Examples include single story and multi-story facilities that provide individual storage areas for rent. These uses are also called mini-warehouses.

D. Exceptions. A transfer and storage business where there are no individual storage areas or where employees are the primary movers of the goods to be stored or transferred is in the warehouse and freight movement category. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


1.6.270 Vehicle repair.

A. Characteristics. Firms servicing passenger vehicles, light and medium trucks and other consumer motor vehicles such as motorcycles, boats and recreational vehicles. Generally, the customer does not wait at the site while the service or repair is being performed. (Different than quick vehicle services category.)

B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include offices, sales of parts, and vehicle storage.

C. Examples. Examples include vehicle repair, transmission or muffler shop, auto body shop, alignment shop, auto upholstery shop, auto detailing, and tire sales and mounting.

D. Exceptions. Repair and service of industrial vehicles and equipment, and of heavy trucks; towing and vehicle storage; and vehicle wrecking and salvage are classified as industrial service. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)

Part IV. Industrial Use Categories


1.6.300 Industrial service.

A. Characteristics. Industrial service firms are engaged in the repair or servicing of industrial, business or consumer machinery, equipment, products or by-products. Firms that service consumer goods do so by mainly providing centralized services for separate retail outlets. Contractors and building maintenance services and similar uses perform services off site. Few customers, especially the general public, come to the site.

B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include offices, parking, storage, rail spurs, and loading docks.

C. Examples. Examples include welding shops; machine shops; tool repair; electric motor repair; repair of scientific or professional instruments; sales, repair, storage, salvage or wrecking of heavy machinery, metal, and building materials; towing and vehicle storage; auto and truck salvage and wrecking; heavy truck servicing and repair; tire re-treading or recapping; truck stops; building, heating, plumbing or electrical contractors; printing, publishing and lithography; exterminators; recycling operations; janitorial and building maintenance services; fuel oil distributors; solid fuel yards; research and development laboratories; dry-docks and the repair or dismantling of ships and barges; laundry, dry-cleaning, and carpet cleaning plants; and photofinishing laboratories.

D. Exceptions.

1. Contractors and others who perform industrial services off site are included in the office category, if equipment and materials are not stored at the site, and fabrication or similar work is not carried on at the site.

2. Hotels, restaurants, and other services that are part of a truck stop are considered accessory to the truck stop. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


1.6.305 Heavy industrial.*

A. Characteristics. Heavy industrial firms typically create materials that are used by other industrial users rather than the end consumer. These operations typically use processes that are energy, utility and/or material intensive in nature (i.e., ship building vs. furniture building). Most users bring materials in and ship products out, so goods are generally not displayed or sold on site. If sales occur, they are a subordinate part of the operation. Few customers come to an industrial site. Any use that utilizes or creates hazardous waste, heavy metals and/or pollutants of concern (as defined by Oregon DEQ) as a primary component or byproduct may be classified as heavy industrial.

B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include offices, cafeterias, parking, employee recreational facilities, warehouses, storage yards, rail spurs or lead lines, docks, repair facilities, or truck fleets. Living quarters for one caretaker per site are allowed, not to exceed 800 square feet. Other living quarters are subject to the regulations for residential uses.

C. Examples. Auto and truck salvage and wrecking; slaughterhouses and meatpacking; feed lots and animal dipping; fuel oil distributors; solid fuel yards; pulp and paper mills; production of chemical, rubber, leather, or plastic; manufacture or storage of weapons, ammunition and/or fireworks; concrete batching and asphalt mixing; production of metals or metal products including enameling and galvanizing; waste-related uses also include uses that receive hazardous wastes from others and are subject to the regulations of OAR 340-100 through 340-110, Hazardous Waste Management; sanitary landfills; and hazardous-waste-collection sites.

D. Exceptions.

1. Small-scale (up to 5,000 square feet of gross floor area) for weapons and ammunition sales and storage are considered a retail use.

2. Small-scale (up to 5,000 square feet of gross floor area) for slaughterhouses and meatpacking operations are considered a retail use. (Ord. 14-01 § 1 (Exh. A), 2014)

*    Code reviser’s note: Ord. 14-01 adds this section as 1.6.300. It has been editorially renumbered to avoid duplication of numbering.


1.6.310 Manufacturing and production.

A. Characteristics. Manufacturing and production firms are involved in the manufacturing, processing, fabrication, packaging, or assembly of goods. Natural, manmade, raw, secondary, or partially completed materials may be used. Products may be finished or semi-finished and are generally made for the wholesale market, for transfer to other plants, or to-order for firms or consumers. Goods are generally not displayed or sold on site, but if so, they are a subordinate part of sales. Relatively few customers come to the manufacturing site.

B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include offices, cafeterias, parking, employee recreational facilities, warehouses, storage yards, rail spurs or lead lines, docks, repair facilities, or truck fleets. Living quarters for one caretaker per site are allowed, not to exceed 800 square feet. Other living quarters are subject to the regulations for residential uses.

C. Examples. Examples include processing of food and related products; catering establishments; breweries, distilleries, and wineries; slaughterhouses, and meatpacking; feed lots and animal dipping; weaving or production of textiles or apparel; lumber mills, pulp and paper mills, and other wood products manufacturing; woodworking, including cabinetmakers; production of chemical, rubber, leather, clay, bone, plastic, stone, or glass materials or products; movie production facilities; ship and barge building; concrete batching and asphalt mixing; production or fabrication of metals or metal products including enameling and galvanizing; manufacture or assembly of machinery, equipment, instruments, including musical instruments, vehicles, appliances, precision items, and other electrical items; production of artwork and toys; signmaking; production of prefabricated structures, including mobile homes; and the production of energy.

D. Exceptions.

1. Manufacturing of goods to be sold primarily on site and to the general public is classified as retail sales and service.

2. Manufacture and production of goods from composting organic material is classified as waste-related uses. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


1.6.320 Warehouse, freight movement, and distribution.

A. Characteristics. Warehouse, freight movement, and distribution involves the storage or movement of goods for themselves or other firms. Goods are generally delivered to other firms or the final consumer, except for some will-call pickups. There is little on-site sales activity with the customer present.

B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include offices, truck fleet parking and maintenance areas, rail spurs or lead lines, docks, and repackaging of goods.

C. Examples. Examples include separate warehouses used by retail stores such as furniture and appliance stores; household moving and general freight storage; cold storage plants, including frozen food lockers; storage of weapons and ammunition; major wholesale distribution centers; truck or other freight terminals; bus barns; parcel services; major post offices; grain terminals; and the stockpiling of sand, gravel, or other aggregate materials.

D. Exceptions.

1. Uses that involve the transfer or storage of solid or liquid wastes are classified as waste-related uses.

2. Mini-warehouses are classified as self-service storage uses. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


1.6.330 Waste-related.

A. Characteristics. Waste-related uses are characterized by uses that receive solid or liquid wastes from others for disposal on the site or for transfer to another location, uses that collect sanitary wastes, or uses that manufacture or produce goods or energy from the biological decomposition of organic material. Waste-related uses also include uses that receive hazardous wastes from others and are subject to the regulations of OAR 340-100 through 340-110, Hazardous Waste Management.

B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include recycling of materials, offices, and repackaging and transshipment of by-products.

C. Examples. Examples include sanitary landfills, limited use landfills, waste composting, recycling centers, energy recovery plants, sewer treatment plants, portable sanitary collection, equipment storage and pumping, waste sorting and transfer facilities, and hazardous-waste-collection sites.

D. Exceptions.

1. Disposal of clean fill, as defined in OAR 340-093-0030, is considered a fill, not a waste-related use.

2. Sewer pipes that serve a development are considered a basic utility. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


1.6.340 Wholesale sales.

A. Characteristics. Wholesale sales firms are involved in the sale, lease, or rent of products primarily intended for industrial, institutional, or commercial businesses. The uses emphasize on-site sales or order taking and often include display areas. Businesses may or may not be open to the general public, but sales to the general public are limited as a result of the way in which the firm operates. Products may be picked up on site or delivered to the customer.

B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include offices, product repair, warehouses, parking, minor fabrication services, and repackaging of goods.

C. Examples. Examples include sale or rental of machinery, equipment, heavy trucks, building materials, special trade tools, welding supplies, machine parts, electrical supplies, janitorial supplies, restaurant equipment, and store fixtures; mail order houses; and wholesalers of food, clothing, auto parts, building hardware, and office supplies.

D. Exceptions.

1. Firms that engage primarily in sales to the general public are classified as retail sales and service.

2. Firms that engage in sales on a membership basis are classified as either retail sales and service or wholesale sales, based on a consideration of characteristics of the use.

3. Firms that are primarily storing goods with little on-site business activity are classified as warehouse, freight movement, and distribution. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)

Part V. Institutional Use Categories


1.6.400 Basic utilities.

A. Characteristics. Basic utilities are infrastructure services that need to be located in or near the area where the service is provided. Basic utility uses generally do not have regular employees at the site. Services may be public or privately provided. All public safety facilities are basic utilities.

B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include parking; control, monitoring, data or transmission equipment; and holding cells within a police station.

C. Examples. Examples include water and sewer pump stations; sewage disposal and conveyance systems; electrical substations; water towers and reservoirs; water quality and flow control facilities; water conveyance systems; stormwater facilities and conveyance systems; telephone exchanges; bus stops or turnarounds, suspended cable transportation systems, transit centers; and public safety facilities, including fire and police stations, and emergency communication broadcast facilities.

D. Exceptions.

1. Services where people are generally present, other than bus stops or turnarounds, transit centers, and public safety facilities, are classified as community services or offices.

2. Utility offices where employees or customers are generally present are classified as offices.

3. Bus barns are classified as warehouse and freight movement.

4. Public or private passageways, including easements, for the express purpose of transmitting or transporting electricity, gas, oil, water, sewage, communication signals, or other similar services on a regional level are classified as rail lines and utility corridors. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


1.6.410 Renewable energy facilities. 

A. Characteristics. This category includes facilities which produce renewable energy through the use of hydroelectric, wind, solar, geothermal, or other nonpolluting technologies. Renewable energy facilities may provide energy to sustainable on-site uses or may provide some or all of the produced energy to off-site uses. This category may have regular employees at the site. These facilities may be publicly or privately owned.

B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include parking, offices, and control, monitoring, data or transmission equipment.

C. Examples. Examples include hydroelectric dams and plants, geothermal power plants, single wind turbines or wind farms, solar farms, and greater than 200 square feet of solar panels not integrated into a structure’s design and visible from a public right-of-way.

D. Exceptions. This category does not include nonrenewable energy facilities which burn fossil fuels, biofuels, involve nuclear technologies, or other polluting technologies. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010)


1.6.420 Nonrenewable energy facilities. 

A. Characteristics. This category includes facilities which produce nonrenewable energy from the burning of fossil fuels or biofuels, use of nuclear technologies, or use of other polluting technologies. Nonrenewable energy facilities may provide energy to on-site uses or may provide some or all of the produced energy to off-site uses. This category may have regular employees at the site. These facilities may be publicly or privately owned.

B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include parking, offices, and control, monitoring, data or transmission equipment.

C. Examples. Examples include coal- or oil-fired power plants, biofuel-fired power plants, or nuclear power plants.

D. Exceptions. This category does not include renewable energy facilities which produce energy through the use of hydroelectric, wind, solar, geothermal, or other nonpolluting technologies. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010)


1.6.430 Colleges.

A. Characteristics. This category includes colleges and other institutions of higher learning that offer courses of general or specialized study leading to a degree. They are certified by the State Board of Higher Education or by a recognized accrediting agency. Colleges tend to be in campus-like settings or on multiple blocks, though they may be contained in a single building.

B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses include offices, housing for students, food service, laboratories, health and sports facilities, theaters, meeting areas, parking, maintenance facilities, and support commercial.

C. Examples. Examples include universities, liberal arts colleges, community colleges, nursing and medical schools not accessory to a hospital, computer schools, higher education religious schools, and seminaries.

D. Exceptions. Business and trade schools are classified as retail sales and service. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008. Formerly 1.6.410)


1.6.440 Community services.

A. Characteristics. Community services are uses of a public, nonprofit, or charitable nature generally providing a local service to people of the community. Generally, they provide the service on the site or have employees at the site on a regular basis. The service is ongoing, not just for special events. Community centers or facilities that have membership provisions are open to the general public to join at any time (for instance, any senior citizen could join a senior center). The use may provide mass shelter or short-term housing where tenancy may be arranged for periods of less than one month when operated by a public or nonprofit agency. The use may also provide special counseling, education, or training of a public, nonprofit or charitable nature.

B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include offices; meeting areas; food preparation areas; parking, health and therapy areas; daycare uses; and athletic facilities.

C. Examples. Examples include city hall and similar governmental uses, libraries, museums, senior centers, community centers, publicly owned swimming pools, youth club facilities, hospices, ambulance stations, drug and alcohol centers, social service facilities, mass shelters or short-term housing when operated by a public or nonprofit agency, vocational training for the physically or mentally disabled, soup kitchens, and surplus food or clothing distribution centers.

D. Exceptions.

1. Private lodges, clubs, and private or commercial athletic or health clubs are classified as retail sales and service. Commercial museums (such as a museum) are in retail sales and service.

2. Parks are in parks and open areas.

3. Uses where tenancy is arranged on a month-to-month basis, or for a longer period, are residential, and are classified as household or group living.

4. Public safety facilities are classified as basic utilities. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008. Formerly 1.6.420)


1.6.450 Daycare – Family daycare.

A. Characteristics. A family daycare use includes care given by a “family daycare” provider as defined by ORS 657A.440 if the care is given to 16 or fewer children at any one time including the children of the provider. Family daycare is care regularly given in the family living quarters of the provider’s home, and is regulated as a home occupation.

B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses are the same as for a single-family dwelling and include recreation areas, play areas, kitchens, dining areas, laundry, and parking as required under applicable state regulations.

C. Examples. Examples include child daycare as provided in ORS 657A.440.

D. Exceptions. Family daycare use does not include care given by the parents, guardians, or relatives of the children, or care of the same by babysitters. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008. Formerly 1.6.430)


1.6.460 Daycare – Nonfamily daycare.

A. Characteristics. Nonfamily daycare use includes day or evening care of two or more children outside of the children’s homes, for a fee, in commercial districts. Daycare uses also include the daytime care of teenagers or adults who need assistance or supervision.

B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses include offices, play areas, kitchens, laundry, and parking.

C. Examples. Examples include preschools, nursery schools, latchkey programs, and adult daycare programs.

D. Exceptions. Does not include family daycare, which is regulated as a home occupation. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008. Formerly 1.6.440)


1.6.470 Medical centers.

A. Characteristics. Medical centers include uses providing medical or surgical care to patients and offering overnight care. Medical centers tend to be on multiple blocks or in campus settings.

B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses include outpatient clinics, offices, laboratories, teaching facilities, meeting areas, cafeterias, parking, maintenance facilities, and housing facilities for staff or trainees.

C. Examples. Examples include hospitals and medical complexes that include hospitals.

D. Exceptions.

1. Uses that provide exclusive care and planned treatment or training for psychiatric, alcohol, or drug problems, where patients are residents of the program, are classified in the group living category.

2. Medical clinics that provide care where patients are generally not kept overnight are classified as office.

3. Urgency medical care clinics are classified as retail sales and service. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008. Formerly 1.6.450)


1.6.480 Parks, open areas and cemeteries.

A. Characteristics. Parks, open areas and cemeteries are uses of land focusing on natural areas, large areas consisting mostly of vegetative landscaping or outdoor recreation, community gardens, or public squares. Lands tend to have few structures.

B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses may include clubhouses, maintenance facilities, concessions, caretaker’s quarters (not to exceed 800 square feet), and parking.

C. Examples. Examples include parks, golf courses, cemeteries, public squares, plazas, linear parks, recreational trails, botanical gardens, boat launching areas, nature preserves, and land used for grazing that is not part of a farm or ranch. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008. Formerly 1.6.460)


1.6.490 Religious institutions and places of worship.

A. Characteristics. Religious institutions are intended to primarily provide meeting areas for religious activities.

B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses include Sunday school facilities, parking, caretaker’s housing (not to exceed 800 square feet), one transitional housing unit, and group living facilities such as convents. A transitional housing unit is a housing unit for one household where the average length of stay is less than 60 days. Religious schools, when accessory to a religious institution, are different than a school as a primary use.

C. Examples. Examples include churches, temples, synagogues, and mosques. See also religious schools included in SDC 1.6.480, Schools. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008. Formerly 1.6.470)


1.6.500 Schools.

A. Characteristics. This category includes public and private schools, secular or religious, at the primary, elementary, middle, junior high, or high school level that provide state mandated basic education.

B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses include play areas, cafeterias, recreational and sport facilities, auditoriums, and before- or after-school daycare.

C. Examples. Examples include public and private daytime schools, boarding schools and military academies.

D. Exceptions.

1. Preschools are classified as daycare uses.

2. Business and trade schools are classified as retail sales and service.

3. Religious schools, when accessory to a religious institution or place of worship, are classified as a religious institution. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008. Formerly 1.6.480)


1.6.510 Jails and detention facilities.

A. Characteristics. Detention facilities include facilities for judicially required detention or incarceration of people. Inmates and detainees are under 24-hour supervision by sworn officers, except when on approved leave.

B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses include offices, recreational and health facilities, therapy facilities, maintenance facilities, and hobby and manufacturing activities.

C. Use Example. Types of uses include, but are not limited to: prisons, jails, probation centers, and juvenile detention homes.

D. Exceptions. Programs that provide care and training or treatment for psychiatric, alcohol, or drug problems, where patients are residents of the program, but where patients are not supervised by sworn officers, are classified as group or assisted living. Programs that provide transitional living experience for former offenders, such as halfway houses, where sworn officers do not supervise residents, are also classified as group or assisted living. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008. Formerly 1.6.490)


1.6.520 Wildlife rehabilitation facility.

A. Characteristics. Facility for the caring of injured, orphaned, or sick wild animals with the goal of providing food, housing, and medical care of those animals and returning them to the wild after treatment.

B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses include offices, exhibits, classrooms and educational facilities, exterior habitats for rehabilitating animals, and habitats for educational animals as permitted by the state of Oregon.

C. Use Example. Types of uses include, but are not limited to: wildlife rehabilitation facilities and nature centers.

D. Exceptions. Wildlife rehabilitation activities that are prohibited by the state of Oregon. (Ord. 14-01 § 1 (Exh. A), 2014)

Part VI. Other Use Categories


1.6.600 Agriculture.

A. Characteristics. Agriculture includes activities that raise, produce or keep plants or animals.

B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses include dwellings for proprietors and employees of the use, and animal training.

C. Examples. Examples include breeding or raising of fowl or other animals; dairy farms; stables; riding academies; kennels or other animal boarding places; farming, truck gardening, forestry, tree farming; and wholesale plant nurseries.

D. Exceptions.

1. Processing of animal or plant products, including milk, and feed lots are classified as manufacturing and production.

2. Livestock auctions are classified as wholesale sales.

3. Plant nurseries that are oriented to retail sales are classified as retail sales and service.

4. When kennels are limited to boarding, with no breeding, the city may determine the use category is agriculture or retail sales and service. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008. Formerly 1.6.500)


1.6.610 Mining.

A. Characteristics. Mining includes mining or extraction of mineral or aggregate resources from the ground for off-site use.

B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses include storage, sorting, stockpiling, or transfer off site of the mined material.

C. Examples. Examples include quarrying or dredging for sand, gravel or other aggregate materials; mining; and oil, gas, or geothermal drilling. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008. Formerly 1.6.510)


1.6.620 Radio frequency transmission facilities.

A. Characteristics. Radio frequency transmission facilities include all devices, equipment, machinery, structures or supporting elements necessary to produce nonionizing electromagnetic radiation within the range of frequencies from 100 KHz to 300 GHz and operating as a discrete unit to produce a signal or message. Towers may be self-supporting, guyed, or mounted on poles or buildings.

B. Accessory Uses. Accessory use may include transmitter facility buildings.

C. Examples. Examples include broadcast towers, communication/cell towers, and point-to-point microwave towers.

D. Exceptions.

1. Receive-only antennas are not included in this category.

2. Radio and television studios are classified in the office category.

3. Radio frequency transmission facilities that are public safety facilities are classified as basic utilities. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008. Formerly 1.6.520)


1.6.630 Rail lines and utility corridors.

A. Characteristics. This category includes railroad tracks and lines for the movement of trains. The land may be owned or leased by the railroad. The category also includes public or private passageways, including easements, for the express purpose of transmitting or transporting electricity, gas, oil, water, sewage, communication signals, or other similar services on a regional level.

B. Examples. Examples include rail trunk and feeder lines; regional electrical transmission lines; and regional gas and oil pipelines.

C. Exceptions.

1. Railroad lead and spur lines for delivery of rail cars to sites or for unloading of rail cars on specific sites are classified as accessory to the primary use of the site.

2. Rail lines and utility corridors that are located within motor vehicle rights-of-way are not included.

3. Railroad yards are classified in the railroad yards category. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008. Formerly 1.6.530)


1.6.640 Railroad yards.

A. Characteristics. Railroad yards are areas that contain multiple railroad tracks used for rail car switching, assembling of trains, and transshipment of goods from other transportation modes to or from trains.

B. Accessory Uses. Accessory uses include offices, employee facilities, storage areas, railcar maintenance and repair facilities, and parking. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008. Formerly 1.6.540)


Chapter 1.7 ENFORCEMENT

Sections:

1.7.100    Provisions of this code declared to be minimum requirements.

1.7.200    Violation of code prohibited.

1.7.300    Penalty.

1.7.400    Complaints regarding violations.

1.7.500    Inspection and right of entry.

1.7.600    Abatement of violations.


1.7.100 Provisions of this code declared to be minimum requirements.

A. Minimum Requirements Intended. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this code shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the protection of the public health, safety, and general welfare.

B. Most Restrictive Requirements Apply. When the requirements of this code vary from other provisions of this code or from other applicable standards, the most restrictive or that imposing the highest standard shall govern. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


1.7.200 Violation of code prohibited.

No person shall erect, construct, alter, demolish, maintain or use any building or structure or shall use, divide or transfer any land in violation of this code, permits, approvals, code standards, applicable conditions of approval, other regulations, or any amendment thereto. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


1.7.300 Penalty.

In addition to any other remedies set forth in the Silverton Municipal Code, the general penalties and procedures set forth in SMC 1.08.010 apply to any and all violations of this development code. The city may, at its option, elect to pursue such procedure in lieu of or in addition to any other remedy previously set. Violation of any condition or requirement of any land use approval constitutes a civil infraction when such violation does not, in and of itself, constitute a separate violation of the Silverton Municipal Code. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


1.7.400 Complaints regarding violations.

All reports or complaints of infractions covered by this article shall be made or referred to an authorized building official and/or code enforcement officer. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


1.7.500 Inspection and right of entry.

The purpose of inspections shall be to determine whether there is compliance with the laws, rules, and regulations which are designed for the protection of the health, safety, and welfare of the public. The community development director or his/her designee may make periodic and routine inspections of properties and premises within the corporate limits of the city of Silverton. The director is also empowered to make such inspections in response to exigent circumstances that would cause a reasonable person to believe that entry or other relevant prompt action was necessary to prevent physical harm or to otherwise address public health, safety and welfare conditions or noncompliance with such rules, conditions, requirements, regulations, and laws.

In the event that any authorized officer or employee of the city of Silverton shall be denied access to any property or premises for the purposes of making an inspection provided for in this title, then such officer or employee shall not inspect such premises unless and until he has obtained from the municipal judge of the city of Silverton a search warrant for the inspection of such premises.

A. Search Warrant for Inspections. A search warrant for inspections can only be issued under the terms of this title when an affidavit has been filed with the city’s municipal court showing probable cause for the inspection by stating:

1. The purpose and extent of the proposed inspection;

2. The ordinance or ordinances which form the basis for the inspection; and

3. Whether it is a routine or periodic inspection, an inspection initiated by complaint, other specific or general information, or observation concerning the property or premises or the area in which it is situated. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to hinder, delay, or obstruct the inspection of premises based on a search warrant issued under the terms of this title.

B. Emergency Inspection without Search Warrant. Nothing within the Silverton development code shall be construed as prohibiting an inspection or investigation without a warrant in an emergency situation if immediate inspection is necessary to the protection of the public health or safety and if it would be impractical and represent an increased hazard to seek a warrant under the provisions of subsection (A) of this section. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


1.7.600 Abatement of violations.

The location, erection, construction, demolition, maintenance, repair, alteration or use of a building or other structure in violation of this title shall be deemed a civil infraction and may be enforced as such. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


Chapter 2.1 ORGANIZATION OF LAND USE DISTRICTS

Sections:

2.1.100    Classification of land use districts.

2.1.200    Land use district map.

2.1.300    Determination of land use district boundaries.


2.1.100 Classification of land use districts.

Every parcel, lot, and tract of land within the city of Silverton is designated with a land use (zoning) district. The use of land is limited to the uses allowed by the applicable comprehensive plan designation, land use designation and zoning district and/or overlay zone. The applicable districts and overlay zone(s) are determined based on the city of Silverton zoning map and the provisions of this chapter, which shall be consistent with the city of Silverton comprehensive plan, as indicated in Table 2.1.100.

Table 2.1.100 

	Comprehensive Plan Designation	Applicable Land Use District(s)

	Residential – Single-Family	Acreage Residential (AR)

	Single-Family Residential (R-1)

	Low Density Residential (R-5)

	Residential – Multiple-Family	Multiple-Family Residential (RM-10)

	Multiple-Family Residential (RM-20)

	Commercial	Downtown Commercial (DC)

	Downtown Commercial Fringe (DCF)

	General Commercial (GC)

	Industrial	Industrial Park (IP)

	Light Industrial (LI)

	Industrial (I)

	Overlay Zones	Floodplain (/FP) Overlay

	Hillside Protection (/H) Overlay

	Public Use (/P) Overlay

	Wetlands and Riparian (/WR) Overlay

(Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.1.200 Land use district map.

A. Consistency with Zoning Map. The boundaries of the land use districts contained within this chapter shall coincide with the boundaries identified on the city’s official zoning map, retained by the city recorder. Said map by this reference is made a part of this development code. The official zoning map, and any map amendments, shall be maintained by the city.

B. Applicability. Each lot, tract, and parcel of land or portion thereof within the land use district boundaries designated on the official zoning map is classified, zoned and limited to the uses hereinafter specified and defined for the applicable land use district. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.1.300 Determination of land use district boundaries.

When amending land use district boundaries, the city’s comprehensive plan map is the primary source for determining appropriate boundaries. Where the plan map does not provide sufficient detail or direction, district locations and boundaries shall be guided by the purpose and applicability statements at the beginning of each land use chapter (Chapters 2.2 through 2.8). Where, due to the scale, lack of scale, lack of detail or illegibility of the city zoning map, or due to any other reason, there is uncertainty, contradiction or conflict as to the existing or intended location of a district boundary line, the boundary line shall be determined by the planning official in accordance with all of the following criteria:

A. Rights-of-Way. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets, highways, railroad tracks, alleys, irrigation canals, bridges, or other rights-of-way shall be construed to follow such center lines. Whenever any public right-of-way is lawfully vacated, the lands formerly within the vacated right-of-way shall automatically be subject to the same land use district designation that is applicable to lands abutting the vacated areas. In cases where the right-of-way formerly served as a land use district boundary, the lands within the right-of-way now vacated shall be allocated proportionately among the subject land use districts;

B. Parcel, Lot, Tract. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the boundaries of a parcel, lot, or tract shall be construed as following such boundaries;

C. Jurisdiction Boundary. Boundaries indicated as approximately following a city or county boundary, or the urban growth boundary, shall be construed as following said boundary; and

D. Natural Features. Boundaries indicated as approximately following a river, stream, drainage channel, drainage basin, topographic contour or other changeable natural feature not corresponding to any feature listed in subsection (A) through (C) of this section shall be construed as following such feature, except that the location may be corrected administratively through a Type II (code interpretation) procedure under Chapter 4.8 SDC. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


Chapter 2.2 RESIDENTIAL (R) DISTRICTS

Sections:

2.2.100    Residential districts – Purpose and applicability.

2.2.110    Residential districts – Allowed land uses.

2.2.120    Residential districts – Development standards.

2.2.130    Residential districts – Setback yards – Exceptions, reverse frontage lots and flag lots.

2.2.140    Reserved.

2.2.150    Residential districts – Housing density.

2.2.160    Residential districts – Lot coverage and impervious surfaces.

2.2.170    Residential districts – Building height, measurement and exceptions.

2.2.180    Residential districts – Building orientation.

2.2.190    Residential districts – Architectural design standards.

2.2.200    Residential districts – Special use standards.


2.2.100 Residential districts – Purpose and applicability.

A. Purpose. The residential districts promote the livability, stability and improvement of the city’s neighborhoods. The districts are intended to:

1. Promote the orderly development of neighborhoods.

2. Make efficient use of land and public services and implement the comprehensive plan.

3. Designate land for the range of housing types and densities needed by the community, including owner-occupied and rental housing.

4. Allow for convenient neighborhood access to parks, schools, places of worship, and other supportive services, compatible with planned residential densities.

5. Provide flexible lot standards that encourage compatibility between land uses, efficiency in site design, and environmental compatibility.

6. Provide for compatible building and site design at an appropriate neighborhood scale; provide standards that are in character with the landforms and desired architectural character of Silverton.

7. Apply the minimum amount of regulation necessary to ensure compatibility with existing residences, schools, parks, transportation facilities, and neighborhood services.

8. Reduce reliance on the automobile for neighborhood travel and provide options for walking, bicycling and transit use.

9. Provide direct and convenient access to schools, parks and neighborhood services.

10. Accommodate acreage residential uses in areas not yet served with urban infrastructure.

B. Applicability. The land use districts shall be applied consistently with the policies and land use designations of the city of Silverton comprehensive plan text and map. Where the comprehensive plan allows for the possible application of more than one land use district (i.e., at the time of annexation or any proposed rezoning), the districts shall be applied appropriately based on the following criteria and consistent with the amendment procedures in Chapter 4.7 SDC. Densities may be transferred or adjusted through the planned development approval process under Chapter 4.5 SDC, provided the overall density on the site conforms with the density range allowed per the comprehensive plan designation. The purpose of this is to provide for exceptional development designs that conserve open spaces and meet other community planning objectives.

1. The single-family residential (R-1) zone is one of the land use districts that implements the single-family residential comprehensive plan land use designation. It is intended primarily for household and group living at densities ranging from two dwellings per acre to not more than six dwellings per acre. Hillside properties zoned R-1 shall also be subject to the hillside protection overlay zone provisions under Chapter 2.6 SDC.

2. The low density residential (R-5) zone is one of the land use districts that implements the single-family residential comprehensive plan land use designation. It is intended to accommodate a variety of household and group living uses, including attached and detached dwellings, on small and medium-size lots, at densities ranging from five dwellings per acre to not more than 10 dwellings per acre. The R-5 district is an appropriate transition between R-1 zoning and higher density residential or commercial districts.

3. The multiple-family residential (RM-10) zone is one of the districts that implements the multifamily comprehensive plan land use designation. It is intended to accommodate a variety of household and group living uses, including multiple-family, attached single-family and small-lot detached dwellings, at densities ranging from 10 dwellings per acre to not more than 20 dwellings per acre. The RM-10 district is an appropriate transition between R zoning and higher density residential or commercial districts.

4. The multiple-family residential (RM-20) zone is one of the zones that is intended to accommodate household and group living uses, including multifamily and attached single-family dwellings, at densities ranging from 20 dwellings per acre to not more than 32 dwellings per acre. The RM-20 district provides for a variety of higher density residential living options.

5. The acreage residential (AR) zone is intended to provide appropriate regulations governing the division and development of lands designated acreage residential in the comprehensive plan. These are properties which prior to being annexed to the city may have been developed consistent with Marion County’s rural regulations. The district allows the continued use of existing rural residential developments provided they do not exceed the environmental and public service capabilities of the area. It also recognizes that properties designated AR are in transition from rural to urban uses. Certain uses, such as farming, that may not be permitted on other lands within the city limits may otherwise be allowed on AR lands. It is not intended to be an alternative zoning designation for lands that are already designated to accommodate future urban development at higher densities. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.2.110 Residential districts – Allowed land uses.

Table 2.2.110.A identifies the land uses that are allowed in the residential districts. The specific land use categories are described and examples of uses are provided in Chapter 1.6 SDC. Land uses may not be modified through a planned development, except as provided in Chapter 4.5 SDC. Table 2.2.110.B specifies the land uses allowed in the acreage residential district.

Table 2.2.110.A – Land Uses Allowed in Residential Districts (R-1, R-5, RM-10, RM-20)  

	Uses	Status of Use in District

	Use Categories

(Examples of uses are in Chapter 1.6 SDC; definitions are in Chapter 1.5 SDC.)	Single-Family Residential (R-1)	Low Density Residential (R-5)	Multiple-Family Residential (RM-10)	Multiple-Family Residential (RM-20)

	Residential Categories	 	 	 	 

	Household Living	 	 	 	 

	Single-family (not attached; does not include cottage cluster developments)	P	P	P	P

	Accessory dwelling, per SDC 2.2.200	S	S	S	S

	Duplex (2 dwellings sharing a common wall on 1 lot), per SDC 2.2.200	 	 	 	 

	- 1 duplex: corner lot	S or CU	P	P	P

	- 1 duplex: interior noncorner lot	S or CU	P	P	P

	- More than 1 duplex (4+ units) consecutively attached	 N	DR	DR	DR

	Single-family attached (2 or more common-wall single-family dwellings), each on its own lot, per SDC 2.2.200	N	S	S	S

	Cottage cluster (2 – 4 single-family dwellings on 1 lot), per SDC 2.2.200	N	DR	DR	DR

	Manufactured home on individual lot, per SDC 2.2.200, except manufactured home subdivisions	S	S	S	S

	Manufactured home park, per SDC 2.2.200	 	 	 	 

	- Lawfully existing as of November 5, 2008	N/A	N/A	N/A	N/A

	- New manufactured home park	N	DR	DR	N

	Multifamily (3 or more dwellings on lot), per SDC 2.2.200	N	DR	DR	DR

	Shipping container or converted vehicles	N	N	N	N

	Group Living	 	 	 	 

	Group living (dormitories, sororities, fraternities)	N	N	CU	CU

	Group care home, per SDC 2.2.200	P	P	P	P

	Group care facility, per SDC 2.2.200	N	N	DR	DR

	Group care institution, per SDC 2.2.200	N	N	DR	DR

	Commercial Categories	 	 	 	 

	Bed and breakfast inn	CU+S	CU+S	CU+S	CU+S

	Home occupation, per the standards in SDC 2.2.200	S	S	S	S

	Kennel	N	N	N	N

	Industrial Categories 	N	N	N	N

	Institutional Categories	 	 	 	 

	Basic utilities	P	P	P	P

	Jails and detention facilities	N	N	N	N

	Renewable energy facilities	 	 	 	 

	- Accessory use	CU+S	CU+S	CU+S	CU+S

	- Primary use	N	N	N	N

	Nonrenewable energy facilities	N	N	N	N

	Telecommunication facilities and towers	N	N	N	N

	Daycare, adult or child	 	 	 	 

	- Family daycare (16 or fewer children); subject to state licensing, ORS Chapter 657A	P	P	P	P

	- Nonfamily daycare	CU	CU	CU	CU

	Parks and open space	 	 	 	 

	- Outdoor uses, including parking	P	P	P	P

	- Lighted sports fields and/or buildings exceeding 2,000 square feet	CU	CU	CU	CU

	Religious institutions and houses of worship	 	 	 	 

	- Facilities lawfully established as of November 5, 2008	P	P	P	P

	- New facilities	CU	CU	CU	CU

	- Transitional shelter communities, per the standards in SDC 2.2.200(N)	CU	CU	CU	CU

	Jails and Detention Facilities    	N	N	N	N

	Schools 	 	 	 	 

	- 20 or fewer students	P	P	P	P

	- More than 20 students	CU	CU	CU	CU

	Other Categories	 	 	 	 

	Accessory structures (with a primary use)	 	 	 	 

	- No taller than 22 ft. and no larger than 800 square feet of building footprint	S	S	S	S

	- Taller than 22 ft. or larger than 800 square feet of building footprint, not to exceed primary structure’s floor area	CU	CU	CU	CU

	Membrane carports/canopies are not allowed within any required setback	 	 	 	 

	Farm use, keeping of livestock, except roosters and swine, if greater than 1 acre	P	N	N	N

	Farm use, chickens	S	N	N	N

	Farm use, sale of produce raised on premises	P	N	N	N

	Agriculture – Nurseries and similar horticulture (indoor or outdoor)	P	P	P	P

	Agriculture – Marijuana producers and grow sites, enclosed and nonenclosed	N	N	N	N

	Radio frequency transmission facilities and telecommunication towers, excluding amateur radio antennas, when accessory to a permitted use, provided they do not exceed the permitted structure height	N	N	N	N

	Temporary uses (limited to “P” and “CU” uses), per SDC 4.9.100	P/CU	P/CU	P/CU	P/CU

	Transportation facilities (operation, maintenance, preservation, and construction, per TSP)	P	P	P	P

	Key:

	P = Permitted, subject to land use review

	S = Permitted with standards (SDC 2.2.200), except standards may be modified with a planned development overlay

	DR = Design review required (Chapter 4.2 SDC)

	CU = Conditional use required (Chapter 4.4 SDC)

	N = Not permitted

Table 2.2.110.B – Land Uses Allowed in Acreage Residential District (AR)  

	Uses	Status of Use

	Use Categories

(Examples of uses are in Chapter 1.6 SDC; definitions are in Chapter 1.5 SDC.)	 

	Residential Categories	 

	Household Living	 

	Single-family (not attached; does not include cottage cluster developments)	P

	Accessory dwelling, per SDC 2.2.200	P

	Duplex (2 dwellings sharing a common wall on 1 lot), per SDC 2.2.200	N

	Single-family attached (2 or more common-wall single-family dwellings), each on its own lot, per SDC 2.2.200	N

	Cottage cluster (2 – 4 single-family dwellings on 1 lot), per SDC 2.2.200	N

	Manufactured home on individual lot, per SDC 2.2.200, except manufactured home subdivisions	S

	Manufactured home park, per SDC 2.2.200	N

	Multifamily (3 or more dwellings on lot), except as provided for cottage housing	N

	Group Living	 

	Group care home, per SDC 2.2.200	P

	Group care facility or institution, per SDC 2.2.200	N

	Commercial Categories	 

	Bed and breakfast inn	CU+S

	Commercial use in conjunction with a farm use, involving primarily sales of produce or goods not produced on the premises	CU

	Home occupation, per the standards in SDC 2.2.200	P

	Kennels	CU

	Other commercial uses not similar to those listed above	N

	Industrial Categories 	N

	Institutional Categories	 

	Basic utilities 	P

	Renewable energy facilities	 

	- Accessory Use	CU+S

	- Primary Use	N

	Nonrenewable energy facilities	N

	Telecommunication facilities and towers	N

	Community services	P

	Daycare, adult or child	 

	- Family daycare (16 or fewer children); subject to state licensing, ORS Chapter 657A	P

	- Nonfamily daycare	N

	Parks and open space	 

	- Outdoor uses, including parking	P

	- Lighted sports fields and/or buildings exceeding 2,000 square feet	CU

	Religious institutions and houses of worship	 

	- Facilities lawfully established as of November 5, 2008	P

	- New facilities, not exceeding 20,000 square feet in total floor area	CU

	Jails and detention facilities	N

	Schools	 

	- 20 or fewer students	P

	- More than 20 students	CU

	Other Categories	 

	Accessory structures (with a primary use)	 

	- Meeting required setbacks and height regulations with a building footprint not to exceed the primary structure’s footprint	P

	Membrane carports/canopies are not allowed within any required setback	 

	Farm use, including livestock and the sale of produce that is raised on the premises; riding academies and public stables	P

	Agriculture – Nurseries and similar horticulture (indoor or outdoor), except gardening that is allowed as ancillary to a permitted residential use	P

	Agriculture – Marijuana producers and grow sites, enclosed and nonenclosed	N

	Mining and/or excavation that is not accessory to a permitted use with applicable land use approval	N

	Radio frequency transmission facilities and telecommunication towers, excluding amateur radio antennas, when accessory to a permitted use, provided they do not exceed the permitted structure height	N

	Temporary uses (limited to “P” and “CU” uses), per SDC 4.9.100	P/CU

	Transportation facilities (operation, maintenance, preservation, and construction per TSP)	P 

	Key:

	P = Permitted, subject to land use review

	S = Permitted with standards (SDC 2.2.200), except standards may be modified with a planned development overlay

	DR = Design review required (Chapter 4.2 SDC)

	CU = Conditional use required (Chapter 4.4 SDC)

	N = Not permitted

(Ord. 18-22 § 2, 2018; Ord. 16-01 § 3, 2016; Ord. 14-01 § 1 (Exh. A), 2014; Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.2.120 Residential districts – Development standards.

The development standards in Table 2.2.120.A apply to all uses, structures, buildings, and development, and major remodels, in the residential districts. Table 2.2.120.B specifies development standards for the acreage residential district. The standards may be modified with approval of a planned development. 

Table 2.2.120.A – Development Standards for Residential Districts  

	Standard	R-1	R-5	RM-10	RM-20

	Density (DU/acre) – Min. and Max.	2 – 6 DU/acre, subject to dev. standards	5 – 10 DU/acre, subject to dev. standards	10 – 20 DU/acre, subject to dev. standards	20 – 32 DU/acre, subject to dev. standards

	Minimum Lot Area* (square feet)	 	 	 	 

	Single-family, not attached, where vehicle access provided from street	7,000 sq. ft. interior

8,000 sq. ft. corner	5,000 sq. ft.	4,000 sq. ft.	4,000 sq. ft.

	Single-family, not attached, where vehicle access provided from alley	6,000 sq. ft. interior

7,000 sq. ft. corner	4,000 sq. ft.	3,000 sq. ft.	3,000 sq. ft.

	Single-family, attached, where vehicle access provided from street	Not permitted	5,000 sq. ft.	4,000 sq. ft.	4,000 sq. ft.

	Single-family, attached, where vehicle access provided from alley	Not permitted	4,000 sq. ft.	2,200 sq. ft.	1,600 sq. ft.

	Duplex	7,000 sq. ft. interior

8,000 sq. ft. corner	7,000 sq. ft.	6,000 sq. ft.	5,000 sq. ft.

	Multiple-family or cottage cluster	Not permitted	2,000 sq. ft. per dwelling unit	2,000 sq. ft. per dwelling unit	1,200 sq. ft. per dwelling unit

	Nonresidential uses, except tracts for open space and utilities	7,000 sq. ft.	5,000 sq. ft.	4,000 sq. ft.	4,000 sq. ft.

	*Lot area is subject to min. and max. density. Sizes may be reduced by 10 percent through lot size averaging, per SDC 4.3.115, Land divisions, or 4.5.130, Planned development. Does not apply to open space and parks.

	Minimum Lot Width*	 	 	 	 

	Where vehicle access to be provided from street or flag lot	50 ft.	50 ft.	40 ft.	40 ft.

	Where vehicle access to be provided from alley	50 ft.	40 ft.	20 ft.	16 ft.

	*Width is measured at the front setback line. For flag lots, width is measured at the front setback line on the “flag” portion of the lot. The minimum width on the “pole” portion of such lots is 20 feet. See also SDC 4.3.115, Flexible lot size – Lots without street frontage – Flag lots – Minisubdivisions. All applicable setbacks, lot area, coverage and other standards must be met.

	Minimum Lot Depth	60 ft.	60 ft.	60 ft.	60 ft.

	Maximum Building Stories	2.5	2.5	3.0	3.0

	Building/Structure Height

	See also: SDC 2.2.130, Residential districts – Setback yards – Exceptions, reverse frontage lots and flag lots; 2.2.200(A), Accessory Dwellings (Attached, Separate Cottage, or Above Detached Garage); 3.1.200(N), Vision Clearance; 3.2.500, Fences and walls.

	Standard maximum height	35 ft.	35 ft.	 35 ft.	 35 ft.

	Accessory structure height	22 ft.	22 ft.	22 ft.	22 ft.

	Interior lot: fences, hedges, retaining/garden walls*	 	 	 	 

	Max. height – Front yard	42 inches	42 inches	42 inches	42 inches

	Max. height – Interior side	6 ft.	6 ft.	6 ft.	6 ft.

	Max. height – Rear yard	6 ft.	6 ft.	6 ft.	6 ft.

	Max. height – Reverse frontage lot (rear)	42 inches, or 6 ft. with 5 ft. landscape buffer between fence/wall and sidewalk	42 inches, or 6 ft. with 5 ft. landscape buffer between fence/wall and sidewalk	42 inches, or 6 ft. with 5 ft. landscape buffer between fence/wall and sidewalk	42 inches, or 6 ft. with 5 ft. landscape buffer between fence/wall and sidewalk

	Corner lot: fences, retaining/garden walls	 	 	 	 

	Max. height – Front yard within 50 ft. of through-curb intersection	42 inches

*see Figure 3.2.500	42 inches

*see Figure 3.2.500	42 inches

*see Figure 3.2.500	42 inches

*see Figure 3.2.500

	Max. height – Front yard outside 50 ft. of through-curb intersection, at least 5 ft. from property line	6 ft	6 ft	6 ft	6 ft

	Max. height – Side yard	6 ft	6 ft	6 ft	6 ft

	Max. height – Rear yard	6 ft	6 ft	6 ft	6 ft

	Alley	6 ft.	6 ft.	6 ft.	6 ft.

	*Retaining walls taller than 4 feet and fences taller than 6 feet require a building permit.	 	 	 	 

	1. Basic lot coverage standards

Lot coverage by buildings and structures exceeding 30 inches above grade (foundation plane divided by lot area)	50%	50%	65%	75%

	2. Lot coverage bonus	Allowable lot coverage may increase when driveways, rooftops, and/or parking surfaces are designed with approved green building methods such as vegetated swales, stormwater planter boxes, rooftop gardens, or porous paving materials approved through design review. Lot coverage may increase by a ratio of one-half (0.5) square foot for every one square foot of city-approved green building area.

	Minimum landscape area (percent site area), as required under Chapter 3.2 SDC

Additional usable open space area may be required for multifamily projects, per SDC 2.2.200.	All areas not covered by structures and pavement; not less than 10 percent of site	All areas not covered by structures and pavement; not less than 12 percent of site	All areas not covered by structures and pavement; not less than 10 percent of site	All areas not covered by structures and pavement; not less than 8 percent of site

	Minimum Setbacks (feet):	 

	See also: SDC 2.2.130, Residential districts – Setback yards – Exceptions, reverse frontage lots and flag lots; 3.1.200(N), Vision Clearance; and 3.2.500, Fences and Walls.	 

	Front/Street Setback	 

	Primary structure	15 ft.

	Garages and carport entries	20 ft.

	Accessory structure	20 ft.

	Front porch, balcony, portico, patio/garden wall and similar architectural elements that are less than 50 percent enclosed	12 ft. from right-of-way line, provided the structure does not conflict with vision clearance at intersections, utilities or easements

	Note: Other standards may preclude building at a minimum setback. Be sure to avoid utilities, easements, and clear vision areas. See also special setback for planned street improvements under Chapter 3.4 SDC.

	Side Setbacks	 

	One-story structures	5 ft.

	Two-story structures	7 ft.

	Three-story structures	9 ft.

	Accessory structure	5 ft.

	Exceptions:	 

	Alley minimum setback	5 ft.

	Common walls when allowed	0 ft.

	Rear Setbacks	 

	One-story structure	20 ft.

	Two-story structures	20 ft.

	Three-story structures	20 ft.

	Accessory structures	5 ft.

	Porches, decks and similar structures	May encroach into rear yard setback 10 ft.

	Exceptions:	 

	Alley minimum setback	5 ft.

	Common walls when allowed	0 ft.

	Special setback for planned street improvements in residential districts	The city may require a minimum setback of up to 50 feet measured from the street center line to any structure, when a structure abuts a street containing less than the standard right-of-way for the subject street classification. Street classification and required right-of-way width are as indicated by the city of Silverton transportation system plan.

	Special setbacks for accessory structures less than 200 square feet on corner lots	10 feet from street property lines and five feet from rear property lines, at least 50 feet from through curb intersection, outside of any vision clearance area.

	Note: Other standards may preclude building at a minimum setback. Be sure to avoid utilities, easements, and clear vision areas. See also special setback for planned street improvements under Chapter 3.4 SDC.

Table 2.2.120.B – Development Standards for Acreage Residential Districts  

	Standard	AR

	Density (DU/acre) – Maximum	No new lots will be allowed to be created through the subdivision or partition process until such time as sanitary sewer is provided to serve the proposed lot, and it can be shown that a need for additional residential lots cannot be met by additional lands elsewhere inside the urban growth boundary.

	Minimum Lot Area (square feet)	N/A

	Maximum Building/Structure Height	 

	- Dwellings	35 ft.

	- Farm-related structures on farm parcels	None

	- Other structures	35 ft., except as otherwise approved with a conditional use

	Minimum Setbacks for New Single-Family Dwellings	 

	- Rear yard	50 ft.

	- Side yard	25 ft.

	- Front yard	50 ft.

	Minimum Setbacks for Accessory Structures and Other Nonresidential Structures	 

	- Rear yard	10 ft.

	- Side yard	10 ft.

	- Front yard	20 ft.

	Exemptions	 

	Properties which are designated AR shall be exempt from the following city regulations due to the rural character and uses allowed in the AR district	SMC 13.16.190, Privies, cesspools and septic tank prohibitions;

SMC 8.04.050, Barbed wire and electric fence prohibitions;

SMC 8.04.050, Hazardous containers and conditions;

SMC 8.04.050, Attractive nuisances;

SMC 8.04.050, Noxious vegetation;

SMC 8.04.055, Noise disturbances;

SMC 9.16.010, Discharging guns or other weapons prohibition.

*Except that the owner shall be responsible for complying with all applicable county, state and federal rules and regulations pertaining to the above topics.

(Ord. 16-04 § 2, 2016; Ord. 14-01 § 1 (Exh. A), 2014; Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.2.130 Residential districts – Setback yards – Exceptions, reverse frontage lots and flag lots.

A. Residential Yard Setbacks – Purpose. Residential setback yards provide space for private yards and building separation for fire protection/security, building maintenance, sunlight and air circulation. The setback yard standards contained in Table 2.2.120 are also intended to promote human-scale design and traffic calming by diminishing the visual presence of garages along the street and encouraging the use of pedestrian amenities, such as extra-wide sidewalks and street furnishings in multiple-family developments and in residential-commercial projects. The standards also encourage the orientation of buildings to provide street visibility for public safety and neighborhood security.

B. Setback Yards – Exceptions. Eaves, chimneys, bay windows, overhangs, and similar architectural features may encroach into a side yard setback by not more than 36 inches; provided, that a setback of not less than 36 inches is preserved, all applicable building and fire codes are met, and the clear vision standards in SDC 3.1.200 are met. Porches, decks and similar structures not exceeding 30 inches in height are not subject to setback provisions. Porches, decks and similar structures exceeding 30 inches in height may encroach into the rear setback no more than 10 feet and may encroach into the front yard as provided in Table 2.2.120. Walls and fences built on property lines are subject to the height standards in Table 2.2.120 and the provisions of SDC 3.1.200(N), Vision Clearance, and 3.2.500, Fences and walls.

C. Setback Yards – Reverse Frontage Lots. Buildings on reverse-frontage lots (through lots) shall be required to meet the street yard setback on both streets; a rear yard setback is not required. Reverse frontage lots are subject to the fence height and setback requirements in SDC 2.2.120 and the landscape buffer requirements in SDC 3.2.300.

D. Setback Yards – Flag Lots. Where flag lots are allowed, the front yard of the flag lot shall conform to one of the following, as designated by the approval body:

Option 1. Adjacent to the street from which access is taken, or

Option 2. Adjacent to the flag pole from which access is taken.

The applicant for a building permit may request either Option 1 or Option 2, except as otherwise prescribed by conditions of a partition or subdivision approval, and provided adequate setbacks and privacy screening or fencing are provided. The city may impose such conditions of approval as provided under SDC 4.3.115. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.2.140 Reserved.

(Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.2.150 Residential districts – Housing density.

A. Residential Density Standard. To ensure efficient use of buildable lands and to provide for a range of needed housing in conformance with the comprehensive plan, all new developments in the residential districts shall conform to the minimum and maximum densities prescribed in Table 2.2.120, except as provided in subsections (A)(1) through (3) of this section:

1. Residential care homes/facilities/institutions, senior housing, including assisted living, accessory dwellings, and developments in areas with significant natural resources or physical constraints (e.g., wetlands, unstable soils, steep slopes, etc.) are exempt from the minimum density standard.

2. The density standards may be averaged over more than one development phase when approved through a planned development. Duplex lots used to comply with the density standard shall be so designated on the final subdivision plat and through deed restrictions on the subject lots.

3. Partitions and construction of single-family homes on lots exceeding 20,000 square feet, except within the hillside protection overlay district, shall be planned so that infill development can occur in the future and such development can occur in accordance with other adopted plans (e.g., the city of Silverton transportation system plan) and the minimum lot size and other dimensional standards of the district. See also SDC 4.3.110(C), Future Redivision Plan. Densities may be transferred or adjusted through the planned development approval process under Chapter 4.5 SDC, to provide for exceptional development designs that conserve open spaces and meet other community planning objectives.

B. Residential Density Calculation.

1. Minimum and maximum housing densities are calculated by multiplying the total parcel or lot area by the applicable density range. Properties must be developed within the minimum and maximum range. Some properties may not be capable of accommodating development at maximum densities. Properties that cannot meet maximum density standards may consider transferring density and modifying allowable lot sizes and/or housing types through a planned development process. Typical constraints include street right-of-way requirements, parcel configuration, or the presence of natural features or physical constraints.

2. Areas reserved for flag lot access (flag poles) are not counted for the purpose of calculating minimum lot area.

3. Housing density calculations resulting in fractions of dwelling units shall be rounded to the nearest whole number. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.2.160 Residential districts – Lot coverage and impervious surfaces.

A.  Lot Coverage. The maximum allowable lot coverage shall be as provided in Table 2.2.120. Lot coverage by buildings is calculated as the percentage of a lot or parcel covered by buildings and structures exceeding 30 inches above grade, including enclosed and unenclosed structures (as defined by the foundation plane).

B. Impervious Surfaces. Impervious surface shall not exceed 50 percent of the required setback yards. Impervious surfaces are calculated as the percentage of a lot or parcel covered by building foundations, patios, decking, asphalt, concrete, gravel, and similar surfaces, except where such surfaces allow stormwater infiltration and are approved by the city for such purpose. Impervious area does not include planted areas, porous nonplant ground covers (e.g., mulch) and landscaped areas under eaves. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.2.170 Residential districts – Building height, measurement and exceptions.

Building heights shall conform to the standards in Table 2.2.120, and subsections (A) through (C) of this section:

A. Building Height Measurement. The vertical distance from the grade plane to the average height of a pitched (gable or hip) roof, or the top of a mansard or flat roof including the parapet walls.

B. Exclusions from Maximum Building Height Standards. Rooftop structures, including towers, spires, steeples and other structures when built according to Section 1509 of the International Building Code, may extend 20 feet past the roof height requirement when approved by the planning commission and fire department.

C. Sloped Lots (Hillside Overlay District). The maximum allowable height on a sloping lot (12 percent or greater slope averaged from front to rear property line) shall be 35 feet and three stories. (Ord. 16-04 § 3, 2016; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.2.180 Residential districts – Building orientation.

A. Purpose. The following standards are intended to orient buildings close to streets to promote pedestrian-oriented development where walking is encouraged. Placing residences and other buildings close to the street also encourages neighborhood crime prevention, natural surveillance or security, and safety by having more “eyes on the street.”

B. Applicability. This section applies to all new primary structures.

C. Building Orientation Standards. All primary structures shall conform to the following:

1. Except as provided below, all primary structures shall have at least one primary entrance (i.e., dwelling entrance, lobby entrance, or breezeway/courtyard entrance serving a cluster of dwellings) facing an adjacent street, or if on a side elevation, not more than 30 feet from a street sidewalk. See Figure 2.2.180.C(1);



Figure 2.2.180.C(1) – Residential District Building Orientation

Acceptable
[IMAGE]


Not Acceptable
[IMAGE]


2. Except as allowed for single-family detached dwellings, or as provided below, off-street parking, driveways, and other vehicle areas shall not be placed between buildings and the street(s) to which they are oriented, as per subsection (C)(1) of this section and Figure 2.2.180.C(1). Off-street parking and driveways may be placed between buildings and streets where the approval body finds that one of the following exemptions in subsections (C)(2)(a) through (e) of this section applies and allowing the exemption will not adversely affect pedestrian access, safety or convenience:

a. Schools, group care facilities, and public uses may have one drive aisle with parking, including ADA accessible spaces, located between the street and the primary building entrance; provided, that the building’s primary entrance is connected to an adjacent street by a pedestrian walkway; in such case, the driveway/parking area shall contain a clearly defined pedestrian crosswalk as specified in SDC 3.1.300. The intent of this exception is to allow limited use of driveways for drop-off or loading zones where the functional requirements of the use require such facilities.

b. Attached single-family housing developments (townhomes) with street-facing garages may have not more than one driveway access located between the street and the primary building entrance for every two dwelling units, provided the access meets the following criteria, as generally shown in Figure 2.2.180.C(2):

i. The maximum number of consecutively attached townhomes with garages facing the same street is six (three driveways);

ii. Where two abutting townhomes have street-facing garages, they shall share one driveway access that does not exceed 24 feet in width where it crosses the sidewalk and intersects the street. The intent of this standard is to minimize sidewalk interruptions and maximize the space available for on-street parking;

iii. The townhomes’ primary entrances shall be connected to an adjacent sidewalk via pedestrian walkway of not less than three feet in width; such walkway may adjoin the driveway described in subsection (C)(2)(b)(i) of this section to minimize paving;

iv. Street-facing garages shall be set back at least 20 feet from the street property line; where a building is placed less than 20 feet from the street property line, the 20-foot garage setback may be accomplished by recessing the garage behind the front building elevation.

Figure 2.2.180.C(2) – Townhome Building Orientation
[IMAGE]


c. Parking may be placed between a building and an adjacent street where the street is a designated arterial street under the Silverton transportation system plan, and the approval body finds that such orientation provides greater pedestrian accessibility, comfort and/or safety than would otherwise be provided.

d. Where a development contains multiple buildings and there is insufficient street frontage to which buildings can be oriented, a primary entrance may be oriented to common green, open space, plaza, or courtyard. When oriented in this way, the primary entrance(s) and green, plaza, or courtyard shall be connected to the street by a pedestrian walkway meeting the standards in SDC 3.1.300. See also Figure 2.2.180.C(1).

e. Where live-work or other commercial uses are allowed, any off-street parking shall be located behind or to the side of such building(s) and screened from abutting properties in accordance with Chapter 3.2 SDC (See Figure 2.2.180.C(3)). Off-street parking shall not be located between any building and any street.

Figure 2.2.180.C(3) – Commercial Orientation in a Residential District
[IMAGE]


(Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.2.190 Residential districts – Architectural design standards.

A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote the public health, safety, and welfare by requiring at least a minimum level of design on every building and varied building elevations in large developments. The design standards are also intended to promote architectural compatibility and harmony within Silverton’s existing residential neighborhoods as infill development occurs. The standards support context-appropriate, pedestrian-scale design and crime prevention by providing street visibility from residential structures, while affording flexibility to use a variety of building styles.

B. Applicability. This section applies to all new primary residential structures and accessory dwellings. It does not apply to remodels of, or additions to, existing single-family dwellings or designated historic structures. The standards and criteria in this section are applied through the land use review or design review procedure (Chapter 4.2 SDC), as applicable, prior to building permit review. The provisions under subsection (C) of this section may be adjusted through the design performance option in SDC 4.2.510.

C. Standards. All projects that are subject to this section shall meet all of the standards in subsections (C)(1) through (5) of this section, except as modified through SDC 4.2.510, Design performance option. The graphics provided with each standard are intended to show examples of how the standards can be met and should not be interpreted as requiring a specific architectural feature or style. Other building styles and designs can be used to meet the standards when the approval body finds they are consistent with the text. An architectural feature, as shown below, may be used to comply with more than one standard.

1. Building Length. The continuous horizontal distance, as measured from end-wall to end-wall, of individual buildings shall not exceed 88 feet in the R-1, R-5, and RM-10 districts and 120 feet in the RM-20 district.

2. Articulation. All buildings shall incorporate design features such as varying roof lines, offsets, balconies, projections (e.g., overhangs, porches, or similar features), recessed or covered entrances, window reveals, change in materials or textures (e.g., stone or faux stone, brick, wood or concrete-wood (shakes versus lap or board and batten siding, etc.)), or similar elements to break up large expanses of uninterrupted building surfaces or blank walls. Along the horizontal and vertical face of a structure, and on all building stories, such elements shall occur at least once every 20 feet, and each floor shall contain at least two elements, as generally shown in the figures in this section.

a. Recess (e.g., deck, patio, courtyard, entrance or similar feature) with a minimum depth of four feet;

b. Extension (e.g., floor area, deck, patio, entrance, overhang, or similar feature) projecting a minimum of two feet and running horizontally for a minimum length of four feet;

c. Offsets or breaks in roof elevation of two feet or greater in height; and/or

d. Change in materials, where one material is the predominant material on all elevations (e.g., where wood lap siding is the predominant material, brick, stone or faux stone could be selected for wainscoting or column accents; and wood or wood-appearance shingles could be used as accents on gable ends, etc.).

Figure 2.2.190.C(4) – Building Length and Articulation (Multifamily Housing Example)
[IMAGE]


3. Eyes on the Street. All building elevations visible from a street right-of-way shall provide prominent defined entrances, and a combination of windows, doors, porches, balconies, and terraces. A minimum of 40 percent of front (i.e., street-facing) elevations, and a minimum of 30 percent of side and rear building elevations, as a percentage of surface area and horizontal plane (lineal feet), shall meet this standard. Windows used to meet this standard shall be proportionately sized and evenly distributed, as generally shown in the figures above. The standard applies to each full and partial building story.

4. Repealed by Ord. 14-01.

5. Detailing and Design Variety. All buildings shall provide detailed design on all street-facing walls (i.e., those oriented 45 degrees or less from street lot line). Detailed design shall be provided by using at least five of the architectural features in subsections (C)(5)(a) through (u) of this section as is appropriate for the proposed building type and style. The applicant may select the desired elements. It is not within the approval body’s authority to prescribe specific elements except when the project is being reviewed as part of a planned development or conditional use request, or it is subject to the design performance option under subsection (C)(5)(v) of this section, only in these cases may the approval body require specific design elements or features, consistent with the purpose in subsection (A) of this section.

a. Dormers;

b. Gables (roof pitch minimum of 4:12);

c. Recessed entries;

d. Covered porch entries or portico;

e. Cupolas or towers;

f. Pillars or posts;

g. Eaves (minimum six-inch projection);

h. Off-sets in building face or roof (minimum 16 inches);

i. Window trim (minimum two inches wide);

j. Bay windows;

k. Balconies;

l. Decorative patterns on exterior finish (e.g., scales/shingles, wainscoting, ornamentation, and similar features);

m. Decorative cornice or pediment (e.g., for flat roofs);

n. Decorative shingles and molding on gable end;

o. Gable end truss;

p. Recessed garage;

q. Decorative accent (brick, stone, rock, etc.) on front facade;

r. Projected entries;

s. Window detail (mullions or other);

t. Pitched roof, minimum 4:12;

u. Shutters;

v. An alternative feature providing visual relief, similar to subsections (C)(5)(a) through (u) of this section, as approved through the design performance option under SDC 4.2.510.

Figure 2.2.190.C(5) – Examples of Architectural Elements (illustrative only)

 

Example 1
[IMAGE]


Figure 2.2.190.C(6) – Examples of Architectural Elements (illustrative only)
[IMAGE]


(Ord. 14-01 § 1 (Exh. A), 2014; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.2.200 Residential districts – Special use standards.

This section provides standards for specific land uses and building types, as identified in Table 2.2.110.A, that control the scale and compatibility of those uses within the residential districts. The standards in this section supplement (are in addition to and do not replace) the standards in SDC 2.2.100 through 2.2.190, and applicable building codes. This section applies to the following uses and building types, as specified in subsections (A) through (K) of this section:

• Accessory dwellings (subsection (A) of this section);

• Attached single-family (townhouses) and attached duplexes (subsection (B) of this section);

• Duplex in R-1 district (subsection (C) of this section);

• Bed and breakfast inns (subsection (D) of this section);

• Cottage cluster (subsection (E) of this section);

• Group living (residential care homes and facilities) (subsection (F) of this section);

• Home occupations (subsection (G) of this section);

• Manufactured homes on individual lots (subsection (H) of this section);

• Manufactured/mobile home parks (subsection (I) of this section);

• Multiple-family housing (subsection (J) of this section);

• Renewable energy facilities (subsection (K) of this section).

A. Accessory Dwelling (Attached, Separate Cottage, or Above Detached Garage). Accessory dwellings shall conform to all of the following standards:

1. Floor Area. Accessory dwellings shall not exceed 800 square feet of floor area if detached from the primary dwelling, or 40 percent of the primary unit, whichever is less. The unit can be a detached cottage, a unit attached to a garage, or in a portion of an existing house;

2. Exempt from Density. Accessory dwellings are exempt from the housing density standards of the residential districts, due to their small size and low occupancy levels;

3. Oregon Structural Specialty Code. The structure complies with the Oregon Structural Specialty Code;

4. Owner-Occupied. The primary residence or accessory dwelling shall be owner-occupied. Alternatively, the owner may appoint a member of his or her immediate family as a resident caretaker of one of the units and manager of the other unit;

5. One Unit. A maximum of one accessory dwelling unit is allowed per lot;

6. Development Standards. The dwelling shall conform to the lot standards in Table 2.2.120, except as modified below:

a. The height of a detached accessory dwelling (i.e., separate cottage) shall not exceed 22 feet.

b. The dwelling shall be set back not less than 20 feet from the front property line, seven feet from side property lines, and 20 feet from the rear property line. When the dwelling is accessed from an alley, the rear yard setback may be reduced to five feet.

c. The approval body may require a landscape hedge or fence be installed on the property line separating a detached accessory dwelling from an abutting single-family dwelling, unless the applicant and the owner of the abutting single-family dwelling agree in writing not to install the hedge or fence.

d. In order to maintain a consistent architectural character, similar building materials, architectural design and colors shall be used so that the accessory dwelling blends with the general appearance of the primary dwelling.

e. A parcel containing a primary dwelling unit and an accessory dwelling shall provide a minimum of two off-street parking spaces.

B. Attached Single-Family (Townhouses) and Two or More Duplexes Attached. Attached housing with three or more dwellings, and attached duplex housing (two or more consecutively attached duplexes), shall conform to the standards in subsections (B)(1) through (2) of this section, which are intended to control development scale; avoid or minimize impacts associated with traffic, parking, and design compatibility; and ensure management and maintenance of common areas.

1. Alley Access Required for Subdivisions Containing Townhomes or Duplexes. Subdivisions, or blocks within subdivisions, containing more than six consecutively attached single-family dwellings, or four or more attached duplexes (eight-plus dwelling units), shall provide vehicle access to all such lots and units from an alley or parking court, as described in SDC 3.1.200. Alley(s) and parking court(s) shall be created at the time of subdivision approval, and may be contained in private tracts or, if approved by the city, in public right-of-way, in accordance with SDC 3.4.100, Transportation standards, and Chapter 4.3 SDC, Land Divisions and Property Line Adjustments.

2. Common Areas. Any common areas (e.g., landscaping, private tracts, common driveways, private alleys, building exteriors, and/or similar common areas) shall be owned and maintained by a homeowners’ association or other legal entity. A copy of any applicable covenants, restrictions and conditions shall be recorded and provided to the city prior to building permit approval.

C. Duplex in R-1 District. Duplexes are allowed in the R-1 district, subject to the following standards which are intended to respect the single-family character of the R-1 district:

1. Floor Area. Total floor area for both dwellings shall not exceed 40 percent of lot area. For example, the maximum floor area (excluding garage space) allowed on an 8,000-square-foot lot is 3,200 square feet.

2. Driveway Access. On corner lots, each dwelling shall strive to have its primary entrance and garage opening, if any, oriented to a different street, meeting public works intersection distance standards. Where vehicular access cannot be taken from two different streets, the approval body may require a shared driveway providing access to both dwellings. On interior lots, shared driveways are preferred and may be required by the review body.

3. Maximum Number of Units. Up to 20 percent of new lots created in new subdivisions are permitted for duplex use and shall be identified as duplex lots on the final plat, with any percent larger than 20 percent requiring conditional use approval. Duplexes are permitted on one new lot in new partitions and shall be identified as a duplex lot on the final plat.

Duplexes may be permitted on an existing lot of record with approval of a conditional use application.

D. Bed and Breakfast Inns. Where bed and breakfast inns are allowed, they shall require approval through conditional use review (Type III) and conform to all of the following standards:

1. Accessory Use. The use must be accessory to a household already occupying the structure as a residence.

2. Maximum Size. In the R-1 and R-5 zones, four bedrooms for guests, and a maximum of eight guests are permitted per night; in the RM-10, RM-20 and DCF zones, 12 bedrooms are allowed for guests, with a maximum of 24 guests per night.

3. Length of Stay. Maximum length of stay is 28 days per guest; anything longer is classified as a hotel or commercial lodging. The bed and breakfast shall maintain a guest registry.

4. Employees. Up to two nonresident employees. There is no limit on resident employees.

5. Food Service. May be provided only to overnight guests of the business.

6. Owner-Occupied. Shall be owner-occupied.

7. Signs. Signs shall require a sign permit approved by the city of Silverton, and not exceed a total of four square feet of surface area on all sides.

8. Other Permit or Licensing Requirements. The owner of a bed and breakfast use shall be responsible for obtaining and complying with all other applicable permit and/or licensing requirements.

E. Cottage Cluster. Where a lot is developed with two or more detached dwellings, the development shall conform to the following standards which are intended to provide light, air, and open space for the occupants:

1. Vehicular Access. The furthermost distance from all dwellings to the closest abutting public street shall be no more than 150 feet, or an approved fire apparatus lane may be required to serve the development.

2. Central Green. The dwellings shall abut a central open space or green of not less than 400 square feet per dwelling (1,600 square feet for four dwellings). The green shall provide benches and other amenities for residents and have a minimum width of 20 feet, except where additional building separation is required under applicable building codes. A homeowners’ or condominium association shall be responsible for ongoing maintenance of the green and enforcement of any shared parking.

3. Parking. Two parking spaces are required for each dwelling, plus one space for each four units. The parking spaces for all dwellings shall be oriented away from the green. Parking may be provided in parking bays, garages or carports, attached or detached from the cottages. When provided in a parking lot, parking spaces shall be screened from abutting properties and walkways shall be provided, as specified under SDC 3.2.300.

4. Design Review. Design review shall be required for new cottage developments, including conversion of existing single-family homes to cottage developments, to ensure conformance with parking, landscaping, architectural review, and other code requirements.

F. Group Living (Residential Care Homes, Residential Care Facilities, and Residential Care Institutions). Group living includes a variety of residential living arrangements (see SDC 1.6.100(A)). Residential care provides lodging, care, treatment, or training for children and/or adults and is licensed by the state of Oregon. Residential care may provide residential care alone, or in conjunction with treatment and/or training, for six or fewer individuals (“homes”) or for seven to 15 individuals (“facilities”), or for 16 or more individuals (“institutions”), who need not be related. Staff persons required to meet state licensing requirements are not counted in the number of facility residents and need not be related to each other or the residents. Residential care homes and facilities consistent with ORS 197.660 through 197.670, and institutions consistent with ORS 443.400 through 443.455, shall comply with the following standards:

1. Licensing. All residential care homes, facilities, and institutions shall be duly licensed by the state of Oregon.

2. Parking. Parking in accordance with Chapter 3.3 SDC.

3. Design Review. Design review shall be required for new structures to be used as residential care facilities or institutions, to ensure compliance with the licensing, parking, and other requirements of this code.

G. Home Occupations. The purpose of this section is to encourage those who are engaged in small commercial ventures that could not necessarily be sustained if it were necessary to lease commercial quarters, or which, by the nature of the venture, are appropriate in scale and impact to be operated within a residence. Home occupations are encouraged for their contribution in reducing the number of vehicle trips often generated by conventional businesses:

1. Home occupations meeting the standards in subsection (G)(2) of this section are allowed outright, provided the owner has obtained and is in compliance with all applicable permit and licensing requirements, and all other uses and structures on the subject property are in conformance with all applicable city codes and requirements.

2. Standards for Home Occupations.

a. The use is carried on only by members of the family residing on the premises and not more than one outside employee or volunteer who does not exceed 40 hours per week.

b. The home occupation shall be continuously conducted in such a manner as not to create any public or private nuisance, including, but not limited to, offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat or glare resulting from the operation noticeable at or beyond the property line, fire hazards, or electronic, electrical or electromagnetic interference. In a residential zone noise associated with the home occupation of more than 55 dba at the lot line is prohibited.

c. The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling or any attached garage or within an unattached enclosed accessory building.

d. In residential zones, no structural alterations shall be made to the dwelling that would be inconsistent with future use of the building exclusively as a dwelling.

e. No alteration to or use of the premises shall be made such as to reduce the number of required on-site parking spaces.

f. In residential zones there shall be no display, other than the allowed sign, which would indicate from the exterior that the building is being used for any purpose other than a dwelling.

g. There is no visible outside storage of materials other than plant materials.

h. The use does not adversely affect the residential character of the neighborhood, nor infringe upon the right of neighboring residents to enjoy the peaceful occupancy of their homes.

i. There is not excessive generation of traffic created by the home occupation, including frequent deliveries and pickups by trucks or other vehicles.

j. All visits by suppliers or customers shall occur between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.

k. Construction businesses may be allowed when vehicles are screened by a sight-obscuring fence, wall or hedge or vehicles are parked in a building. All repairs and storage of materials shall occur within a building. There shall not be more than two vehicles associated with the home occupation parked on the premises at one time.

l. Where a home occupation involves deliveries one off-street loading space shall be provided. If visits by customers occur, two additional off-street parking spaces shall be provided if the street along the lot frontage does not provide paved area for at least two parallel parking spaces within 100 feet of the residence. During normal loading/unloading or customer parking periods, the off-street loading and parking shall be reserved exclusively for that use.

m. The residence shall not be used as headquarters or main office for assembly or dispatch of employees to other locations.

n. The rental of separate living quarters within a single-family residence is limited to not more than one bedroom which does not contain separate cooking facilities and which has a maximum occupancy of two persons.

o. Home occupations conducted as a for-profit business shall obtain business licenses in accordance with Chapter 5.12 SMC.

3. Prohibited Home Occupation Uses.

a. Auto body repair and painting.

b. Ongoing mechanical repair conducted outside of an entirely enclosed building.

c. Storage and/or distribution of toxic or flammable materials, and spray painting or spray finishing operations which involve toxic or flammable materials which in the judgment of the fire chief of the Silverton fire district pose a dangerous risk to the residence, its occupants, and/or surrounding properties.

d. Junk and salvage operations.

e. Storage and/or sale of fireworks in quantities judged by the fire chief of the Silverton fire district to be dangerous.

f. Marijuana processors, producers, retailers, wholesalers, dispensaries, by any individual or businesses for commercial purposes for which a license from the OLCC is required, or grow sites.

4. Enforcement.

a. Complaints regarding home occupations may be initiated by the city of Silverton or the public. Complaints must be related to noncompliance with the standards listed above.

b. The community development director shall make a determination of whether the alleged violation of the home occupation provisions has occurred. The determination will result in allowing the use to continue as it exists, ordering termination, or bringing into compliance with the home occupation standards.

c. If a notice of termination or an order to bring the use into compliance is given, the respondent shall be provided a reasonable time to cure or remedy the alleged infraction after the notice is given. The time allowed shall not be less than 24 hours, nor more than 30 days. Where there is an extreme hardship, additional time may be granted to the respondent. Notwithstanding the remedial time period specified above, if the community development director determines that the alleged infraction presents an immediate danger to the public health, safety or welfare, or that any continuance of the violation would allow the respondent to profit from the violation or would otherwise be offensive to the public at large, the director may require immediate remedial actions.

d. If the community development director is unable to serve a notice of infraction on the respondent or, if after such service the respondent refuses or is unable to remedy the infraction, the city may proceed to remedy the infraction as provided in SMC 15.08.790.

H. Manufactured Homes on Individual Lots. Manufactured homes are permitted on individual lots, subject to all of the following design standards. Exception: The following standards do not apply to units that were lawfully placed within the city prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this code.

1. Floor Plan. The manufactured home shall be multi-sectional and have an enclosed floor area of not less than 1,000 square feet;

2. Roof. The manufactured home shall have a pitched roof with a slope not less than three feet in height for each 12 feet in width (14 degrees);

3. Residential Building Materials. The manufactured home shall have exterior siding and roofing which in color, material and appearance are similar or superior to the exterior siding and roof material used on nearby residences (e.g., horizontal wood or wood-appearance siding is considered “superior” to metal siding and roofing);

4. Garages and Carports. A garage or carport shall be provided and be constructed of materials like those used on the house;

5. Thermal Envelope. The manufactured home shall be certified by the manufacturer to meet the thermal envelope requirements equivalent to those for a single-family dwelling constructed under the State Building Code. Evidence demonstrating that the manufactured home meets current energy efficiency standards is deemed to satisfy the exterior thermal envelope certification requirement. Additional manufacturer certification shall not be required;

6. Placement. The manufactured home shall be placed on an excavated and back-filled foundation and enclosed at the perimeter such that the manufactured home is located not more than 16 inches above grade, unless greater height is required as a result of the floodplain overlay provisions (Chapter 2.5 SDC) and complies with the minimum set-up standards of the adopted state Administrative Rules for Manufactured Dwellings, OAR chapter 918. Where the building site has a sloped grade, no more than 16 inches of the enclosing material shall be exposed on the uphill side of the home;

7. Foundation Skirt. The foundation area of the manufactured home shall be fully skirted with a decay-resistant material;

8. Prohibited. The manufactured home shall not be located in a designated historic district.

I. Manufactured/Mobile Home Parks. Manufactured/mobile home parks (not including recreational vehicles) are permitted on parcels of one acre or larger, subject to compliance with subsections (I)(1) through (5) of this section:

1. Permitted Uses. Single-family residences, manufactured home park manager’s office, home occupations, and accessory structures that are necessary for the operation and maintenance of the manufactured dwelling park (e.g., landscape maintenance).

2. Space. The minimum size pad or space for each dwelling is 2,500 square feet; provided, that the overall density of the park does not exceed 12 units per acre. Each space shall be at least 30 feet wide and 40 feet long, in accordance with ORS 446.100(c).

3. Setbacks and Dwelling Separation. The minimum setback between park structures and abutting properties is five feet. The minimum setback between park structures and public street right-of-way is 15 feet. At least a 10-foot separation shall be provided between all dwellings. Dwellings shall be placed a minimum of 14 feet apart where flammable or combustible fuel is stored between units. Park structures shall be placed no closer than five feet to a park street or sidewalk/pathway. An accessory structure shall not be located closer than six feet to any other structure or dwelling, except that a double carport or garage may be built which serves two dwellings. When a double carport/garage is built, the carport/garage shall be separated from all adjacent structures by at least three feet.

4. Perimeter Landscaping. When manufactured dwellings are oriented with their back or side yards facing a public right-of-way, the city may require installation of fencing and planting of a landscape buffer between the right-of-way and a manufactured home park for the privacy and security of residents or aesthetics of the streetscape.

5. Dwelling Design (For Parks Smaller Than Three Acres). Manufactured dwellings in parks smaller than three acres shall meet the following design standards, consistent with ORS 197.314(6):

a. The manufactured dwelling shall have a pitched roof with a slope not less than three feet in height for each 12 feet in width (14 degrees); and

b. The manufactured dwelling shall have exterior siding and roofing which in color, material and appearance are similar or superior to the exterior siding and roof material used on nearby residences (e.g., horizontal wood or wood-appearance siding is considered “superior” to metal siding and roofing);

c. Exception. Subsections (I)(5)(a) and (b) of this section do not apply to manufactured dwellings that existed within the city prior to November 5, 2008.

J. Multiple-Family Housing. Where multifamily housing is allowed, it shall conform to all of the following standards, which are intended to promote livability for residents and compatibility with adjacent uses. Figure 2.2.200.H provides a conceptual illustration of the requirements listed below.

1. Building Design and Separation. The architectural design standards under SDC 2.2.190 apply. In addition, when more than one multifamily building is built on a site, the buildings shall be separated from one another by a landscaped courtyard that is not less than 20 feet wide, unless the buildings are arranged end to end; in such case building separation may be reduced to 10 feet, provided no doorway or entry opens into the space between the buildings and applicable building codes are met.

2. Common Usable Open Space. Multiple-family developments shall incorporate not less than 15 percent common usable open space. Common usable open space shall be provided in accordance with all of the following criteria:

a. The site area is defined as the lot or parcel on which the development to be located, after subtracting any required dedication of street right-of-way and other land for public purposes (e.g., public park or school grounds, etc.);

b. In meeting the common usable open space standard, the multiple-family development shall contain one or more of the following: outdoor recreation area, protection of sensitive lands (e.g., trees preserved), playfields, outdoor playgrounds, outdoor sports courts, swimming pools, walking fitness courses, pedestrian amenities, or similar usable open space amenities for residents;

c. Historic buildings or landmarks within the project that are open to the public may count toward meeting the common open space requirements when approved by the planning commission;

d. All common open space areas shall have an average width that is not less than 20 feet and an average length that is not less than 20 feet;

e. The common open space requirement may be waived for a project that dedicates and improves a new public neighborhood park or playground of not less than one-quarter acre;

3. Private Open Space. Private open spaces shall be required for all ground-floor dwellings, and not less than 50 percent of all upper-story dwellings. “Private open space” shall be a patio, deck or other improved surface of not less than 48 square feet.

Figure 2.2.200.H – Examples of Multiple-Family Open Space
[IMAGE]


4. Trash Receptacles. Adequate solid waste storage and recycling facilities shall be provided. Trash receptacles shall be oriented away from building entrances, set back at least 10 feet from any public right-of-way and adjacent residences and shall be screened with an evergreen hedge or solid fence or wall of not less than six feet in height. Receptacles must be accessible to trash pick-up trucks.

K. Renewable Energy Facilities. Where renewable energy facilities are allowed, they shall require approval through conditional use review (Type III) and conform to all of the following standards:

1. Accessory Use. The use must be accessory to an allowed use within a residential district.

2. Maximum Height. Renewable energy facilities structures built according to the International Building Code shall be limited to a total height of 55 feet when approved by the planning commission and fire department.

3. Setbacks. Facilities which exceed 35 feet in height shall be set back a distance at least equal to the facility’s total height from all property lines.

4. Performance Standards. Renewable energy facilities shall not exceed the performance standards stated by SDC 2.4.170(C).

5. Landscaping. Screening and buffering for the facility shall follow the standards of SDC 3.2.300. When renewable energy facilities are allowed, the subject site shall be considered to be located within the IP district when applying the standards of the Screening and Buffering Matrix.

6. Exempt from Conditional Use Process. Installation and use of solar photovoltaic energy systems or solar thermal energy systems are exempt from the conditional use process and shall be processed as a Type I procedure if installation can be accomplished:

a. Without increasing the footprint of the structure.

b. Without increasing the peak height of the section of roofs with a slope of 6:12 or greater where the system is located.

c. This exemption does not apply to solar energy systems located on structures that are federally or locally designated historic buildings, on landmarks or conservation landmarks, and in a historic district or an area designated as a significant scenic resource unless the material used is designated anti-reflective or less than 11 percent reflective.

7. Other Permit or Licensing Requirements. The owner of the facility shall be responsible for obtaining and complying with all other applicable permit and/or licensing requirements.

L. Accessory Structure. Accessory structures shall conform to all of the following standards:

1. Floor Area. Accessory structures with a building footprint greater than 200 square feet and no more than 800 square feet are permitted under the Type I approval process. Accessory structures with a building footprint greater than 800 square feet may be permitted under the conditional use approval process.

2. Oregon Structural Specialty Code. The accessory structure shall comply with the Oregon Structural Specialty Code.

3. Development Standards. The structure shall conform to the lot standards in Table 2.2.120, except as modified below:

a. The height of an accessory structure shall not exceed 22 feet, unless permitted under the conditional use approval process.

b. Accessory structures with building footprints that exceed 200 square feet shall have exterior siding and roofing which in color, material and appearance are similar or superior to the exterior siding and roof material used on the primary residence.

c. The accessory structure shall be set back not less than 20 feet from the front property line, five feet from side property lines, and five feet from the rear property line.

M. Chickens. Where chickens are allowed, they shall conform to all of the following standards:

1. A lot shall be limited to the keeping of three or fewer chickens. Roosters are not permitted.

2. The chickens shall be housed in an enclosure behind the front facade of a house and a minimum of 10 feet from property lines and 20 feet from dwellings on adjacent properties.

3. The chickens shall be kept in a state that does not constitute a public nuisance, which includes, but is not limited to, chickens roaming at large, chickens kept in an unclean and unsanitary condition, and obnoxious smells and substances. If the community development director or designee determines a nuisance exists, the city shall follow the applicable regulations to abate the nuisance.

N. Transitional Shelter Communities. Transitional shelter communities shall comply with the following standards:

1. Transitional shelter communities are allowed on land that is currently in use as a religious institution or place of worship per SDC 1.6.490.

2. Shelter Unit Type. Shelter units shall be stick-built structures or prefabricated structures but may not have fabric walls or roofs (e.g., tents, yurts, and membrane structures). Shelter units may not be vehicles, residential trailers, or manufactured dwellings. Each shelter unit shall be detached from any other shelter unit. Design of the units shall be compatible with the surrounding area.

3. Maximum Building Floor Space. The maximum building floor space for each shelter unit is 200 square feet.

4. Maximum Number of Units. The maximum number of units per parcel is one for every 10,000 square feet of area of the site the units are to be located on, rounded to the nearest whole number, or four units, whichever is less.

5. Maximum Number of Sites. Only two sites in the city are allowed to be operated as a transitional shelter community at any one time.

6. Length of stay is limited to 18 months for each participant.

7. Bathrooms and Kitchens. Bathrooms and kitchens are prohibited in the shelter units. Instead, common permanent bathroom facilities available all hours of all days shall be provided for the residents and kitchen facilities may be provided to residents.

8. Utilities. Water service, sanitary sewer service, natural gas service, propane heaters, and generators are prohibited in the shelter units but are permitted in common facilities. Adequate trash and recycling service is to be provided in the vicinity of the use.

9. Storage. No outdoor storage is permitted, excluding bicycles. Residents shall be provided with enclosed, secure storage facilities for their belongings.

10. Fencing. The transitional shelter community shall be adequately fenced from abutting properties (does not include adjacent properties) with sight-obscuring fencing a minimum of six feet in height.

11. Minimum Rear and Side Yard Depth. The minimum rear and side yard depth is five feet, except that if the rear or side yard abuts a residential district, the minimum shall be 20 feet from the abutting lot line.

12. Minimum Structure Separation. Structures shall be separated from one another by a minimum of six feet.

13. Conditional Use. Transitional shelter communities shall be reviewed as a conditional use; however, no fee shall be charged for such review.

14. Periodic Review and Renewal. Transitional shelter communities shall require periodic review and renewal. The first periodic review and renewal shall be conducted six months from occupancy and shall follow the conditional use review procedure. If renewal is approved, periodic review and renewal shall be conducted annually from that point, following the conditional use review procedure.

15. Financial security (bonds, petitions, cash, etc.) to ensure the removal of the improvements should approval not be renewed shall be provided to the city prior to occupancy.

16. The person in charge (owner-occupant, tenant, lessee or person other than an owner who has possession and/or control of the property) shall provide local contact information, name and telephone number, to all property owners and residents within 500 feet of the site on an annual basis. The local contact person must be available to accept and immediately respond to telephone calls during business hours. Any change in local contact person must be reported to the city and property owners and residents within 500 feet of the site at least seven days prior to the date the change takes effect.

17. An operations, security, and case management plan for the transitional shelter community shall be submitted to the city at the time of application for review and approval.

18. Code of Conduct. The managing agency shall provide to all residents of the transitional shelter community a code of conduct for living at the transitional shelter community, including information regarding the noise disturbance standards of SMC 8.04.055, the chronic nuisance property standards of Chapter 8.06 SMC, and the Periodic Review and Renewal timetable. A copy of the code of conduct shall be submitted to the city at the time of application for review and approval.

19. Priority should be given to individuals that have been living within or near Silverton for the past year.

20. Occupancy shall be limited to one person per shelter unit. (Ord. 18-22 § 6, 2018; Ord. 16-01 § 2, 2016; Ord. 14-01 § 1 (Exh. A), 2014; Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


Chapter 2.3 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS

Sections:

2.3.100    Commercial districts – Purpose and applicability.

2.3.110    Commercial districts – Allowed land uses.

2.3.120    Commercial districts – Development standards.

2.3.130    Commercial districts – Zero setbacks and build-to line.

2.3.140    Commercial districts – Lot coverage and impervious surfaces.

2.3.150    Commercial districts – Building orientation and commercial block layout.

2.3.160    Commercial districts – Special use standards.

2.3.170    Commercial districts – Pedestrian amenities.

2.3.180    General commercial district design standards.

2.3.190    Reserved.

2.3.200    Downtown commercial district design standards.

2.3.210    Downtown commercial fringe district design standards.


2.3.100 Commercial districts – Purpose and applicability.

A. Purpose. This chapter provides three distinct commercial zones covering Silverton’s downtown commercial, downtown commercial fringe, and general commercial areas. The districts are intended to:

1. Maintain and enhance Silverton’s small-town character and historic resources;

2. Promote efficient use of land and urban services;

3. Create a mixture of land uses that encourages employment and housing options in close proximity to one another;

4. Provide formal and informal community gathering places and opportunities for socialization (i.e., along an active street front);

5. Encourage pedestrian-oriented development in all commercial areas;

6. Provide connections to and appropriate transitions between residential areas and commercial areas;

7. Apply land use and design standards to automobile-oriented and automobile-dependent uses that promote pedestrian safety, aesthetics, and economic development;

8. Provide for visitor accommodations and tourist amenities;

9. Reinforce downtown Silverton as the historic heart of the community.

a. Downtown Commercial District. The downtown commercial district is one of the zoning districts that implement the commercial comprehensive plan designation. The purpose of the downtown commercial district is to preserve and enhance Silverton’s downtown as the historic heart of the community. The DC district is intended as Silverton’s center of vital retail activity, services, entertainment, mixed use, civic buildings and public spaces. The historic character of the downtown, together with its pedestrian-oriented architecture, streets and public spaces, define the district.

b. Downtown Commercial Fringe District. The downtown commercial fringe district is one of the zoning districts that implement the commercial comprehensive plan designation. The purpose of the downtown commercial fringe district is to provide a transition between the DC district and adjacent neighborhoods and commercial areas. The DCF district is intended as a mixed use area, where commercial, residential and mixed use buildings co-exist and complement the downtown. Architecture reflecting the historic character of the area, and pedestrian-oriented streetscapes, define the DCF district.

c. General Commercial District. The general commercial district is one of the zoning districts that implement the commercial comprehensive plan designation. The purpose of the general commercial district is to provide for a wide variety of commercial and mixed uses. Design standards and options in the GC district are intended to ensure that buildings are appropriately oriented to streets and pedestrian facilities are provided in commercial developments. The GC district is Silverton’s location for larger format retailing, except where planned development overlays dictate otherwise.

B. Applicability. Commercial zoning districts shall be applied consistent with the land use designations on the city of Silverton comprehensive plan. The format of this section includes standards that apply to all commercial districts that are titled “commercial districts.” Standards that relate to a specific commercial district (DC, DCF and GC) are listed specifically under that district heading. Developments have an option to modify code standards through a Type III procedure by following the design review performance option per SDC 4.2.510. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.3.110 Commercial districts – Allowed land uses.

Table 2.3.110 identifies the land uses that are allowed in the commercial districts. The specific land use categories are described and uses are defined in Chapters 1.5 and 1.6 SDC.

Table 2.3.110 – Uses Permitted in Commercial Districts  

	Use Categories

(Examples of uses are in Chapter 1.6 SDC; definitions are in Chapter 1.5 SDC)	Downtown Commercial (DC)	General Commercial (GC)	Downtown Commercial (DCF)

	Residential Categories	 	 	 

	All residential uses (household living and group living) allowed, if:	 	 	 

	- Lawfully existing as of September 1, 2006 (SDC 2.3.160(E)), or	S	S	S

	- Replacement or rebuilding of residential structure conforming to the same footprint as previously existed as of November 5, 2008, or	 P	P	P

	- New dwelling, free-standing (not above commercial use), or	N	CU	P

	- New dwelling(s) built in conjunction with a permitted commercial use, including caretaker dwellings (residential use allowed above ground floor commercial only)	P	P	P

	Group living uses shall conform to the provisions in SDC 2.2.200.	 	 	 

	Commercial Categories	 	 	 

	Drive-up/drive-in/drive-through (drive-up windows, kiosks, ATMs, similar uses/facilities), per SDC 2.3.160(A)	CU+S	CU+S	CU+S

	Bed and breakfast inn, per SDC 2.2.200	P	P	P

	Educational services, not a school (e.g., tutoring or similar services)	P	P	P

	Entertainment, major event	CU	CU	N

	Mobile food vendor, per SDC 2.3.160(B)	S	S	S

	Offices	P	P	P

	Outdoor recreation, commercial	CU	CU	CU

	Parking lot (when not an accessory use)	CU	CU	CU

	Quick vehicle servicing or vehicle repair. (See also drive-up/drive-in/drive-through uses, per SDC 2.3.160)	 	 	 

	- Fully enclosed (e.g., garage)	CU	P	N

	- Not enclosed	N	CU	N

	Retail sales and service (See also drive-up uses, per SDC 2.3.160)	 	 	 

	- Fully enclosed (e.g., garage)	 P	P	P

	- Not enclosed (other than accessory uses)	N	N	N

	- Eating establishments as an accessory use, enclosed in same building with primary use	P	P	P

	- Eating establishment not enclosed, per SDC 2.3.160(C)	 S	S	S

	Self-service storage	N	CU	N

	Industrial Categories	 	 	 

	Industrial service (See also drive-up uses)	 	 	 

	- Fully enclosed (e.g., office)	N	P	CU

	- Not enclosed	N	CU	N

	Manufacturing and production	 	 	 

	- Fully enclosed	CU	P	CU

	- Not enclosed	N	CU	N

	Warehouse and freight movement	N	CU	N

	Waste-related	N	N	N

	Wholesale sales	 	 	 

	- Fully enclosed	N	P	CU

	- Not enclosed	N	CU	N

	Institutional Categories	 	 	 

	Basic utilities 	P	P	P

	Renewable energy facilities	 	 	 

	- Accessory uses	CU + S	CU + S	CU + S

	- Primary uses	N	CU + S	N

	Nonrenewable energy facilities	N	N	N

	Funeral services	P	P	P

	Cemeteries, mausoleums, and crematoriums	CU	CU	CU

	Colleges	P	P	P

	Community service	CU	CU	CU

	Daycare, adult or child daycare; family daycare (16 or fewer children) under ORS 657A.250	CU	CU	CU

	Jails and detention facilities	N	CU	N

	Parks and open space 	P	P	P

	Religious institutions and houses of worship	 	 	 

	- Lawfully existing as of November 5, 2008	P	P	P

	- New facilities	CU	CU	CU

	- Transitional shelter communities, per the standards in SDC 2.2.200(N)	CU	CU	CU

	Schools	 	 	 

	- 20 or fewer students	P	P	P

	- More than 20 students    	CU	CU	CU

	Other Categories	 	 	 

	Accessory structures (with a primary permitted use)	P	P	P

	Agriculture – Animals	N	N	N

	Agriculture – Nurseries and similar horticulture (see also wholesale and retail uses)	CU	CU	N

	Agriculture – Marijuana producers and grow sites enclosed, per SDC 2.4.160(B)	N	CU	N

	Agriculture – Marijuana producers and grow sites nonenclosed	N	N	N

	Historic building alterations, per Chapter 3.5 SDC	S	S	S

	Mining	N	N	N

	Radio frequency transmission facilities and telecommunication towers and antennas, except those allowed as ancillary to a primary permitted use	N	CU	N

	Rail lines and utility corridors, except existing facilities on nonzoned railroad properties are permitted	CU	CU	CU

	Temporary uses (limited to “P” and “CU” uses), per SDC 4.9.100	P/CU	P/CU	P/CU

	Transportation facilities (operation, maintenance, preservation, and construction in accordance with the city’s transportation system plan)	P	P	P 

	Key:

	P = Permitted, subject to land use review or design review (Chapter 4.2 SDC). Other uses may be allowed with a planned development

	S = Permitted with standards (SDC 2.3.160). Other uses may be allowed with a planned development

	CU = Conditional use required (Chapter 4.4 SDC). Other uses may be allowed with a planned development

	N = Not permitted

(Ord. 18-22 § 4, 2018; Ord. 16-01 § 4, 2016; Ord. 14-01 § 1 (Exh. A), 2014; Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.3.120 Commercial districts – Development standards.

The development standards in Table 2.3.120 apply to all new structures, buildings, and development, and major remodels, in the commercial districts. In addition to meeting the following standards, project proposals must be reviewed through design review.

Table 2.3.120 – Development Standards for Commercial Districts  

	Standard	DC	GC	DCF

	Minimum Lot Area* (square feet)	 	 	 

	*Development must conform to lot width, depth, yard setback and coverage standards.	1,600 sq. ft.	6,000 sq. ft.	1,600 sq. ft.

	Minimum Lot Width	Not limited	Not limited	20 ft.

	Minimum Lot Depth	Not limited	Not limited	80 ft.

	Building/Structure Height and Footprint	 	 	 

	Maximum height	55 ft.	45 ft.	35 ft.

	Maximum building footprint with a single user	45,000 sq. ft.	45,000 sq. ft.	45,000 sq. ft.

	Fences and Walls – Maximum Height at Street Right-of-Way. See also SDC 3.1.200(N), Vision Clearance; and 3.2.500, Fences and walls)	42 inches	42 inches	42 inches

	Impervious Surface (Maximum)	100%	90%	90%

	Landscape Area (Minimum)

Landscape area may include plant areas and some nonplant/hardscape areas, as allowed under SDC 3.2.300(D).	0%	10%	10%

	Minimum Setbacks:	 	 	 

	(See also SDC 2.3.150(E), Design Standards for Properties Adjacent to North 1st, North Water and C Streets; and Section 2.3.160(A), Drive-Up/Drive-In/Drive-Through Facilities.)	Per building code	Per building code	Per building code, except 5 ft. side yard and 10 ft. rear yard (minimum) when abutting residential district

	Build-To Line (feet)*:	 	 	 

	(See also SDC 2.3.150(E), Design Standards for Properties Adjacent to North 1st, North Water and C Streets; and SDC 2.3.160(A), Drive-Up/Drive-In/Drive-Through Facilities.)	0 ft.	0 – 20 ft. (per SDC 2.3.150(E))	5 – 20 ft.

	New Buildings Only: At least one primary building entrance shall be built no farther from the street right-of-way than the build-to line; except where a greater setback is required for a planned street improvement, then the build-to line increases proportionately.	 	 	 

	The build-to line may also be increased through design review when pedestrian amenities are provided between a primary building entrance and the street right-of-way. (See also SDC 2.3.170 and 2.3.180.)	 	 	 

	Inadequate Right-of-Way: On streets with inadequate right-of-way, the primary building entrance shall be built not farther from the intended street right-of-way. These streets include, but are not limited to, Lane, McClaine, 3rd, and Park between 2nd and 3rd.	 	 	 

	*Additional street setbacks beyond those required by SDC 2.3.120 may apply, as required by the city of Silverton transportation system plan (TSP), or the TSP of other road authority(ies), for the purpose of maintaining a clear area for planned future street improvements. 

(Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.3.130 Commercial districts – Zero setbacks and build-to line.

A. Zero Setbacks and Build-To Line – Purpose; Fire Code; and Clear Vision. The setbacks and build-to lines, as provided in Table 2.3.120, are intended to encourage pedestrian-oriented development, while providing more flexibility in site design than what is possible with large setbacks. With buildings placed close to the street, a development affords good access for emergency service providers in the case of a fire or other emergency. Where no minimum setback is required, all structures and buildings shall conform to the vision clearance standards in Chapter 3.1 SDC and the applicable fire and building codes (e.g., for attached structures, fire walls, and related requirements).

B. Setback Yards – Reverse Frontage Lots. Buildings on reverse frontage lots (through lots), or lots that front onto more than one street, shall be required to meet the build-to line standard on only one street. The approval body may require that the build-to line apply to the highest-order street. Reverse frontage lots are subject to the fence height and setback requirements in this section and the landscape buffer requirements in Chapter 3.2 SDC. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.3.140 Commercial districts – Lot coverage and impervious surfaces.

Impervious surfaces are regulated under Table 2.3.120. Lot coverage is not limited; provided, that impervious surface limitations are met. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.3.150 Commercial districts – Building orientation and commercial block layout.

A. Purpose. This section orients buildings close to streets to promote pedestrian-oriented development where walking is encouraged, and to discourage automobile-dominated development. Placing commercial storefronts and other buildings close to the street also encourages crime prevention, natural surveillance or security, and safety by having more “eyes on the street.”

B. Applicability. This section applies to all new buildings and major remodels that are subject to design review.

Figure 2.3.150.C(1) – Building Orientation
[IMAGE]


C. Building Orientation Standards. Developments subject to this section shall have their buildings oriented to a street, as generally shown in Figure 2.3.150.C(1). All of the following criteria must be met:

1. Compliance with the setback and build-to line standards in SDC 2.3.130, where applicable. The build-to line may be set back to provide additional space for pedestrian amenities between a building and its adjoining street. In the DC zone, the maximum setback is five feet.

2. Except as provided in subsections (C)(4) and (5) of this section, all buildings shall have at least one primary building entrance (i.e., a dwelling entrance, tenant entrance, lobby entrance, or breezeway/courtyard entrance) facing an adjoining street (i.e., within 45 degrees of the street property line), or if the building entrance is turned more than 45 degrees from the street (i.e., front door is on a side elevation), the primary entrance shall not be more than 60 feet in the GC district, except to provide pedestrian amenities; a walkway shall connect the primary entrance to the sidewalk. In the DCF zones, all buildings with street frontage must have at least one primary building entrance facing an adjoining street. Additionally, street-facing facades of buildings shall provide an entrance at least every 45 feet along the street.

3. In the DC and DCF district, off-street parking, driveways, and other vehicle areas shall not be placed between buildings and the street(s) to which they are oriented. Off-street parking shall be oriented internally to the site, with parking bays separated by landscaping, as generally shown in Figure 2.3.150.C(2). Bays shall contain no more than 10 parking spots each, as an average over all contiguous parking bays on the same parcel.



Figure 2.3.150.C(2) – Building Orientation with Internal Parking
[IMAGE]


4. In the GC district, the building orientation standard may be met with vehicle areas allowed between the street right-of-way and a building’s primary entrance when the approval body finds that all of the following criteria are met:

a. Placing vehicle areas between the street right-of-way and the building’s primary entrance will not adversely affect pedestrian safety, comfort or convenience, based on the distance from the street sidewalk to the building entrance, projected vehicle traffic volumes, and available pedestrian walkways;

b. The proposed vehicle areas are limited to one drive aisle of not more than 20 feet in width with adjoining bays of not more than eight consecutive parking spaces per bay (including ADA accessible spaces) on the side(s) of the drive aisle. (The intent of which is to create a drive aisle that is street-like, and to break up parking into small bays with landscaping); and

c. The building’s primary entrance is connected to an adjoining street by a pedestrian crosswalk as specified under SDC 3.1.300.

5. Where a development contains multiple buildings and there is insufficient street frontage to which buildings can be oriented, a primary entrance may be oriented to a plaza or courtyard. When oriented in this way, the primary entrance(s) plaza or courtyard shall be connected to the street by a pedestrian walkway meeting the standards in SDC 3.1.300.

D. Block Layout (Pedestrian-Orientation) Standard. Developments containing more than one building, including commercial subdivisions with outlying commercial pads, shall meet all of the following standards:

1. The site shall be configured into blocks having frontage onto streets, interior parking courts (as generally shown in Figure 2.3.150.C(2)), or shopping streets (as generally shown in Figure 2.3.150.C(3)). All parking courts and shopping streets shall contain on-street parking bays (parallel or angled parking), street- or plaza-facing building entrances and sidewalks with street trees, pedestrian lighting and furnishings (benches and trash receptacles) where appropriate;

2. In the GC district, blocks shall not exceed 400 feet in length, and shall have a perimeter not exceeding 1,400 feet. Pedestrian walkways inside buildings are not counted as block edges. In the DC and DCF districts, blocks shall not generally exceed 250 feet in length and 160 feet in width, in keeping with the historic block pattern in the downtown;

3. Pedestrian pathways shall connect the street right-of-way to building entrances and the interior parking courts between buildings to ensure reasonably safe, direct, and convenient access to building entrances and off-street parking.

Figure 2.3.150.C(3) – Shopping Street Example
[IMAGE]


E. Properties Adjacent to North 1st, North Water and C Streets. This section applies only to properties designated GC. For properties in the DC and DCF districts, the standards of SDC 2.3.150(A) through (D) apply. A wide variety of site conditions exist along North 1st, North Water and C Streets, making it difficult to apply uniform design standards to the properties designated general commercial. Some buildings are placed right up to the highway, while others are set back behind parking. Therefore, the site layout should be designed to accomplish the following objectives:

1. Improve safety for all modes of transportation;

2. Better integrate land use and transportation planning;

3. Protect and enhance aesthetic values;

4. Promote human-scale development that is compatible with Silverton’s small-town character.

F. Site Design in Commercial Districts. In determining the specific access, circulation, building orientation, and street frontage standards that apply to a particular project, the applicant, in consultation with the community development director, shall select from the following prototypes:

Table 2.3.150.F – Site Design in Commercial Districts  

	Site Design Performance Standards (see pages that follow)	Downtown Commercial (DC)	General Commercial (GC)	Downtown Commercial Fringe (DCF)

	1. Corner property 	P	P	P

	2. Front entrance at street 	P	P	P

	3. Building at street with side entrance 	N	P	N

	4. Building setback with side entrance 	N	S	N

	5. Parking in front with joint access and shared driveway 	N	S	N

	6. Parking in front without joint access or shared driveway 	N	S	N

	7. Property with grade change; retaining wall between sidewalk and building 	S	S	S

	Key:

	P = Permitted, subject to land use or design review (Chapter 4.2 SDC)

	S = Subject to community development director approval (see criteria under each standard)

	N = Not permitted

1. Corner Property (Performance Standard No. 1). On corner properties buildings shall be oriented to the corner, with vehicle access provided from a side street. Primary building entrances shall be located within 20 feet of a street and the building shall meet transparency and weather protection standards along all street-facing elevations. If the primary building entrance is more than 20 feet from the sidewalk, then a 10-foot landscape buffer or civic space is required between the building and sidewalk.


[IMAGE]


2. Front Entrance at Street (Performance Standard No. 2). On noncorner parcels, the building shall be oriented to the street and have a primary entrance placed at street edge or within 20 feet of edge; this distance may be increased only where a civic space abuts the sidewalk and primary building entrance and no parking is allowed between the building and highway. The building shall meet weather protection and transparency standards along all street-facing elevations.


[IMAGE]


3. Building at Street with Side Entrance (Performance Standard No. 3). Where the community development director determines that a building may have its primary entrance placed on a side elevation not facing a street, a primary building entrance shall be placed within 40 feet of a street right-of-way and a pedestrian pathway shall connect the entrance directly to the right-of-way. There shall be no parking located between the building and the subject street. The building shall meet weather protection and transparency standards on all street-facing elevations.


[IMAGE]


4. Building Setback with Side Entrance (Performance Standard No. 4). Where the community development director determines that a building may be oriented to an internal parking area and it may have its primary entrance placed on a side elevation, the following standards shall apply: All street-facing elevations and elevations on which a primary building entrance is placed shall meet the transparency and weather protection requirements of this chapter. There shall be no parking placed between the building and subject street; buildings with primary entrances more than 40 feet from the highway edge need not meet weather protection and transparency standards along the street frontage; provided, that a landscape buffer of 20 to 30 feet in width shall be required. Plantings shall create horizontal and vertical screening of any large wall not meeting the transparency standard of this chapter in the GC and DCF only.


[IMAGE]


5. Parking in Front (Performance Standard No. 5). Where the community development director finds that multiple buildings and/or building pads should be set back from the street behind surface parking and oriented to internal driveways instead of streets, such driveways shall be designed as “shopping streets.” Shopping streets shall contain, at a minimum, on-street parking, sidewalks/walkways with raised curbs, street trees and pedestrian lighting, as generally shown below. Such buildings may have their primary entrance(s) placed along the shopping street instead of a public street; in such cases, primary building entrances shall be within 10 feet of a walkway (eight-foot minimum width), except where a civic space (e.g., plaza or outdoor seating area) is provided the setback may be increased accordingly. Surface parking shall be set back and screened from the street behind a 20-foot minimum landscape buffer. Buildings shall meet the weather protection and transparency standards of this chapter along all shopping streets.


[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]


6. Parking in Front without Shopping Street (Performance Standard No. 6). Where the community development director finds that it is necessary to place surface parking between a building’s primary entrance and the street, and it is not possible to develop an internal shopping street as described above, e.g., due to the small size of a property, its configuration, or other physical site constraints, then the following standards shall apply: All surface parking and internal drives shall be set back at least 20 feet from the street behind a landscape buffer; adequate vehicle queuing distances shall be provided between the street and all parking areas, subject to design review; a six-foot minimum width walkway shall connect the primary building entrance to a public sidewalk with four-foot minimum width planter strips placed between such walkways and abutting driveways; raised or textured paving with ADA wheelchair-accessible ramps shall be provided at all pedestrian crossings of vehicle areas; and provisions shall be made for potential future driveway extensions as adjacent properties develop or street connections can be made.


[IMAGE]


7. Property with Grade Change (Performance Standard No. 7). Where retaining walls are required adjacent to a public right-of-way, they shall incorporate rusticated concrete block, natural stone, or striated or battered concrete with a natural stone color. Applications for design review shall include proposed retaining wall detail drawings.
[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]


(Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.3.160 Commercial districts – Special use standards.

This section provides special use standards for those uses so designated in Table 2.3.110.

A. Drive-Up/Drive-In/Drive-Through Uses and Facilities. When drive-up or drive-through uses and facilities are allowed, they shall conform to all of the following standards, which are intended to calm traffic, and protect pedestrian comfort and safety:

1. Access to the drive-up/drive-through facility shall be from an alley, interior access way, (e.g., parking area) driveway, and/or private or public street when the other alternatives are not practicable. When access is provided from a public or private street, the drive-up/drive-in/drive-through facility shall be located on the site such that vehicles waiting to access the drive-up/drive-in/drive-through facility are not blocking the free flow of travel on the street, nor is the street being used to accommodate vehicles waiting to use the facility.

2. None of the drive-up, drive-in or drive-through facilities (e.g., driveway queuing areas, windows, teller machines, service windows, kiosks, drop-boxes, or similar facilities) are located within 20 feet of a street and shall not be oriented to a street corner. (Walk-up-only teller machines and kiosks may be oriented to a street or placed adjacent to a street corner).

3. Drive-up/drive-in queuing areas shall be designed so that vehicles do not obstruct a driveway, fire access lane, walkway, or public right-of-way.

4. The minimum spacing of drive-up, drive-in, and drive-through facilities receiving access onto the same street is 400 linear feet along that street’s block face (same side of street).

5. For restaurants, at least one designated parking space immediately beyond the service window, or other satisfactory methods, to allow customers requiring excessive waiting time to receive their food while parked.

6. Commercial establishments providing drive-up window facilities that do not provide for walk-in customer service (i.e., not allowing transactions within the structure) shall provide for safe, convenient and readily accessible exterior walk-up window service. At least two parking spaces shall be provided allowing convenient access to the walk-up service window.

7. The design of vehicle stacking areas shall allow customers’ vehicles to leave the stacking line for emergency reasons.

8. On-site parking for walk-in customers shall be designed to be readily accessible to all public entrances to the building and to provide safe, convenient access.

9. Establishments having drive-up window facilities shall have sufficient stacking area to ensure that public rights-of-way and driveways are not obstructed, as determined by the director of public works.

10. The communication sound system shall not exceed a measurement of 55 decibels at the adjoining property line.

B. Mobile Food Vendors. Where mobile food vendors are allowed, they shall conform to all of the following standards, which are intended to protect the public health, safety and welfare. The owner shall submit a site plan drawn to scale with supporting written information to the director demonstrating compliance with all of the following criteria. A mobile food vendor shall not commence operations until the city has issued approval in writing.

1. “Mobile food vendor,” for the purposes of this section, means any kiosk, shed, shelter, trailer, vehicle, wagon, or other similar device which is used for the purpose of preparing, processing, or converting food for immediate consumption as a drive-in, drive-through, curb, or walk-up service that remains in or on any one site or tax lot.

2. The use shall be limited to the preparation and/or sale of food and beverages.

3. The use shall not be conducted within public rights-of-way unless a special permit is issued by the city for this purpose.

4. The use shall be conducted on private property only with the written consent of the property owner.

5. Business operations shall be conducted between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.

6. The use shall conform to all setback standards, vision clearance requirements and other standards of the district in which it is located.

7. The use shall not block driveways, entrances or parking aisles, or be placed in a landscaped planter required by this code.

8. Signs associated with the use shall be limited to six square feet total surface area of all sign faces including menu boards.

9. A trash receptacle shall be located within 10 feet of the use, which shall be maintained by the owner or operator of the mobile food vendor.

10. The combined floor area of the use, including all enclosed structures and decks, shall not exceed 128 square feet.

11. The operator of the use shall possess valid county certification of compliance with health and sanitation standards as applicable.

12. A city transient merchant permit is required pursuant to Chapter 5.40 SMC.

C. Outdoor Seating Areas within the Public Right-of-Way. Where outdoor seating areas are desired by restaurants or other business establishments, they must comply with the following procedures and criteria:

1. Submit a written request to the community development department identifying the area involved, a site plan of the area, a description of the operating characteristics of the proposed use or other pertinent information.

2. Accompanying the written request shall be a completed city of Silverton application to occupy the right-of-way and the associated review fee.

3. The community development director within 45 days of receipt will review the application and make a final decision.

4. In some cases the request may be forwarded to the city council for final approval.

5. Approval may be given provided the community development director or city council determine there will be no negative impact to the public, the right-of-way or nearby businesses or property owners.

6. Compliance with other applicable provisions of the city’s municipal code, including permits for using the public right-of-way where sidewalk cafes are allowed.

7. Design review approval where the outdoor eating area includes seating for more than eight patrons.

8. Where adjacent or abutting a residential use and/or zoning district, the outdoor eating area shall only be allowed between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.

9. The outdoor eating area shall contain a trash receptacle within 10 feet of the use, which shall be maintained by the owner or operator of the restaurant.

10. At least four feet of open passageway is maintained on the sidewalk.

D. Renewable Energy Facilities. Where renewable energy facilities are allowed, they shall require approval through conditional use review (Type III) and conform to all of the following standards:

1. Primary or Accessory Use. The use may be primary or accessory to an allowed use within the general commercial district. Renewable energy facilities may only be accessory to an allowed use with the downtown commercial and downtown commercial fringe districts.

2. Maximum Height. Renewable energy facilities structures built according to the International Building Code shall be limited to a total height of 55 feet within the DC district, 65 feet within the GC district, and 55 feet within the DCF district when approved by the planning commission and fire department.

3. Setbacks. Facilities which exceed 35 feet in height within the DCF district shall be set back a distance at least equal to the facility’s total height from all property lines. Facilities within the DC and GC districts shall meet the standard setbacks of those districts.

4. Performance Standards. Renewable energy facilities shall not exceed the performance standards stated by SDC 2.4.170(C).

5. Landscaping. Screening and buffering for the facilities within DC and GC districts shall follow the standards of SDC 3.2.300. When renewable energy facilities are allowed within the DCF district, the subject site shall be considered to be located within the IP district when applying the standards of the Screening and Buffering Matrix.

6. Other Permit or Licensing Requirements. The owner of the facility shall be responsible for obtaining and complying with all other applicable permit and/or licensing requirements.

E. Special Status for Single-Family Residences in Commercial and Industrial Districts. Notwithstanding the restrictions of any other provisions of the Silverton Municipal Code, all single-family dwellings built before September 1, 2006, on commercial or industrially zoned properties are considered as pre-existing conforming uses. If any building on these properties is substantially destroyed, as defined in Chapter 5.2 SDC, it may be rebuilt to the same size as existed when it was destroyed, subject to the regulations of any applicable overlay district. If a pre-existing single-family residence is converted to a permitted commercial, office or industrial use, the special status granted here is rescinded, and the use of the property must thereafter conform to the requirements of the applicable zoning district. New dwellings may be established only in accordance with the provisions in the applicable zoning district.

People residing in a dwelling unit in a commercial district intending to start a commercial use may request the commercial use be classified as a home occupation use provided the commercial use is accessory to the residential use and the home occupation standards of SDC 2.2.200(G) are met. (Ord. 14-01 § 1 (Exh. A), 2014; Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.3.170 Commercial districts – Pedestrian amenities.

A. Purpose and Applicability. This section provides standards for pedestrian amenities when pedestrian amenities are required as part of new developments and major remodels, and when pedestrian amenities are provided to meet the requirements of other code sections. Pedestrian amenities serve as informal gathering places for socializing, resting, and enjoyment along street frontages, and they support the community’s public safety and transportation objectives through natural surveillance and walkability.

B. Standards. All new developments and major remodels in the GC and DC zones shall provide one or more of the “pedestrian amenities” as generally illustrated in Figure 2.3.170.B. Pedestrian amenities may be provided within a street furnishing zone, building frontage zone, or plaza, or within the pedestrian through zone, as shown in Figure 2.3.170.B; provided, that applicable minimum clearance and ADA standards are met. Use of the public right-of-way requires approval by the roadway authority.

Figure 2.3.170.B – Examples of Pedestrian Amenities
[IMAGE]


1. New developments and major remodels in the GC zone may use the elements listed below to fulfill this standard:

a.  A plaza, courtyard, square or extra-wide sidewalk next to the building entrance with a minimum width of five feet.

b. Sitting space (e.g., dining area, benches, garden wall or ledges between the building entrance and sidewalk) with a minimum of 16 inches in height and 30 inches in width.

c. Public art that incorporates seating (e.g., fountain, sculpture).

d. Transit amenity, such as bus shelter, per the standards of the transit service provider, as applicable.

e. Decorative sidewalk paving.

f. Planters.

g. Covered entryway with seating.

2. New developments and major remodels in the DC zone may use the following amenities and streetscape elements identified in the downtown master plan to fulfill this standard, including:

a. A plaza, courtyard, square or extra-wide sidewalk next to the building entrance with a minimum width of five feet;

b. Sitting space (i.e., dining area, benches, garden wall or ledges between the building entrance and sidewalk) with a minimum of 16 inches in height and 30 inches in width;

c. Public art that incorporates seating (e.g., fountain, sculpture);

d. Transit amenity, such as a bus shelter, per the standards of the transit service provider, as applicable;

e. Preferred streetscape furnishings where applicable, including street lamp, bike rack, street bench, crosswalk, bollard, trash can, kiosk, tree grate and curb extension. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.3.180 General commercial district design standards.

A. Purpose. This section promotes the public health, safety, and welfare by requiring at least a minimum level of design on every building in the general commercial district. Design is important to identifying Silverton as a unique place with successful commercial areas. The design standards are intended to:

1. Encourage architecture that is consistent with the character of Silverton.

2. Ensure that new development creates a close, intimate human scale and architectural designs address all four sides of a building.

3. Encourage the use of contextually appropriate materials, textures and colors.

4. Promote pedestrian-oriented uses by orienting buildings and their entrances to the street or to civic spaces abutting the street.

5. Create vibrant civic spaces (e.g., plazas, public art, cafe seating areas, etc.) oriented to take advantage of southern exposures; civic spaces should help identify the village, create intrigue, and offer weather protection and comfort to pedestrians while adding value to adjoining properties.

6. Break down large building masses and provide visual interest along the street.

7. Balance rhythm and continuity – encourage creativity in the design of building elevations, rooflines and facade elements.

8. Treat corner lots as focal points with vertical elements, public art, seating, and other design features.

9. Provide weather protection where commercial and mixed-use buildings abut the street.

B. Applicability. The following standards are applied through design review prior to building permit review. The applicant is required to demonstrate that the standards are met by complying with the criteria under each standard. Remodels of, or additions to, designated historic residential structures are subject to the requirements under Chapter 3.5 SDC. The provisions of this section may be adjusted through the design performance option in SDC 4.2.510.

C. Pedestrian Orientation. The design of all buildings on a site shall support a safe and attractive pedestrian environment. This standard is met when the approval body finds that all of the criteria in subsections (C)(1) through (8) of this section are met. Alternatively, the approval body may approve an alternate design under SDC 4.2.510 through a Type III procedure upon finding that the proposed design equally or better achieves the above standard.

1. The building orientation standards under SDC 2.3.150 are met;

2. Primary building entrances shall open directly to the outside and, if not abutting a street, shall have walkways connecting them to the street sidewalk; every building shall have at least one primary entrance that does not require passage through a parking lot or garage to gain access;

3. Corner buildings (i.e., buildings within 20 feet of a corner as defined by the intersecting curbs) shall have corner entrances, or shall provide at least one entrance within 20 feet of the street corner or corner plaza;

4. At least 50 percent of a building’s street-facing elevation(s) shall be located at the build-to line or closer to the street; build-to lines are prescribed by SDC 2.3.120;

5. Ground floor windows or window displays shall be provided along at least 50 percent of the building’s (ground floor) street-facing elevation(s). Design elements such as large, regularly spaced and similarly shaped windows with window trim, and with transom or clerestory windows above building entrances, are counted; windows and display boxes shall be integral to the building design and not mounted to an exterior wall;

6. Windows shall cover no more than 90 percent of the ground floor facade length, and shall not begin less than 18 inches or more than 30 inches above the walkway (except transom windows). Second and third story windows shall match the vertical and horizontal character of ground level windows;

7. Street-facing elevations shall be designed with weather protection, such as awnings, canopies, overhangs, or similar features. Such weather protection shall project a minimum of four feet and a maximum of eight feet over sidewalks or other pedestrian space.

a. Awnings shall be flat or sloping with a maximum slope of 1.5:1. Awnings shall be made of metal, wood, canvas or similar materials. Rounded bubble or plastic awnings are prohibited unless the plastic is rigid sheet.

b. Awnings shall not be internally illuminated. However, lighting which is intended to provide illumination to the walkway and signage is permitted provided the awning material is opaque;

8. Drive-up and drive-through facilities, when allowed, shall conform to SDC 2.3.160.

D. Compatibility. All new buildings and major remodels shall be designed consistent with the architectural context in which they are located. This standard is met when the approval body finds that all of the criteria in subsections (D)(1) through (7) of this section are met. Alternatively, the applicant may propose different design elements as provided under SDC 4.2.510, Design review – Adjustments (performance option).

1. There is continuity or effective transitions in building sizes between new and existing buildings;

2. A standardized prototype or franchise design and color scheme shall be modified if necessary to meet the provisions of this section;

3. The ground floor and upper floor elevations and architectural detailing are compatible with adjacent commercial buildings;

4. Roof Pitch, Materials and Parapets.

a. Pitched (gabled or hipped) roofs are required to have minimum pitch of 4:12. Pitched roof surfaces visible from an abutting public street shall provide a secondary roof detail every 30 feet (minimum two), such as a dormer, decorative brackets, exposed beams, etc. Visible roof materials must be wood shingle or architectural grade composition shingle, slate, vinyl, or concrete tile. Metal with standing or batten seam may also be used conforming to the Silverton color palette.

b. Parapet roofs shall have steps and detailed coursing shall be provided on those elevations visible from an abutting public street. Parapets shall be varied so that the length of a parapet does not exceed 30 feet without a change in the parapet height of at least two feet or as necessary to hide rooftop equipment (minimum two). A decorative cornice shall be provided along the elevations visible from an abutting street. Parapet corners shall be stepped and the parapet be designed to emphasize the center or primary entrance(s), unless the primary entrance is at the corner of the building. Decorative cornices in excess of three feet tall that include plane separation and color variation may be provided in lieu of the change in parapet height.

c. Mansard roofs and barrel roofs are generally not permitted as the primary roof type, unless approved by the planning commission through SDC 4.2.510.

d. Back-lit or internally illuminated roofs are prohibited;

5. There is continuity in the rhythm of windows and doors on the proposed building(s);

6. The relationship of buildings to public spaces, such as streets, plazas, other areas, and public parking, including on-street parking, is strengthened by the proposed building(s);

7. Materials, Color and Design.

a. Preferred Building Materials. Building exteriors shall be constructed from high quality, durable materials. Preferred exterior building materials that reflect the city’s desired traditional character are as follows:

i. Brick or better.

ii. Basalt stone or basalt veneer.

iii. Narrow horizontal wood or composite siding (generally five inches wide or less); wider siding will be considered where there is a historic precedent.

iv. Other materials subject to approval by the community development director.

b. Prohibited Materials. The following materials shall be prohibited in visible locations unless an exception is granted by the planning commission through the design review performance option in SDC 4.2.510:

i. Vinyl or plywood siding (including T-111 or similar plywood).

ii. Glass block or highly tinted, reflected, translucent or mirrored glass (except stained glass) as more than 10 percent of the building facade.

iii. Poured tilt up concrete.

iv. Corrugated fiberglass.

v. Chain link fencing (except for temporary purposes such as a construction site or as a gate for a refuse enclosure).

vi. Crushed colored rock/crushed tumbled glass.

vii. Noncorrugated and highly reflective sheet metal.

c. Special Material Standards. The following materials are allowed if they comply with the requirements found below:

i. Concrete Block. When used for the front facade of any building, concrete blocks shall be split, rock- or ground-faced and shall not be the prominent material of the elevation. Plain concrete block or plain concrete may be used as foundation material if the foundation material is not revealed more than three feet above the finished grade level adjacent to the foundation wall.

ii. Metal Siding. Metal siding shall have visible corner moldings and trim and incorporate masonry or other similar durable/permanent material near the ground level (first two feet above ground level).

iii. Exterior insulation and finish system (EIFS) and similar troweled finishes shall be trimmed in wood, masonry, or other approved materials and shall be sheltered from extreme weather by roof overhangs or other methods.

iv. Board and batten siding, and/or stucco (when trimmed in wood, masonry, or other approved materials and shall be sheltered from extreme weather by roof overhangs or other methods) are allowed as accent materials to account for no more than 40 percent of a facade visible from the street.

d. Color. Building exteriors shall comply with the following standards:

i. Permitted colors include warm earth tones (tans, browns, reds, grays and greens) conforming to the Silverton color palette.

ii. Primary colors, metallic colors and black may be utilized as trim, detail, and accent colors only, not to exceed five percent of the surface area of any elevation. Such colors shall not be used as primary wall colors.

iii. Day-glow colors, highly reflective colors, and similar colors are not permitted.

iv. A standardized prototype or franchise color scheme shall be modified or muted if necessary to meet the provisions of this section.

e. Design Elements. Each building shall incorporate at least four of the following elements listed below:

i. Canopies, porticos or pergolas;

ii. Overhangs;

iii. Recesses/projections;

iv. Raised corniced parapets over the door;

v. Outdoor patios;

vi. Window shutters;

vii. Transom windows;

viii. Corner detailing;

ix. Architectural details such as tile work, moldings, trellises, or lighting which are integrated into the building structure and design;

x. Integral planters or wing walls that incorporate landscaped areas and/or places for sitting;

xi. Cobbled, patterned or paved stone or enhanced concrete;

xii. Planter boxes and street furniture placed in the right-of-way shall be approved for use according to materials, scale and type.

E. Human Scale. The design of all buildings shall be to a human scale. This standard is met when the approval body finds that all of the criteria in subsections (E)(1) through (8) of this section are met. Alternatively, the applicant may propose different design elements as provided under SDC 4.2.510, Design review – Adjustments (performance option). Figure 2.3.180.E contrasts examples of building elevations that are consistent/inconsistent with human scale criteria.

1. Regularly spaced and similarly shaped windows are provided on all building stories;

2. Ground floor retail spaces have tall ceilings (i.e., 12 to 16 feet) with display windows on the ground floor;

3. Display windows are trimmed, recessed, or otherwise defined by wainscoting, sills, water tables, or similar architectural features;

4. On multi-story buildings, ground floors are defined and separated from upper stories by appropriate architectural features (e.g., cornices, trim, awnings, canopies, arbors, trellises, overhangs, or other features) that visually identify the transition from ground floor to upper story; such features should be compatible with the surrounding architecture;

5. The tops of flat roofs are treated with appropriate detailing (i.e., cornice, pediment, flashing, trim, or other detailing) that is compatible with the surrounding architecture;

6. Pitched roofs have eaves, brackets, gables with decorative vents, or other detailing that is consistent with the surrounding architecture;

7. Historic design and compatibility requirements under Chapter 3.5 SDC, where applicable, are met; and

8. Where buildings with greater than 10,000 square feet of enclosed ground-floor space are proposed, they shall provide articulated facades on all street-facing elevations. This criterion is met when there is a major break in the building plane not less than once for every 30 feet of a building’s horizontal length. Breaks in the building plane include windows, primary entrances, weather protection (awnings, canopies, arbors, arcades), offsets/projections/changes in elevation or horizontal direction, sheltering roofs, terraces, a distinct pattern of divisions in surface materials, ornamentation, screening trees, small-scale lighting (e.g., wall-mounted lighting or up-lighting), and/or similar features as generally shown in Figure 2.3.180.E. See also subsection (C) of this section.

9. Utility equipment within landscaped areas or attached to structures shall be screened from view from public rights-of-way.

Figure 2.3.180.E – Design Elements on Large Commercial Buildings in GC District
[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]


Silverton Color Palette, Taken from Benjamin Moore Historic Colors. Proposed paint colors are required to match colors on the approved palette but do not need to be Benjamin Moore brand. The director will review all proposed exterior paint colors to ensure compliance with the approved palette.
[IMAGE]
 

Silverton Color Palette, Taken from Valspar Historic Colors. Proposed paint colors are required to match colors on the approved palette but do not need to be Valspar brand. The director will review all proposed exterior paint colors to ensure compliance with the approved palette.

	
[IMAGE]
	
[IMAGE]


	
[IMAGE]
	
[IMAGE]


	
[IMAGE]
	 

(Ord. 16-05 § 1, 2016; Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.3.190 Reserved.

(Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.3.200 Downtown commercial district design standards.

A. Purpose. This section promotes the historic storefront nature of the downtown commercial area. Design is important to identifying Silverton as a unique place with successful commercial areas. The design standards are intended to:

1. Encourage architecture that is consistent with the historic character of downtown Silverton.

2. Ensure that new development creates a close, intimate human scale and architectural designs address all four sides of a building.

3. Encourage the use of contextually appropriate materials, textures and colors.

4. Promote public access by orienting buildings and their entrances to the street or to civic spaces abutting the street.

B. Applicability. The following standards are applied through design review prior to building permit review. An applicant is required to demonstrate compliance with all applicable district standards, design review criteria and historic review criteria, if applicable. Remodels of, additions to, or modifications of structures within the National Register Historic District boundary are also subject to the requirements under Chapter 3.5 SDC. The provisions of this section may be adjusted through the design performance option in SDC 4.2.510 through a Type III procedure.

C. Area Defined. The downtown commercial area comprises the central business district and all of the national historical district, and some contiguous areas which are not within the national historical district. See Figure 2.3.200.C.


[IMAGE]
Figure 2.3.200.C – Map of Downtown Commercial Area

D. Standards. Standards for new construction shall require builders to conform to the architectural form of Silverton’s historic period (1890s through 1940s). As such, new construction shall conform to the following standards listed below. Throughout the standards, reference is made to Silverton’s historic period, the 1890s through 1940s, and to buildings which display characteristics of that period. The following list of buildings is provided as a reference guide to those buildings which display characteristics intended by the standards. The list is a guide only – other buildings may be used to demonstrate the required elements and/or the basis for visual compatibility.

Examples of historic storefront buildings for determining compatibility with standards:

1. Wolfe Building: 201 E Main St.;
[IMAGE]


2. Silver Falls Bank: 217 E Main St.;
[IMAGE]


3. Larsen and Flynn Building: 100 S Water St.;
[IMAGE]


4. Silver Grill: 206 E Main St.;
[IMAGE]


5. Hartman Building: 210 S Water St.;
[IMAGE]


6. Silverton Masonic Building: 101 – 110 S Water St.
[IMAGE]


E. Site Development.

1. Building fronts and entrances shall be oriented toward the street.

2. Building facades shall be set at the property edge along the sidewalk. A setback of up to five feet is permitted when occupied by pedestrian amenities (e.g., plaza, outdoor seating).

3. Buildings shall promote public viewing of the creek by the construction of decks or balconies adjacent to Silver Creek. This shall include a continuation of a deck or walk within a public access easement. The deck/creek walk shall be a minimum of five feet in width.

F. Building Scale.

1. The overall size and proportion of new structures shall be compatible with the scale of buildings constructed during the historic period (1890s through 1940s). This standard may be met by either designing the building’s size and proportions to be similar to comparable historic structures in the downtown, or by the design of the facade so that it breaks a larger mass into smaller proportions that are similar to comparable historic structures.

2. The relationship between the height and width of the main facade of the building shall be visibly compatible with adjoining or nearby buildings of the historic period or style. As with subsection (F)(1) of this section, this standard may be met through either similar height and width, or, through design elements that provide visual continuity with the height and width of adjoining or nearby buildings of the historic period.

G. Building Height.

1. The facade height of all buildings shall be two to four stories and not more than 55 feet in maximum height.

H. Building Width.

1. All new buildings shall maximize lot frontage as much as is practicable.

2. New buildings whose street frontage is more than 45 feet wide shall be designed to convey a sense of division through the use of pilasters, windows and door openings, recessed entries, off-sets or other architectural details.

I. Storefronts.

1. Primary entrances shall be oriented to the street. Corner buildings shall have corner entrances, or shall provide at least one entrance within 20 feet of the street corner or corner plaza.

2. The upper windows of multi-story buildings shall use multi-pane double-hung sash windows or the equivalent style.

3. The relationship between solid walls and window and door openings on the main facade shall be visually compatible with adjoining or nearby structures from the historic period or style.

4. The relationship of width and height of window and door openings shall be visually compatible with adjoining or nearby buildings from the historic period or style.

5. Blank walls, walls without window or door openings, are not permitted along public streets.

6. Windows and doorways shall not be covered over with paper, boards, or cardboard except during times of construction or remodeling and shall be limited to a period of 120 days unless an extension is otherwise granted by the city manager.

7. Doors shall match the materials, design, and character of the display window framing.

8. Architectural features such as awnings, windows, cornices, etc., shall be provided at the second floor to differentiate the storefront from the upper levels of the building, to add visual interest, and to allow the storefront to function as the base for the rest of the building.

9. Utility equipment within landscaped areas or attached to structures shall be screened from view from public rights-of-way.

J. Facade Materials and Texture.

1. The materials and texture of the facade shall be compatible with those on buildings constructed during the historic period.

2. Permitted exterior facade materials include: brick, cast iron, relatively narrow horizontal wood siding, and stucco. Plywood siding, T-111, and vertical board and batten are prohibited.

3. Exposed concrete block facades facing the street are not allowed. Split-face or scored-face block may be used in small quantities for foundations or other nondominant features.

4. All main facade materials shall be painted (except brick, for which painting is optional).

5. Metal siding shall not be used as a building material on the facade facing a street.

K. Roofs.

1. Main facade roofs (lower than a 6:12 pitch) shall be concealed behind a square or stepped parapet.

2. All HVAC systems located on top of a roof shall be located and/or screened so that they are not visible from the street. Dish-style antennas shall be located and/or screened so that they are not visible from the street. All screening material shall be natural and shall be compatible with the facade of the front of the building.

3. New roofs on existing buildings, or on additions to existing buildings, shall match the pitch and form of the original roof.

4. Shed roofs are permitted on one-story rear additions.

5. Back-lit or internally illuminated roofs are prohibited.

L. Awnings and Canopies.

1. Awnings shall extend out from the building front to cover at least two-thirds of the sidewalk unless it is shown that such a distance will interfere with existing trees, poles, etc., to provide pedestrian protection from the elements.

2. Awnings shall be flat or sloping. Awnings shall be made of metal, wood, canvas or similar materials. Rounded bubble or plastic awnings are prohibited. Fully glazed awnings are not permitted.

3. Awnings shall fit within the window bays (either above the main glass or the transom light) so as not to obscure or distract from significant architectural features.

4. The color of the awning shall be compatible with its attached building.

5. Awnings shall not be internally illuminated. However, lighting which is intended to provide illumination to the sidewalk and signage is permitted.

6. Awnings shall be a minimum of eight feet above the sidewalk.

M. Color.

1. The painting of brick walls is permitted.

2. Subtle or subdued tones commonly used during the historic period shall be used. Bright or neon colors are prohibited.

3. Different colors shall be used to accentuate and highlight trim, windows, and other building features.

N. Signs/Murals. Refer to Silverton sign code, Chapter 15.16 SMC, for specific sign regulations. In the DC and DCF districts:

1. Murals are allowed on the side walls of buildings facing the interior of blocks and blank side walls of nonhistoric buildings.

2. Murals are not permitted on the main facades of either modern or historic buildings.

3. Existing murals shall not be altered without a conditional use.

O. Site Design.

1. Landscaping shall not obliterate street and sidewalk views of signage or architectural features on historic buildings.

2. The area of downtown bounded north and south between High Street and Lewis Street and bounded east and west by Water Street and First Street shall provide alternative landscape features in lieu of street trees to include one of the following for every 30 feet of frontage: plazas, planter boxes, hanging baskets, decorative sidewalk treatments or benches.

3. For those areas not included in subsection (O)(2) of this section there shall be one street tree for every 30 to 50 feet of frontage, depending on the crown width of the tree, chosen from the street tree list, permitted on that portion of the development paralleling the street, unless it is determined that street trees will interfere with ingress/egress, utility lines or other factors would prevent a tree from growing to healthy maturity. Tree species and size are to be consistent with the approved city of Silverton street tree list.

4. Container plants shall be provided if the property cannot provide any other form of landscaping. Otherwise, low-water deciduous trees, shrubs, and flowering plants shall be used.

P. Designated Creek Protection.

1. Creek protection to maintain water quality and wild animal habitat shall be incorporated in the overall design of a project.

2. Native riparian plant materials shall be planted adjacent to the creek to enhance creek habitat, consistent with state and federal guidelines.

Q. Parking.

1. Parking areas shall not be located between the front of the building and the street.

2. Parking areas with more than 10 spaces shall be divided by landscaped areas or walkways, or by a building or group of buildings.

3. Parking lot landscaping shall consist of a minimum of 10 percent of the total parking area. The landscaping in parking areas is in addition to that required to meet other standards or percentages of required landscaping. A minimum of one tree for every 10 parking spaces shall be provided.

4. “Knee walls” are required to screen street side parking lots. “Knee walls” shall not exceed three feet in height and shall be constructed with masonry. A combination of walls and landscaping may be approved if they provide an effective buffer and low-level screen of the parking area.

5. Parking lot orientation shall comply with requirements within SDC 2.3.150.

R. Residential Development.

1. Development which includes second and third-story residences is compatible with historic design and use patterns and shall be allowed when other standards are met. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.3.210 Downtown commercial fringe district design standards.

A. Purpose. This section promotes the historic residential nature of the downtown commercial fringe area. Design is important to identifying Silverton as a unique place with successful commercial areas. The design standards are intended to:

1. Encourage architecture that is consistent with the historic residential character of downtown Silverton.

2. Ensure that new development creates a close, intimate human scale and architectural designs address all four sides of a building.

3. Encourage the use of contextually appropriate materials, textures and colors.

4. Promote pedestrian-oriented uses by orienting buildings and their entrances to the street or to civic spaces abutting the street.

5. Balance rhythm and continuity – encourage creativity in the design of building elevations, rooflines and facade elements.

B. Applicability. The following standards are applied through design review prior to building permit review. The applicant is required to demonstrate that the standards are met by complying with the criteria under each standard. Remodels of, or additions to, designated historic residential structures are subject to the requirements under Chapter 3.5 SDC. The provisions of this section may be adjusted through the design performance option in SDC 4.2.510.

C. Area Defined. The “downtown commercial fringe” includes four subsections that surround the downtown commercial district. See Figure 2.3.210.C.

Figure 2.3.210.C Map of Downtown Commercial Fringe District
[IMAGE]




D. Standards. Standards for new construction shall require builders to conform to the residential form of the historic period (1890s through 1940s) or the surrounding buildings. As such, new construction shall conform to the following standards. The following list of buildings is provided as a reference guide to those buildings which display characteristics intended by the standards. The list is a guide only; other buildings may be used to demonstrate the required elements and/or the basis for visual compatibility.

Examples of historic homes converted to commercial use for determining compatibility with standards:

1. Water Street Inn: 421 N Water St.;
[IMAGE]


2. Heron Graphics: 417 N Water St.;
[IMAGE]


3. Medical Data Solutions: 411 N Water St.;
[IMAGE]


4. Patrick Doyle House: 429 N Water St.;
[IMAGE]


5. Adams House: 729 S Water St.
[IMAGE]


E. Site Orientation.

1. The primary building facade shall face the street.

2. Buildings shall promote public viewing of the creek by the construction of decks or balconies adjacent to Silver Creek. This shall include a continuation of the five-foot-wide creek walk or trail with a public easement.

3. The setbacks in the DCF zone are five to 20 feet.

4. All sign locations shall be identified and shown on the plan submitted for review. Proposed sign locations and dimensions of signs shall comply with the Silverton sign code, Chapter 15.16 SMC.

F. Site Design.

1. Landscaping (trees, shrubs, planters, etc.) shall not obliterate street and sidewalk views of signage or architectural features on historic buildings.

2. Landscaping shall be continuously maintained by the property owner.

3. Existing healthy trees on the site shall be preserved.

4. One street tree shall be provided for every 30 to 50 feet of frontage, depending on the crown width of the tree, chosen from the street tree list, which shall be placed on that portion of the development paralleling the street. Where the size of the project dictates an interior street layout, a similar streetscape with street trees is required. Tree species and size are to be consistent with the approved city of Silverton street tree list.

5. Low-water-use trees, shrubs, and flowering plants shall be used or an irrigation system shall be installed.

G. Building Scale and Height.

1. Buildings shall be constructed to a maximum height of 35 feet. Roof style shall be architecturally compatible with the surrounding developments.

H. Building Width.

1. All new building widths shall be consistent with adjacent properties.

I. Roofs.

1. Backlit or illuminated roofs are prohibited.

2. All HVAC systems located on top of a roof shall be located and/or screened so that they are not visible from the street. Dish style antennas shall be located and/or screened so that they are not visible from the street. All screening material shall be compatible with the facade of the front of the building.

3. Roof lines should be visually compatible with the existing historic buildings in the same district. Peaked and pitched roofs are preferred in the DCF district. Refer to subsection (D) of this section for examples of residential historic buildings in the DCF.

J. Facade Materials/Textures.

1. Generally, the material and texture of the facade shall be compatible with those on buildings constructed during the designated historic period.

2. Permitted exterior facade materials include: relatively narrow horizontal wood siding, wood shingles, stucco facing and durable materials such as brick, stone and concrete.

3. Exposed concrete block and plywood material are not allowed. Split-face or textured concrete may be used on the facade facing a street.

4. All main facade materials shall be painted, except for durable materials such as brick, stone or concrete block which shall be sealed or otherwise appropriately treated.

5. Metal shall not be used as a building material on the building facade facing any street. This requirement shall not include certain types of uses such as gas station canopies, historically sensitive awnings or ornamentation.

6. Utility equipment within landscaped areas or attached to structures shall be screened from view from public rights-of-way.

K. Color.

1. Bright primary colors shall be prohibited. Subtle or subdued tones shall be used.

L. Parking.

1. Parking areas shall not be located between the front of the building and the street.

2. Parking lot landscaping shall consist of a minimum of 10 percent of the total parking area. The landscaping in parking areas is in addition to that required to meet other standards or percentages of required landscaping. A minimum of one tree for every 10 parking spaces shall be provided.

3. Parking lots shall comply with requirements within Chapter 3.3 SDC.

M. Designated Creek Protection.

1. Properties which abut Silver Creek shall include creek protection to maintain water quality and wild animal habitat in the overall design of a project.

2. Properties which abut Silver Creek shall include native riparian plant materials landscaping to be planted adjacent to the creek to enhance creek habitat.

N. Landscaping.

1. Landscaping shall be designed so that vegetation covers a minimum of 50 percent of the required landscaped area within one year of installation, and 90 percent coverage occurring within five years.

2. Landscaping design shall include a variety of deciduous and evergreen trees and shrubs and flowering plant species well adapted to the local climate.

3. During site preparation existing healthy trees shall be saved where practicable.

4. Landscaping shall consist of a minimum of 10 percent of the total site.

5. All landscaping shall be continuously maintained by the property owner. Failed plantings shall be replaced in the next appropriate planting season, but no later than within one year of the initial planting. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


Chapter 2.4 INDUSTRIAL (I) DISTRICTS

Sections:

2.4.100    Industrial districts – Purpose.

2.4.110    Industrial district – Allowed uses.

2.4.120    Industrial districts – Setback yards and buffering.

2.4.130    Industrial districts – Lot coverage.

2.4.140    Industrial districts – Site layout and design.

2.4.150    Industrial districts – Building and structure height.

2.4.160    Special use standards.

2.4.170    Industrial districts – Performance standards.


2.4.100 Industrial districts – Purpose.

A. Industrial District. Provides appropriate locations for intensive industrial uses including heavy industrial uses as well as railroad yards and waste-related activities. Uses include those which involve the use of raw materials, require significant outdoor storage and generate heavy truck and/or rail traffic. Properties are carefully located to minimize impacts on established residential, commercial and light industrial areas.

B. Light Industrial District. Provides appropriate locations for general industrial uses, including manufacturing and production, research and development, warehousing and freight movement and wholesale sales activities with few, if any, nuisance characteristics.

C. Industrial Park District. Provides appropriate locations for combining light manufacturing, office and small-scale commercial uses (restaurants, personal services and fitness centers) in a campus-like setting. (Ord. 14-01 § 1 (Exh. A), 2014; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.4.110 Industrial district – Allowed uses.

Table 2.4.110 identifies the land uses that are allowed in the industrial districts. The specific land use categories are described and uses are defined in Chapters 1.5 and 1.6 SDC.

Table 2.4.110  

	Uses	Status of Use in District

	Use Categories

(Examples of uses are in Chapter 1.6 SDC; definitions are in Chapter 1.5 SDC)	Industrial (I)	Light Industrial (LI)	Industrial Park (IP)

	Residential Categories	 	 	 

	Household Living	 	 	 

	Residential uses (household living and group living) not allowed, except as follows:	 	 	 

	- Lawfully existing before September 1, 2006, per SDC 2.3.160(E); or	S	S	S

	- Caretaker dwelling (accessory to a primary permitted use)	P	P	P

	Group living uses shall conform to the provisions in SDC 2.2.200	 	 	 

	Commercial Categories	 	 	 

	Drive-up/drive-in/drive-through (drive-up windows, kiosks, similar uses/facilities)	 	 	 

	- Accessory to a primary permitted use	P	CU	CU

	- Not accessory to a permitted use	CU	CU	N

	Bed and breakfast inn	N	N	N

	Educational services, not a school 	N	CU	CU

	Entertainment, major event	N	N	N

	Mobile food vendor, per SDC 2.3.160(B)	S	S	S

	Offices	CU	P	P

	Outdoor recreation, commercial	N	N	N

	Parking lot, when not an accessory use	CU	CU	CU

	Quick vehicle servicing or vehicle repair	CU	CU	CU

	Retail sales and service	 	 	 

	- Accessory to a primary permitted use	P	P	P

	- Not accessory to a primary permitted use, limited to 30,000 square feet gross floor area (SDC 2.4.140)	N	S	S

	Indoor sports facility – no square footage limit	CU	CU	CU

	Self-service storage	 	 	 

	- Enclosed	P	P	P

	- Unenclosed (any portion)	P	CU	N

	Industrial Categories	 	 	 

	Heavy industrial	P	P	PH

	Industrial service	 	 	 

	- Fully enclosed (e.g., office)	P	P	P

	- Not enclosed	P	CU	N

	Manufacturing and production	 	 	 

	- Processing of marijuana	CU	CU	CU

	- Fully enclosed	P	P	P

	- Not enclosed	CU	N	N

	Warehouse and freight movement	CU	CU	CU

	Waste-related	CU	CU	N

	- Composting facilities	CU	CU	CU

	Wholesale sales, per SDC 2.4.140	 	 	 

	- Fully enclosed	N	S	S

	- Not enclosed	CU	CU+S	 CU+S

	Institutional Categories	 	 	 

	Basic utilities	P	P	P

	Renewable energy facilities	 	 	 

	- Accessory or primary use	CU+S	CU+S	CU+S

	Nonrenewable energy facilities	CU	CU	CU

	Colleges, including vocational schools	CU	P	P

	Community service	CU	P	P

	Daycare, adult or child daycare	N	N	N

	Jails and detention facilities	CU	CU	CU

	Parks and open space 	P	P	P

	Religious institutions and houses of worship	 	 	 

	- Lawfully existing as of November 5, 2008	P	P	P

	- New facilities	N	N	N

	- Transitional shelter communities, per the standards in SDC 2.2.200(N)	CU	CU	CU

	Schools	 	 	 

	- 20 or fewer students	N	P	P

	- More than 20 students	N	CU	CU

	Funeral services	P	P	P

	Cemeteries, mausoleums, and crematoriums	CU	CU	CU

	Other Categories	 	 	 

	Accessory structures (with a primary use)	P	P	P

	Agriculture – Animals 	N	N	N

	Agriculture – Nurseries and similar horticulture (see also wholesale and retail uses)	P	CU	CU

	Agriculture – Marijuana producers and grow sites enclosed, per SDC 2.4.160(B)	CU	CU	CU

	Agriculture – Marijuana producers and grow sites nonenclosed, per SDC 2.4.160(B)	N	N	N

	Mining	N	N	N

	Radio frequency transmission facilities	 	 	 

	- Within height limit of district	 P	P	P

	- Exceeds height limit (free-standing or building-mounted facilities)	CU	CU	CU

	Rail lines and utility corridors 	CU	CU	CU

	Temporary uses (limited to “P” and “CU” uses), per SDC 4.9.100	P/CU	P/CU	P/CU

	Transportation facilities (operation, maintenance, preservation, and construction in accordance with the city’s transportation system plan)	P	P	P

	Key:

	P = Permitted, subject to land use review or design review (Chapter 4.2 SDC)

	PH = Permitted, subject to design review conducted by the planning commission in a public hearing

	S = Permitted with standards (SDC 2.4.140 and/or 2.4.160). Standards may be modified with a planned development

	CU = Conditional use required (Chapter 4.4 SDC)

	N = Not permitted

(Ord. 18-22 § 5, 2018; Ord. 16-01 § 5, 2016; Ord. 14-01 § 1 (Exh. A), 2014; Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.4.120 Industrial districts – Setback yards and buffering.

A. Purpose. Setback yards and buffers provide separation between industrial and nonindustrial uses for fire protection/security, building maintenance, sunlight and air circulation, noise buffering, and visual separation.

B. Applicability. The setback yard and buffer standards in subsections (C) through (F) of this section are minimum standards that apply to buildings, accessory structures, parking areas, mechanical equipment, and other development (but not buffers as required under subsection (F) of this section). In granting a conditional use, the approval body may increase the standard yards and/or buffers consistent with the criteria in Chapter 4.4 SDC. The approval body may also decrease the standard yards and/or buffers through the CU process; provided, that all applicable building and fire safety codes are met.

C. Front and Street Yard Setbacks.

1. Industrial (I) District: Minimum of 20 feet.

2. Light Industrial (LI) District: Minimum of 10 feet.

3. Industrial Park (IP) District: Minimum of 10 feet.

D. Rear Yard Setbacks. A minimum of 10 feet is required, except where common wall buildings with zero setback are allowed through design review (fire codes must be met); and where abutting a residential district, a minimum of 30 feet is required.

E. Side Yard Setbacks. There are no required side yard setbacks, except a minimum of 30 feet is required when an industrial district (I or LI) abuts a residential district.

F. Buffering – Other Yard Requirements.

1. Buffering. The approval body may require landscaping, fences, walls or other buffering that exceeds the landscaping standards in Chapter 3.2 SDC when it finds through design review (Chapter 4.2 SDC), conditional use review (Chapter 4.4 SDC), and/or planned development review (Chapter 4.5 SDC), as applicable, that more or different buffering is necessary to mitigate adverse noise, light, glare, and/or aesthetic impacts to adjacent properties.

2. Pedestrian Access. The approval body may require the construction of pedestrian access ways through required buffers to ensure pedestrian connections within large developments, between multiple development phases, or connecting to public sidewalks, walkways, or multi-use pathways. Access way design shall conform to SDC 3.1.300. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.4.130 Industrial districts – Lot coverage.

A. Industrial (I) District. Maximum lot coverage, 90 percent; maximum area of impervious surfaces, 90 percent.

B. Light Industrial (LI) District. Maximum lot coverage, 85 percent; maximum area of impervious surfaces, 85 percent.

C. Industrial Park (IP) District. Maximum lot coverage, 85 percent; maximum area of impervious surfaces, 85 percent. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.4.140 Industrial districts – Site layout and design.

A. Development Compatibility. Industrial uses and developments shall be oriented on the site to minimize adverse impacts (e.g., noise, glare, smoke, dust, exhaust, vibration, etc.) and to provide compatibility with adjacent uses to the extent practicable. The following standards shall apply to all development in the industrial districts:

1. Mechanical equipment, lights, emissions, shipping/receiving areas, and other components of an industrial use that are outside enclosed buildings shall be located away from residential areas, schools, parks and other nonindustrial areas to the maximum extent practicable; and

2. The city may require a landscape buffer, or other visual or sound barrier (fence, wall, landscaping, or combination thereof), to mitigate adverse impacts that cannot be avoided, as provided in SDC 2.4.120.

B. Large-Scale Commercial Development. Where a commercial, retail or wholesale use is allowed (LI or IP districts), it shall meet the following standards:

1. Gross floor area used for commercial, retail or wholesale shall be limited to 30,000 square feet;

2. The architectural standards in SDC 2.3.180 must be met on the subject commercial, retail or wholesale building(s), as applicable; and

3. Developments containing more than one building, including commercial or industrial subdivisions containing outlying commercial pads, shall meet the commercial block layout and building orientation standards for the general commercial district contained in Chapter 2.3 SDC, Commercial Districts.

C. Landscape Area.

1. Industrial (I) District. Minimum area: 10 percent.

2. Light Industrial (LI) District. Minimum area: 15 percent.

3. Industrial Park (IP) District. Minimum area: 15 percent. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.4.150 Industrial districts – Building and structure height.

A. Height. The maximum allowable height of buildings and structures in the industrial districts is 45 feet, except that taller buildings and structures are allowed when approved as part of a conditional use, provided the minimum setback for such structures abutting a residential district shall be increased by one foot for every foot of structure height exceeding 45 feet.

B. Design Standards.

1. Building frontages shall have offsets, jogs, or other distinctive changes in the texture, color and size of the facade.

2. Metal shall not be the predominant building material on the facade facing a street. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.4.160 Special use standards.

A. Renewable Energy Facilities. Where renewable energy facilities are allowed, they shall require approval through conditional use review (Type III) and conform to all of the following standards:

1. Primary or Accessory Use. The use may be primary or accessory to an allowed use within I, LI, or IP districts.

2. Maximum Height and Setback. Renewable energy facilities structures built according to the International Building Code shall meet the maximum height and setback standards of SDC 2.4.150(A).

3. Performance Standards. Renewable energy facilities shall not exceed the performance standards stated by SDC 2.4.170(C).

4. Landscaping. Screening and buffering for the facilities within IP, LI and I districts shall follow the standards of SDC 3.2.300.

5. Other Permit or Licensing Requirements. The owner of the facility shall be responsible for obtaining and complying with all other applicable permit and/or licensing requirements.

B. Agriculture – Marijuana Producers and Grow Sites. Where marijuana produces and grow sites are allowed, they shall require approval through the conditional use process and conform to all of the following standards:

1. For the purposes of this section, “enclosed” means within a building, which is defined as a permanent rigid fabrication or construction, attached or affixed to land with a permanent foundation, consisting of walls, columns, girders, beams, floors, and a roof, or some combination of these elemental parts, that is enclosed on all sides, that is intended as a habitation or shelter for people or animals or a shelter for tangible personal property, and that has structural integrity independent of the tangible personal property, if any, it is designed to shelter. Greenhouses constructed out of rigid material, or greenhouses constructed out of flexible material, are not considered enclosed.

2. Marijuana producers, processors, and wholesalers shall not be located within 1,000 feet of a public elementary or secondary school for which attendance is compulsory under ORS 339.020; or a private or parochial elementary or secondary school, teaching children as described in ORS 339.030. “Within 1,000 feet” means a straight line measurement in a radius extending for 1,000 feet or less in any direction from the closest point anywhere on the boundary line of the real property comprising a school to the closest point of the licensed premises of a producer, processor, and/or wholesaler. “Premises” has the definition described in OAR 845-025-1015. (Ord. 16-01 § 5, 2016; Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010)


2.4.170 Industrial districts – Performance standards.

A. Purpose. The following performance standards apply to all industrially zoned properties, and are intended to minimize the potential adverse impacts of industrial activities on the general public and on other land uses or activities. They are not intended to prevent conflicts between different uses or activities that may occur on the same property.

B. Confined Operations. All uses and operations except storage, off-street parking, loading and unloading, including the transfer of materials from outdoor storage to a building, shall be confined, contained, and conducted wholly within completely enclosed buildings, unless outdoor activities have been approved as part of a conditional use approval.

C. Vibration. Every use shall be so operated that the ground vibration inherently and recurrently generated from equipment other than vehicles is not perceptible without instruments at any boundary line of the property on which the use is located.

D. Odors. Emission of offensive odorous gases or other offensive odorous matter, to a reasonable person of normal sensitivities, in quantities as detectable at any point on any boundary line of the property on which the use is located shall be prohibited.

E. Heat and Glare. Uses and operations shall meet the following standards:

1. Operations producing heat or glare shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building.

2. Exterior lighting on private property shall be screened, baffled, or directed away from adjacent residential properties. This is not intended to apply to street lighting.

F. Dangerous Substances. Any use which involves the presence, storage or handling of any explosive or nuclear waste product in a manner which would cause a health or safety hazard for any adjacent land use or site shall be prohibited.

G. Liquid and Solid Wastes. Uses and operations shall meet the following standards:

1. Any storage of wastes which attracts insects or rodents or otherwise creates a health hazard shall be abated as a nuisance.

2. Waste products which are stored outside shall be concealed from view from any property line by a sight-obscuring fence or planting as required in Chapter 3.2 SDC.

3. No connection with any public sewer shall be made or maintained in violation of applicable city or state standards.

4. No wastes conveyed shall be allowed to or permitted, caused to enter, or allowed to flow into any public sewer in violation of applicable city or state standards.



5. All drainage permitted to discharge into a street gutter, caused to enter or allowed to flow into any pond, lake, stream, or other natural water course shall be limited to surface waters or waters having similar characteristics as determined by the city, county, and State Department of Environmental Quality.

6. All operations shall be conducted in conformance with the city’s standards and ordinances applying to sanitary and storm sewer discharges.

H. Noise. No noise or sound in an industrial district shall be of a nature which will constitute a nuisance and shall not exceed the limits permitted under OAR 340-035-0005. Noise made by devices which are maintained and utilized solely to serve as warning devices is excluded from these regulations. Noise created by highway vehicles, trains, watercraft, and aircraft is also excluded from these regulations.

I. Electrical Disturbances. Except for electrical facilities wherein the city is preempted by other governmental entities, electrical disturbances generated by uses within the industrial zones which interfere with the normal operation of equipment or instruments within the industrial zones are prohibited. Electrical disturbances which routinely cause interference with normal activity in abutting residential use areas are also prohibited.

J. Discharge Standards. There shall be no emission of smoke, fallout, fly ash, dust, vapor, gases, or other forms of air pollution that may cause injury to human, plant, or animal life, or to property. Plans of construction and operation shall be subject to the recommendations and regulations of the State Department of Environmental Quality. All measurements of air pollution shall be by the procedures and with equipment approved by the State Department of Environmental Quality or equivalent and acceptable methods of measurement approved by the city. Persons responsible for a suspected source of air pollution upon the request of the city shall provide quantitative and qualitative information regarding the discharge that will adequately and accurately describe operation conditions.

K. Open Burning. This activity shall be prohibited.

L. Storage. Uses and operations shall meet the following standards:

1. Outdoor storage area shall be gravel surface or better and shall be suitable for the materials being handled and stored. If a gravel surface is not sufficient to meet the performance standards for the use, the area shall be suitably paved.

2. Any open storage that would otherwise be visible at the property line shall be concealed from view at the abutting property line by a sight-obscuring fence or planting not less than six feet in height.

M. Landscaping. Uses and operations shall meet the following standards:

1. Landscaping for unused property disturbed during construction shall include such things as plantings of ornamental shrubs, lawns, native plants, and mowed, seeded field grass.

2. Unused areas of undisturbed field grass may be maintained in their existing state. Stands of invasive weeds shall meet the noxious vegetation standards of SMC 8.04.050. These unused areas, located within a phased development project or a future expansion, cannot be included in the area calculated to meet the landscape requirements for the initial phase(s) of the development.

3. Unused property shall not be left with disturbed soils that are subject to siltation and erosion. Any disturbed soil shall be seeded for complete erosion cover germination and shall be subject to applicable erosion control standards. (Ord. 14-01 § 1 (Exh. A), 2014; Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008. Formerly 2.4.160)


Chapter 2.5 FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT

Sections:

2.5.100    Purpose.

2.5.110    Development to which these regulations apply.

2.5.120    Lands to which these regulations apply.

2.5.130    Floodplain variances.

2.5.140    Definitions.

2.5.150    State and federal approval.

2.5.160    Floodway restrictions.

2.5.170    Alteration of the flood carrying capacity of a watercourse prohibited.

2.5.180    General information requirements.

2.5.190    Land division and planned development standards.

2.5.200    Manufactured home parks.

2.5.210    Building standards.

2.5.220    Procedure.

2.5.230    Flood hazard reduction standards.

2.5.240    Accessory buildings in floodplain districts that represent a minimal investment are exempt from the standards of SDC 2.5.210 and 2.5.220.

2.5.250    Recreation vehicles in floodplain districts.

2.5.260    Warning and disclaimer of liability.

2.5.270    Storage of material and equipment.


2.5.100 Purpose.

It is the purpose of these regulations to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.5.110 Development to which these regulations apply.

“Development,” as defined in Chapter 1.5 SDC, includes, but is not limited to, residential and nonresidential construction, manufactured housing, and land divisions. Excavation and fill (grading) is specifically excluded from the definition of development as used in this section. Grading is regulated by SDC 2.6.180. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.5.120 Lands to which these regulations apply.

These regulations shall apply to all areas within the city of Silverton that are subject to inundation from a 100-year flood. These areas are depicted on federal flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) and floodway maps by the letters A, AE, or AO.

These areas have been identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the flood insurance study for Marion County dated January 19, 2000 (Panels 243, 244, 382, and 400 of 1150). In addition, the city council may adopt by resolution more current studies or boundary information approved by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).

Precise floodplain district boundaries may be difficult to determine from the maps referred to above due to their large scale and lack of site-specific studies. In such instances, the community development director may apply FEMA base flood elevations to topographic maps or site surveys in order to determine actual boundaries. In the absence of FEMA base flood elevations, the director shall reasonably utilize other sources of floodplain and floodway data to determine base flood elevations and boundaries. However, when elevation data is not available through FEMA or another authoritative source and the development consists of four or more lots, four or more structures, or four or more acres, the applicant shall generate and have certified by a registered engineer the base flood elevation. Any decision of the community development director regarding a determination of a base flood elevation or interpretation of a district boundary may be appealed in accordance with Chapter 4.8 SDC.

The flood insurance study and FIRM panels for the city of Silverton are maintained in the community development office. The community development office also maintains for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this title, including elevation and flood-proofing certificates. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.5.130 Floodplain variances.

Variances from the terms of this chapter shall be granted only when, because of special circumstances applicable to the property including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, the strict application of this section deprives such property of privileges enjoyed by other property in vicinity and under identical zoning classifications. There will be no variance given to the standards for development in the floodway. Variances from the floodplain management regulations of this chapter shall be reviewed as a Type II procedure and shall be approved if the review body finds that all of the following criteria have been met:

A. The applicant can show good and sufficient cause; and

B. Failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional, nonfinancial hardship to the applicant; and

C. Issuance of the variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances; and

D. The variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and in addition, variances from the required lowest floor elevation may be granted if the review body finds that the request meets the following criterion as well as those criteria listed above:

1. The parcel is one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level.

Upon issuance of the variance, the community development director will notify the applicant in writing that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance, and such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.5.140 Definitions.

As used in this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:

“Base flood” or “100-year flood” means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Map designation always includes the letter “A” (e.g., A, AE, AO).

“Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)” means the federal agency charged with implementing the National Flood Insurance Program. FEMA provides floodplain maps to the city of Silverton.

“Flood” means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:

1. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or

2. The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.

“Flood fringe” means those areas outside the floodway but within the 100-year floodplain. Zone designations on flood insurance rate maps include A, AE, and AO. Note floodway relationships diagram Figure 6-3 at the end of this section.

“Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)” means the official map on which FEMA has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the insurance risk premium zones.

“Floodplain” means the combined area of the floodway and the flood fringe.

“Floodproofing” means any combination of structural or nonstructural provisions, changes or adjustments to structures, land or waterway for the reduction or elimination of flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents during a 100-year flood.

“Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. These areas are identified on the floodway maps issued by FEMA. Note floodway relationships diagram in Figure 6-3 at the end of this section.

“Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed habitable area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking vehicles, building access or storage, in any area other than a basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable design requirements of this title found in SDC 2.5.210.

“Permanent foundation” means a natural or manufactured support system to which a structure is anchored or attached. A permanent foundation is capable of resisting flood forces and may include posts, piles, poured concrete or reinforced block walls, properly compacted fill, or other systems of comparable flood resistance and strength.

“Special flood hazard area” means areas subject to inundation during the occurrence of the 100-year flood.

“Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

“Substantial improvement” means, for the purposes of this section, and notwithstanding the provisions for nonconforming uses and development pursuant to Chapter 5.2 SDC, any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:

1. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

2. Any alteration of a structure identified on the city’s adopted historic inventory; provided, that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure.

“Watercourse” means any natural or artificial stream, river, creek, ditch, channel, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine or wash in which water flows in a definite direction or course, either continuously or intermittently, and has a definite channel, bed and banks, and includes any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or flood water.


[IMAGE]


(Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.5.150 State and federal approval.

City approval of any development within the floodplain is conditioned upon receipt of any required state or federal permits. Required state and federal permits include but are not limited to:

A. Permits and associated wetland development regulations administered by the Oregon Department of State Lands.

B. Permits administered by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.

C. All discharge permits covered by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and Oregon Department of Environmental Quality. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.5.160 Floodway restrictions.

No development is allowed in any floodway except where the review body finds that the development will not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the 100-year flood. Such finding shall be based upon applicant-supplied evidence certified by a registered professional engineer and upon documentation that one of the following three criteria has been met:

A. The development does not involve the construction of permanent or habitable structures.

B. The development is a public or private park or recreational use or municipal utility use.

C. The development is a water-dependent structure such as a dock, pier, bridge, or floating marina.

If a floodway boundary is not designated on an official FEMA map available to the city, the floodway boundary can be estimated from available data. Proposed development along such estimated floodway boundary shall not result in an increase of the base flood level greater than one foot as certified by a registered professional engineer. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.5.170 Alteration of the flood carrying capacity of a watercourse prohibited.

No development shall diminish the flood carrying capacity of a watercourse. Subject to the foregoing regulation, no person shall alter or relocate a watercourse, without submittal of a land use review application per Chapter 4.2 SDC. The city shall provide a minimum 30-day prior written notice to any adjacent community, and the Natural Hazards Mitigation Office of the Department of Land Conservation and Development. Maintenance of the altered watercourse shall be provided so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished over time. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.5.180 General information requirements.

In addition to the information required in other sections of this code, the application for any development proposed in the floodplain district must include the following information:

A. Elevations of the original contours.

B. Final elevations of proposed fills and excavations.

C. Base flood (100-year flood) elevations of the site.

D. Location of any designated floodway and base flood boundary.

E. Location of any designated wetlands and/or wildlife habitat (if applicable).

F. Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures (if applicable).

G. Which watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development (if applicable).

H. If floodproofing is required, the proposed description and elevation of floodproofing. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.5.190 Land division and planned development standards.

Land divisions and planned developments in the floodplain district shall be reviewed by the planning commission as a part of the land use planning process.

Notwithstanding other provisions of this code, all land division and planned development applications which propose actual development within a floodplain district shall be processed under the Type III process. An application to develop property which has a floodplain on it, but where no development is proposed in that floodplain, will be processed as otherwise required in this code. In the case of a land division, “no actual development” means the floodplain area has been excluded from the land division. This can be done by setting the property aside for some other purpose than later development, for example, as a public drainage right-of-way.

In addition to the general review criteria for land divisions and planned developments in Article 4, applications which propose actual development within the floodplain district shall also be subject to the following standards:

A. All land division proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.

B. All land division proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.

C. All land division proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage.

D. Any lot created for development purposes must have adequate area created outside of the floodway to maintain a buildable site area meeting the minimum requirements of this code.

E. Any new public or private street providing access to a residential development shall have a roadway crown elevation not lower than one foot below the 100-year flood elevation.

F. All land divisions or planned developments in the floodplain district shall show the location of the 100-year flood contour line followed by the date the flood elevation was established. Where elevation data is not available, either through the Flood Insurance Study or from another authoritative source, and the development is four or more acres or results in four or more lots or structures, the elevation shall be determined and certified by a registered engineer. In addition, a statement located on or attached to the recorded map or plat shall read as follows:

Development of property within the 100-year floodplain as most currently established by the Federal Emergency Management Agency or city of Silverton may be restricted and subject to special regulations by the City.

(Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.5.200 Manufactured home parks.

Manufactured home parks and manufactured home subdivisions proposed in the floodplain district shall be reviewed by the planning commission. Notwithstanding other provisions of this code, all manufactured home park and subdivision applications which propose actual development within the floodplain district shall be processed under a Type III process. An application to develop property which has a floodplain on it, but where no development is proposed in that floodplain, will be processed as otherwise required in this code. In the case of a land division, “no actual development” means the floodplain area has been excluded from the land division. This can be done by setting the property aside for some other purpose than later development, for example, as a public drainage right-of-way. In addition to the general review criteria applicable to manufactured home parks, applications which propose actual development within the floodplain district shall include an evacuation plan indicating alternate vehicular access and escape routes. In addition, the standards listed in SDC 2.5.210 also apply to the placement of manufactured homes within a floodplain. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.5.210 Building standards.

Applications for building permits in the floodplain district shall be reviewed by the building official pursuant to locally adopted state building codes. In addition to building code criteria, all development in the floodplain district, except that exempted in SDC 2.5.230, shall be subject to the following building standards:

A. The lowest floor, including basement, of any proposed structure (including manufactured homes and nonresidential structures) shall be placed at least three feet above the 100-year flood as determined by the latest Federal Insurance Study.

B. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.

C. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.

D. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or otherwise elevated or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.

E. All manufactured homes shall be on an adequately anchored, permanent foundation and be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement, and shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. Anchoring methods may include, but are not limited to, the use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors (reference FEMA’s “Manufactured Home Installation in Flood Hazard Areas” guidebook for additional details).

F. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement and shall be installed or constructed using materials, methods, and practices that minimize flood damage.

G. All new and replacement public water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.

H. All new and replacement public sanitary sewer systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharges from the system into flood water. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.

I. Property owners or developers shall file with the city a certificate whose format is acceptable to FEMA. This certificate must be approved by the building official, prepared by a registered surveyor or professional engineer, architect or surveyor, and maintained for public inspection. The certificate must contain:

1. The actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor including basement;

2. The elevation of any floodproofing; and

3. Whether or not the structure contains a basement.

J. If floodproofing methods are required as per subsection (B) of this section, the property owners or developers shall file with the city certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing methods meet or exceed FEMA standards. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.5.220 Procedure.

A registered Oregon engineer or land surveyor shall visit the site prior to construction and set a reference datum on the site to establish the 100-year base flood elevation. This elevation shall be shown on the building plans submitted to the city for review.

Upon issuance of the building permit, the owner or contractor of record shall set the top of the foundation forms so that the floor and mechanical equipment are three feet above the reference datum that was set by the engineer or surveyor.

Foundation approval to pour will not be granted until the engineer or surveyor has verified the elevation of the top of the forms. Verification shall be written and available to the inspector on site at the time of inspection. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.5.230 Flood hazard reduction standards.

All flood hazard reduction measures are required, as applicable, and must be certified as required in SDC 2.5.210(I) and (J) to at least meet the following standards (these standards do not apply to structures exempted in this section):

A. All structures: fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor and lower than three feet above the 100-year flood level must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:

1. A minimum of two openings, having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding, shall be provided.

2. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.

3. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.

B. Nonhabitable construction meeting the certification requirements of SDC 2.5.210(I) and (J) can have the lowest floor and attendant utility and sanitary facilities located lower than one foot above the 100-year flood elevation if:

1. The structure is floodproofed so that areas lower than one foot above the 100-year flood level are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water.

2. The structure has structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.

3. The applicant is notified that flood insurance premiums will be based on rates that are one foot below the floodproofed level.

4. The applicant files a certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting provisions of this section based on their development and/or review of the structural design, specifications and plans. Such certification shall be provided to the building official as set forth in SDC 2.5.210(I).

5. Nonhabitable construction that is elevated, not floodproofed, must meet the elevation standards of SDC 2.5.210 and the standards for space below the first floor as described in subsection (A) of this section. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.5.240 Accessory buildings in floodplain districts that represent a minimal investment are exempt from the standards of SDC 2.5.210 and 2.5.220.

The following standards, and all other regulations that apply to development in floodplain areas, apply to those buildings. The definition of “minimal investment” for the purposes of this section is a building which costs less than $10,000 in labor and materials to construct. The value of a proposed building will be that value stated on the application for building permits.

A. Accessory structures shall not be used for human habitation.

B. Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage potential.

C. Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.

D. Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation which may result in damage to other structures.

E. Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated and floodproofed. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.5.250 Recreation vehicles in floodplain districts.

Recreation vehicles placed on sites in the floodplain are required to either:

A. Meet the requirements of SDC 2.5.210, including the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes; or

B. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or

C. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on wheels or jacking systems attached to the site only by quick-disconnect-type utilities and security devices, and with no permanently attached additions. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.5.260 Warning and disclaimer of liability.

The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased as a result of failure of manmade structures and/or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that the land outside the area of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter does not create liability on the part of the city of Silverton or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.5.270 Storage of material and equipment.

No storage of material or equipment is allowed within floodway areas, unless the storage can be approved upon determination that the following criteria have been satisfied:

A. Site plan approval has been received.

B. There is no storage or processing of material that is, in time of flooding, buoyant, flammable, toxic, explosive or otherwise could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life.

C. The material or equipment is not subject to major damage by floods and is firmly anchored to prevent flotation or is readily removable from the area within the time available after flood warning. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


Chapter 2.6 HILLSIDE PROTECTION (/H) OVERLAY DISTRICT

Sections:

2.6.100    Purpose.

2.6.110    Applicability.

2.6.120    General.

2.6.130    Reports required.

2.6.140    Development density options.

2.6.150    Building location and design standards.

2.6.160    Revegetation standards – Slopes greater than 20 percent.

2.6.170    Grading, cut and fill standards.

2.6.180    Grading and erosion control.

2.6.190    Storm drainage.

2.6.200    Street standards.

2.6.210    Driveway standards.

2.6.220    Tree conservation, protection and removal.

2.6.230    Modification of standards.

2.6.240    Variance from hillside lands development standards.


2.6.100 Purpose.

The intent of the hillside development overlay standards is to provide for supplementary regulations to underlying zoning districts to ensure that development occurs in such a manner as to protect the natural and topographic character and identity of these areas, environmental resources, the aesthetic qualities and restorative value of lands, and the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Silverton by ensuring that development does not create soil erosion, sedimentation of lower slopes, slide damage, flooding problems, and severe cutting or scarring. It is the intent of these development standards to encourage a sensitive form of development and to allow for a reasonable use that complements the natural and visual character of the city. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.6.110 Applicability.

A. General. The hillside development standards apply to all areas that have an average slope of 12 percent or greater and areas classified as having moderate or high susceptibility to shallow and deep seated landslides by the Department of Geology and Mineral Industries (DOGAMI). Notwithstanding any provisions of the development code to the contrary, hillside lots in subdivisions and partitions receiving tentative approval on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title shall comply with the minimum lot size standards set forth in this article. Hillside lots in other areas may, at the option of the developer or owner, meet such standards in lieu of those specified elsewhere in the development code. A topographical survey of the lot shall be furnished by any person wishing to meet the standards of this article. For development of any property after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, the community development director or building official may require a topographic survey showing two-foot intervals wherever there is a question as to whether the lot is a hillside lot.

B. Exemptions.

1. An excavation or fill that is less than three feet in depth, or which involves less than 50 cubic yards of volume; or

2. Emergency actions required to prevent an imminent danger to public or private property, as determined by the community development director or designee; or

3. Any land use or activity that does not require a building or grading permit or land use approval. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.6.120 General.

All development proposed within the hillside development overlay district is required to provide for the preservation and, if possible, enhancement of the site’s natural features during all phases of the design and development process. This includes consideration of soils, vegetation, hydrology, wildlife habitat, views and visual orientation, both from the site and to the site, and unusual or unique natural features. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.6.130 Reports required.

Prior to issuance of a land use decision or a building permit on land that exceeds 12 percent average slope or contains areas classified as having moderate or high susceptibility to shallow-seated and deep-seated landslides by DOGAMI, a geotechnical study prepared and stamped by a geotechnical engineer and certified engineering geologist, following applicable guidelines for preparing engineering geologic reports in Oregon as adopted by the Oregon State Board of Geologist Examiners, indicating that the site is stable for the proposed use and development shall be submitted to the city. Peer review of a geotechnical study required by this chapter shall be performed by a professional or professional firm of the city’s choice that meets the qualifications listed above. The peer review will occur at the applicant’s expense.

The study shall be approved for a specific development plan and shall be valid for five years. Should the time limit expire for the approved study, if environmental conditions associated with the site change, or if the proposed development activities change, an amendment to the study shall be submitted for review. The study shall include the following information:

A. Index map.

B. Project description to include location, topography, drainage, vegetation, discussion of previous work and discussion of field exploration methods.

C. A scale-drawing site plan of the property, showing all natural physical features, topography at two-foot contour intervals, steepness of slopes, location of all test excavations or borings, watercourses both perennial and intermittent, ravines and all existing and manmade structure or features all fully dimensioned, trees six-inch caliper or greater measured four feet from ground level, rock outcroppings and drainage facilities.

D. A scale-drawing map for the property showing areas with zero to 11.9 percent slopes, 12 to 14.9 percent slopes, 15 to 24.9 percent slopes, 25 to 29.9 percent slopes, 30 to 34 percent slopes, and 34.1 to 100 percent slopes. The map shall include a square foot calculation for each slope category area on the site.

E. Site geology, based on a surficial survey, to include site geologic maps, description of bedrock and surficial materials, including artificial fill, locations of any faults, folds, etc., and structural data including bedding, jointing and shear zones, soil depth and soil structure.

F. Discussion of any off-site geologic conditions that may pose a potential hazard to the site, or that may be affected by on-site development.

G. Suitability of site for proposed development from a geologic standpoint.

H. Specific recommendations for cut and fill slope stability, seepage and drainage control or other design criteria to mitigate geologic hazards.

I. If deemed necessary by the engineer or geologist to establish whether an area to be affected by the proposed development is stable, additional studies and supportive data shall include cross-sections showing subsurface structure, graphic logs with subsurface exploration, results of laboratory test and references.

J. A scale-drawing grading plan, including all of the features and detail required for the site plan listed in subsection (C) of this section, but reflecting preliminary finished grades and indicating in cubic yards whether and to what extent there will be a net increase or loss of soil.

K. Signature and registration number of the engineer and/or geologist.

L. Additional information or analyses as necessary to evaluate the site.

M. Inspection schedule for the project. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.6.140 Development density options.

The developer has two options for the development of steeply sloped land. The first option, Option “A,” is designed to correlate minimum lot sizes to the average slope of the development area. The second option, Option “B,” is designed to allow, through a planned development, a density transfer bonus to stimulate development on those portions of the development area where the slope of the land is less than 12 percent. A combination of Options “A” and “B” may be used through a planned development.

A. Option “A”: Average Slope – Minimum Lot Size. In slope areas of 12 to 14.9 percent slope, the minimum lot areas shall be 10,000 square feet. In slope area of 15 to 24.9 percent, the minimum lot size shall be 12,000 sq. ft. In slope areas of 25 to 29.9 percent slope, the minimum lot size shall be 15,000 square feet and for areas of slope between 30 and 34 percent the minimum lot size shall be 20,000 square feet. All hillside lots created by following Option “A” shall meet the lot area and dimension standards of Table 2.6.140.

Areas with average slopes of greater than 34 percent prior to grading shall not be subdivided or partitioned further unless the area being divided is included in addition to the square footage required for building envelopes. However, open space, greenways and recreational trails may be developed in these areas. For those lots of record which have an average slope of greater than 34 percent and have no area less than 34 percent slope, the maximum residential development shall be one dwelling unit per lot of record. When density is transferred from areas in excess of 34 percent slope, density transfers shall be allowed at a rate of one dwelling unit per acre.

Table 2.6.140 

	Average Slope	Minimum Lot Size per Dwelling Unit	Minimum Lot Frontage	Minimum Lot Depth

	12 – 14.9%	10,000 sq. ft.	80 feet	100 feet

	15 – 24.9%	12,000 sq. ft.	85 feet	100 feet

	25 – 29.9%	15,000 sq. ft.	90 feet	100 feet

	30 – 34%	20,000 sq. ft.	100 feet	100 feet

B. Option “B”: Planned Development Density Transfer Bonus. In order to promote the preservation of natural slopes greater than 12 percent, development density transfer is encouraged when dividing land. The density transfer is only feasible where there are sizable portions of the development area which have slopes less than 12 percent through a planned development process per Chapter 4.5 SDC. Determination of the density transfer bonus is a three-step process:

1. Determine the area of the parcel where the average slope of the land is:

a. Less than 12 percent.

b. From 12 to 14.9 percent.

c. From 15 to 24.9 percent.

d. From 25 to 29.9 percent.

e. From 30 to 34 percent.

f. In excess of 34 percent.

2. Determine the number of potential lots for the total development area which could have been permitted for the portion of the parcel where the average slope is greater than 12 percent, if the average slope option had been considered by using Table 2.6.140. Fractions shall be rounded to the nearest whole number.

3. Multiply the number of potential lots by 1.2 to determine the density that may be transferred to those sections of the development area where the slopes are less than 12 percent. Development shall occur in conformance with the provisions of the planned development process found in Chapter 4.5 SDC. Land of greater than 12 percent average slope subject to density transfer provisions shall be maintained as permanent open space or dedicated for park use. The findings and recommendations of the report required in SDC 2.6.130 shall be considered and utilized during the development process. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.6.150 Building location and design standards.

All buildings and buildable areas proposed for hillside lands shall be designed and constructed in compliance with the following standards:

A. Building Envelopes. All newly created lots, either by subdivision or partition or property line adjustment, shall contain building envelopes conforming to the following standards:

1. The building envelopes shall contain a buildable area with a slope of 34 percent or less unless the division or lot line adjustment is for open space or conservation purposes.

2. Building envelopes and lot design shall address the retention of the following percentage of the lot in landscaping or in a natural state:

	Average Slope	Minimum Lot Size per Dwelling Unit	Maximum Lot Coverage (Impervious Surface)

	12 – 14.9%	10,000 sq. ft.	35%

	15 – 24.9%	12,000 sq. ft.	35%

	25 – 29.9%	15,000 sq. ft.	30%

	30 – 34%	20,000 sq. ft.	25%

3. Building envelopes shall be designed and located to maximize tree conservation while recognizing and following the standards for fuel reduction if the development is located in wildfire lands.

4. Building envelope locations shall be located to avoid ridgeline exposures, and designed such that the roofline of a building within the envelope does not project above the ridgeline.

B. Building Setbacks. Setbacks shall be the horizontal distance from the property line to the nearest vertical wall. Site plans and building elevations submitted for building permits shall include the topography of the site at two-foot intervals and building elevations in relation to the existing and proposed finished grade.

	Minimum Setback	Downhill Lot	Uphill Lot

	Living Adjacent to a Street	20 feet	20 feet

	Garage 	20 feet	20 feet

	Side	15 feet	15 feet



	Minimum Setback	Downhill Lot	Uphill Lot

	Rear	30 feet	30 feet

C. Building Design. To reduce hillside disturbance through the use of slope-responsive design techniques, buildings on hillside lands shall incorporate the following into the building design and indicate features on required building permits:

1. Hillside Building Height. The building height shall be determined by the vertical distance from the lowest-grade plane to the average height of the highest roof surface. In no case will the height of the structure exceed 35 feet.

2. Fire Suppression. All buildings served by streets or roadways in excess of 10 percent grade shall have a fire suppression system installed.

3. Building Plans. All structures on hillside lands in excess of 14 percent shall be designed by an engineer or architect. Foundations shall be designed in accordance with a site-specific geotechnical report. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.6.160 Revegetation standards – Slopes greater than 20 percent.

Exposed soil which is not under continuous construction must be revegetated with temporary or permanent vegetation so that the soil is not left exposed for more than 60 days. Within six months of issuance of a certificate of occupancy, vegetation must be reestablished. If irrigation is not provided, then the exposed soil must be planted with species which can survive without irrigation. Vegetative cover or any alternative cover (rock, masonry, etc.) must be maintained in perpetuity. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.6.170 Grading, cut and fill standards.

All cut and fill slopes must not exceed a two (horizontal) to one (vertical) ratio. Slopes which are steeper (i.e., 1:1.5 or 1:1) may be conditionally approved by the public works director upon certification, by a qualified soils engineer or geologist, that the slope will remain stable under foreseeable conditions. The certification must delineate any specific stabilization measures deemed necessary by the soils engineer or geologist. As a condition of approval, a designated state certified person on the grading crew shall be employed by the developer to determine soil stability on all cut and fill slopes and take appropriate measure where unstable soils are encountered. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.6.180 Grading and erosion control.

All development on lands classified as hillside lands shall be required to conform to the following items:

A. Plans. All grading, retaining wall design, drainage, and erosion control plans for development on hillside lands shall be designed by a geotechnical expert. All cuts, grading or fills shall conform to the most current State Structural Code. Erosion control measures on the development site shall be required to minimize the solids in runoff from disturbed areas. Temporary erosion control measures shall be taken throughout the course of development and construction, and permanent measures shall be taken thereafter to prevent erosion from foreseeable sources.

B. Time Period. For development other than single-family homes on individual lots, all grading, drainage improvements, or other land disturbances shall only occur from May 1st to October 31st. Excavation shall not occur during the remaining wet months of the year. Erosion control measures shall be installed and functional by October 31st. Up to a 30-day modification to the October 31st date and a 45-day modification to the May 1st date may be made by the community development director, based upon weather conditions and in consultation with the project geotechnical expert. The modification of dates shall be the minimum necessary, based upon evidence provided by the applicant, to accomplish the necessary project goals.

C. Grading – Cuts. All cut slopes on areas classified as hillside lands shall be designed by a registered structural engineer, and the following standards shall apply:

1. Cut slope angles shall be determined in relationship to the type of materials of which they are composed. Where the soil permits, limit the total area exposed to precipitation and erosion. Steep-cut slopes shall be retained with stacked rock, retaining walls, or a functional equivalent to control erosion and provide slope stability when necessary. Where cut slopes are to be laid back (1:1 or less steep), the slope shall be protected with erosion control netting or a structural equivalent installed per manufacturer’s specifications, and re-vegetated.

2. Exposed cut slopes, such as those for streets, driveways, accesses, or yard areas, greater than seven feet shall be terraced. Cut faces on a terraced section shall not exceed a maximum height of four feet or five feet if building permits are obtained. Terrace widths shall be a minimum of three feet to allow for the introduction of vegetation for erosion control. Total cut slopes shall not exceed a maximum vertical height of 15 feet.

a. The top of cut slopes not utilizing structural retaining walls shall be located a minimum setback of one-half the height of the cut slope from the nearest property line.

b. Cut slopes for structure foundations encouraging the reduction of effective visual bulk, such as split pad or stepped footings, shall be exempted from the height limitations of subsection (D)(1) of this section.

3. Re-vegetation of cut slope terraces shall include the provision of a planting plan, introduction of topsoil where necessary, and the use of irrigation if necessary. The vegetation used for these areas shall be native or species similar in resource value, which will survive, help reduce the visual impact of the cut slope, and assist in providing long-term slope stabilization. Trees, bush-type plantings and cascading vine-type plantings may be appropriate. On slopes likely to be extensively disturbed by later construction, an interim ground cover shall be planted or other suitable temporary measures taken, to be supplemented by the permanent ground cover or shrubs and trees when the site is finally developed and landscaped.

D. Grading – Fills. On all fill slopes on lands classified as hillside lands, the following standards shall apply:

1. Fill slopes shall not exceed a total vertical height of 15 feet. The toe of the fill slope area shall be a minimum of six feet from the nearest property line.

2. Fill slopes shall be protected with an erosion control netting, blanket or functional equivalent. Netting or blankets shall only be used in conjunction with an organic mulch such as straw or wood fiber. The blanket shall be applied so that it is in complete contact with the soil, so that erosion does not occur beneath it. Erosion netting or blankets shall be securely anchored to the slope in accordance with manufacturer’s recommendation.

3. Utilities. Whenever possible, utilities shall not be located or installed on or in fill slopes. When determined that it is necessary to install utilities on fill slopes, all plans shall be designed by a geotechnical expert.

4. Re-vegetation of fill slopes shall utilize native vegetation or vegetation similar in resource value and which will survive and stabilize the surface. Irrigation may be provided to ensure growth if necessary. Evidence shall be required indicating long-term viability of the proposed vegetation for the purposes of erosion control on disturbed areas.

E. Re-vegetation Requirements. Where required, all re-vegetation of cut and fill slopes shall be installed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, signature of a required survey plat, or other time as determined by the hearing authority. Vegetation shall be installed in such a manner as to be substantially established within one year of installation. If such measures are considered ineffective, the director of public works or his designee shall prescribe alternative measures to control erosion. Upon the failure of the person responsible to institute such measures within 30 days of notice to do so, the director of public works shall obtain competitive bids and let a contract in the name of the city of Silverton for the performance of such work. All costs incurred thereby shall become a lien against the property to be assessed, collected, and enforced as provided for dangerous buildings in Chapter 15.08 SMC.

F. Maintenance, Security, and Penalties for Erosion Control Measures.

1. Maintenance. All measures installed for the purposes of long-term erosion control, including but not limited to vegetative cover, rock walls, and landscaping, shall be maintained in perpetuity on all areas which have been disturbed, including public rights-of-way. The developer or subdivider shall record covenants for the property to ensure the ongoing maintenance of erosion control measures.

2. Security and Penalties. Except for individual lots existing prior to December 1, 2005, after an erosion control plan is approved by the hearing authority and prior to construction, the applicant shall provide a performance bond or other financial guarantees in the amount of 120 percent of the value of the erosion control measures necessary to stabilize the site. Any financial guarantee instrument proposed other than a performance bond shall be approved by the city attorney. The financial guarantee instrument shall be in effect for a period of at least one year, and shall be released when the community development director and public works director determine, jointly, that the site has been stabilized. All or a portion of the security retained by the city may be withheld for a period up to five years beyond the one-year maintenance period if it has been determined by the city that the site has not been sufficiently stabilized against erosion.

G. Site Grading. The grading of a site on hillside lands shall be reviewed considering the following factors:

1. Hazardous or unstable portions of the site shall be avoided.

2. Existing natural drainage systems shall be utilized, as much as possible, in their natural state, recognizing the erosion potential from increased storm drainage.

3. Flow-retarding devices, such as detention ponds and recharge berms, shall be used where practical to minimize increases in runoff volume and peak flow rates due to development. The needs for an emergency overflow system to safely carry any overflow water to an acceptable disposal point shall be considered for each facility.

4. Stormwater facilities shall be designed, constructed and maintained in a manner that will avoid erosion on site and to adjacent and downstream properties.

5. Alternative stormwater systems, such as dry well systems, detention ponds, and leach fields, shall be designed by a registered engineer or geotechnical expert and approved by the city’s public works director or building official. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.6.190 Storm drainage.

In all slope areas, impervious surface drainage from roofs, driveways, and parking areas must be directed to a city storm drain or other city-approved drainage system. Development activities must not block the flow of stormwater in natural drainage ways without prior approval of an alternative solution by the public works director. With application for tentative plan approval for a subdivision or partition, the applicant shall submit a conceptual plan for stormwater control. The plans shall include but are not limited to the following items as appropriate: location of curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, detention facilities and stabilized outfalls. Prior to the signing of the final plat, the applicant shall submit a permanent and complete stormwater control plan. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.6.200 Street standards.

A. Where practical, streets must be contoured to hillside areas in order to minimize environmental and scenic disruption. Street grades shall generally be 10 percent or less. Street grades of up to 12 percent may be permitted for a distance of no more than 300 feet only where topographical conditions make it impractical to meet the 10 percent standard. No intersections are permitted where street grades exceed 10 percent. Street grades over 12 percent will require variance approval by the approval authority. In no case shall a street grade exceed 15 percent for any distance. Street rights-of-way may be 40 feet in width with a minimum 28-foot-wide curb-to-curb improvement, with a five-foot-wide curb line sidewalk on one side and 10-foot-wide utility easements on both sides. The area within the utility easement shall be graded to meet the requirements of the private utilities.

B. A minimum three-foot-wide level shoulder shall be provided adjacent to all exposed public improvements such as sidewalks and streets in areas classified as hillside lands.

C. All constructed cut or fill slopes adjacent to street or sidewalk improvements must be entirely within slope easements, given to the city of Silverton, and shall be shown as such on both preliminary and final subdivision plats in areas classified as hillside lands. All retaining walls and other improvements, including landscaping, within the slope easement area shall in all cases be the property owner’s responsibility to maintain or replace.

D. Retaining walls necessary for public street improvements in areas classified as hillside lands and on public rights-of-way shall be designed and constructed as per the city’s standard specifications. The developer shall be required to reimburse the city for an independent geotechnical/structural design review by a qualified engineer, selected by the city, on all walls over five feet in height. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.6.210 Driveway standards.

The maximum difference in elevation between the curb line and finished floor level of the garage or carport for driveways serving individual hillside lots shall be on a slope of 15 percent or less. The building official may permit a difference in elevation not exceeding a 20 percent slope; provided, that there is no slope exceeding 25 percent between any two points in the driveway, and that adequate vertical curves or ramps are used in the driveway to assure usability by a standard-size American automobile. A driveway serving a residence located more than 50 feet from the public road shall conform to the following standards, which are necessary for adequate access for emergency vehicles:

A. Be improved with an all weather surface with a minimum width of 12 feet and four feet of unobstructed clearance on both sides. The unobstructed clearance areas may consist of four-foot graveled shoulders on both sides;

B. Have a maximum grade of 12 percent for no more than 300 feet;

C. Driveways 150 feet in length or more shall be provided with a vehicle turnaround meeting the approval of the Silverton fire district; and

D. Provide adequate sight distance at the intersection with a public street. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.6.220 Tree conservation, protection and removal.

All development on hillside lands shall conform to the following requirements:

A. Inventory of Existing Trees. A tree survey at the same scale as the project site plan shall be prepared, which locates all trees greater than six inches in caliper measured at four feet above ground level (d.b.h.), identified by d.b.h., species, and approximate extent of tree canopy. In addition, for areas proposed to be disturbed, the existing tree base elevations shall be provided. Dead or diseased trees shall be identified. Groups of trees in close proximity (i.e., those within five feet of each other) may be designated as a clump of trees, with the predominant species, estimated number and average diameter indicated. All tree surveys shall have a location accuracy of plus or minus two feet. The name, signature, and address of the site surveyor responsible for the accuracy of the survey shall be provided on the tree survey. Portions of the lot or project area not proposed to be disturbed by development need not be included in the inventory.

B. Evaluations of Suitability for Conservation. All trees indicated on the inventory of existing trees shall also be identified as to their suitability for conservation. When required by the hearing authority, the evaluation shall be conducted by a landscape professional. Factors included in this determination shall include:

1. Tree Health. Healthy trees can better withstand the rigors of development than nonvigorous trees.

2. Tree Structure. Trees with severe decay or substantial defects are more likely to result in damage to people and property.

3. Species. Species vary in their ability to tolerate impacts and damage to their environment.

4. Potential longevity.

5. Variety. A variety of native tree species and ages.

6. Size. Large trees provide greater protection from erosion and shade than smaller trees.

C. Tree Conservation in Project Design. Significant trees (24-inch caliper or greater conifers measured at four feet above ground level and 12-inch caliper or greater broadleaf measured at four feet above ground level) shall be protected and incorporated into the project design whenever possible.

1. Streets, driveways, buildings, utilities, parking areas, and other site disturbances shall be located such that the maximum number of existing trees on the site are preserved, while recognizing and following the standards for fuel reduction if the development is located in wildfire lands.

2. Building envelopes shall be located and sized to preserve the maximum number of trees on site while recognizing and following the standards for fuel reduction if the development is located in wildfire lands.

3. Layout of the project site utility and grading plan shall avoid disturbance of tree protection areas.

4. Trees shall be retained in significantly large areas and dense stands so as to ensure against windthrow.

5. Wooded areas associated with natural drainage ways and water areas will be maintained to preserve riparian habitat and minimize erosion. The wooded area to be retained shall be at least 10 feet in width or as recommended by the landscape professional.

6. Wooded areas along ridges and hilltops will be retained for their scenic and wildlife value.

D. Tree Protection. On all properties where trees are required to be preserved during the course of development, the developer shall follow the following tree protection standards:

1. All trees designated for conservation shall be clearly marked on the project site plan. Prior to the start of any clearing, stripping, stockpiling, trenching, grading, compaction, paving or change in ground elevation, the applicant shall install fencing at the drip-line of all trees to be preserved adjacent to or in the area to be altered. Temporary fencing shall be established at the perimeter of the drip-line. Prior to grading or issuance of any permits, the fences may be inspected and their location approved by the community development department.

2. Construction site activities, including but not limited to parking, material storage, soil compaction and concrete washout, shall be arranged so as to prevent disturbances within tree protection areas.

3. No grading, stripping, compaction, or significant change in ground elevation shall be permitted within the drip-line of trees designated for conservation unless indicated on the grading plans, as approved by the city and landscape professional. If grading or construction is approved within the drip-line, a licensed landscape professional may be required to be present during grading operations, and shall have authority to require protective measures to protect the roots.

4. Changes in soil hydrology and site drainage within tree protection areas shall be minimized. Excessive site runoff shall be directed to appropriate storm drain facilities and away from trees designated for conservation.

5. Should encroachment into a tree protection area occur which causes irreparable damage to trees, as determined by a licensed landscape professional, the project plan shall be revised to compensate for the loss. Under no circumstances shall the developer be relieved of responsibility for compliance with the provisions of this section.

E. Tree Removal. Development shall be designed to preserve the maximum number of trees on a site. The development shall follow the standards for fuel reduction if the development is located in wildfire lands. When justified by findings of fact, the hearing authority may approve the removal of trees for one or more of the following conditions:

1. The tree is located within the building envelope.

2. The tree is located within a proposed street, driveway, or parking area.

3. The tree is located within a water, sewer, or other public utility easement.

4. The tree is determined by a licensed landscape professional to be dead or diseased, or it constitutes an unacceptable hazard to life or property when evaluated by a licensed landscape professional.

5. The tree is located within or adjacent to areas of cuts or fills that are deemed threatening to the life of the tree, as determined by a licensed landscape professional.

F. Tree Replacement. Trees approved for removal, with the exception of trees removed because they were determined to be diseased, dead, or a hazard, shall be replaced in compliance with the following standards:

1. Replacement trees shall be indicated on a tree replanting plan. The replanting plan shall include all locations for replacement trees, and shall also indicate tree planting details.

2. Replacement trees shall be planted such that the trees will in time result in canopy equal to or greater than the tree canopy present prior to development of the property. The canopy shall be designed to mitigate the impact of paved and developed areas, reduce surface erosion and increase slope stability. Replacement tree locations shall consider impact on the wildfire prevention and control plan. The hearing authority shall have the discretion to adjust the proposed replacement tree canopy based upon site-specific evidence and testimony.

3. Maintenance of replacement trees shall be the responsibility of the property owner. Required replacement trees shall be continuously maintained in a healthy manner. Trees that die within the first five years after initial planting shall be replaced in kind, after which a new five-year replacement period shall begin. Replanting must occur within 30 days of notification unless otherwise noted.

G. Enforcement.

1. All tree removal shall be done in accordance with the approved tree removal and replacement plan. No trees designated for conservation shall be removed without prior approval of the city of Silverton.

2. Should the developer or developer’s agent remove or destroy any tree that has been designated for conservation, the developer may be fined up to three times the current appraised value of the replacement trees and cost of replacement or up to three times the current market value, as established by a professional arborist, whichever is greater.

3. Should the developer or developer’s agent damage any tree that has been designated for protection and conservation, the developer shall be penalized as prescribed in Chapter 1.08 SMC. If necessary, a professional arborist’s report, prepared at the developer’s expense, may be required to determine the extent of the damage. Should the damage result in loss of appraised value greater than determined above, the higher of the two values will be used. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.6.230 Modification of standards.

If the review body determines that the applicant’s plan adequately implements the policies of the comprehensive plan, the review body may modify the standards of this code as they apply to the entire proposed development, within the following limitations:

A. Front, side and rear yards may be reduced (when in conformance with the fire and building safety codes); provided, however, where attached dwellings are proposed there shall not be more than five dwelling units in any group.

B. The reduction of public right-of-way, pavement width, and/or requirements for the installation of sidewalks as specified in Chapter 3.4 SDC, Public Facilities, may be made if provisions are made to provide off-street parking in addition to that required in other portions of this code. Any reduction of these minimum street and sidewalk standards must be approved by the public works director. The additional parking requirements are as follows:

1. Detached Dwelling Units. Two additional off-street parking spaces.

2. Attached Dwelling Units. One-half additional off-street parking space for each bedroom more than one in each unit. In cases where a half space occurs in a total figure, the standard shall be increased to the next whole figure. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.6.240 Variance from hillside lands development standards.

In addition to the variance review criteria listed in Chapter 5.1 SDC, the following review criteria must also be met:

A. The variance is consistent with the stated purpose and intent of the physical and environmental constraints of the hillside development provisions.

B. The amount of deviation from standards is the least amount necessary in order to provide a practical solution to the environmental constraints of the hillside area.

C. The variance provides for an improvement in design or other characteristic better than would result from complying with the established hillside regulations. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


Chapter 2.7 WETLANDS AND RIPARIAN (/WP) OVERLAY DISTRICT

Sections:

2.7.110    Wetland – Purpose.

2.7.120    Applicability.

2.7.130    Restrictions on development within wetlands.

2.7.140    Floodplain district and wetlands density calculation.

2.7.150    Riparian – Purpose.

2.7.160    Definitions.

2.7.170    Riparian corridor – Applicability.

2.7.180    Riparian corridor – Location.

2.7.190    Permitted activities within riparian corridors.

2.7.200    Conditional uses within riparian corridors.

2.7.210    Prohibited activities within riparian corridors.

2.7.220    Riparian corridors, reduction or deviation.

2.7.230    Conservation and maintenance of riparian corridors.


2.7.110 Wetland – Purpose.

The wetlands overlay district is intended to ensure that wetland sites within the city are developed with all due sensitivity for the vital role these areas play in the environment. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.7.120 Applicability.

The wetland area regulations apply to those areas meeting Division of State Lands criteria for wetland classification. Precise wetland boundaries may vary from those shown on the comprehensive plan map exhibit if on-site inspection and delineation by a recognized authority and/or other city-approved documentation indicate more accurate boundaries. Those more precise boundaries can be identified, mapped, and used for review and development without a change in the comprehensive plan wetlands map exhibit. All developments proposed within a designated wetland area shall be subject to the provisions of conditional use review and the wetland area regulations. If the development area is within the floodplain district, then the floodplain district regulations of Chapter 2.5 SDC shall also apply. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.7.130 Restrictions on development within wetlands.

No development shall result in the elimination of a wetland area, result in eventual elimination of wetland characteristics, or be located totally within a wetland area without acquiring permit approval from federal and state regulatory agencies and the city of Silverton and, where necessary, amending the open space plan and zoning designation. Development may not infringe upon any designated wetland unless the review authority finds the following criteria have been met:

A. The development cannot be located outside the wetland area, or the wetland is proposed to be reconfigured such that the proposed total area is at least equal in size and quality to the wetland area existing prior to the proposed development. If the wetland area has not been substantially relocated, it is not necessary to remove the open space designation for such a modification.

B. The encroachment within the wetlands is the minimum required to complete the development.

C. Any encroachment or change in drainage which would adversely impact favorable wetland characteristics in the short- or long-term has been mitigated.

D. Development review is coordinated with the Division of State Lands and any other applicable agencies and other required permits have been obtained.

E. The applicable floodway or floodplain requirements of SDC 2.5.100 through 2.5.270 have been met.

F. The open space, vegetation, and wildlife protection policies of the comprehensive plan have been addressed. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.7.140 Floodplain district and wetlands density calculation.

Residential lands located in a floodplain district or wetland area shall not be used in calculating total project density except as follows:

A. Land which has been approved for development features (structures, roads, required yard areas, etc.) under the provisions of SDC 2.5.190 or 2.7.130.

B. In planned developments, land in a flood fringe or wetland area shall be calculated at 50 percent of the allowed density; provided, that the additional units can be incorporated harmoniously into the planned development and without adverse impacts on adjoining projects; and provided further, that the floodplain lands and wetlands can be effectively utilized within the planned development or dedicated for public use. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.7.150 Riparian – Purpose.

A. The purpose of establishing a riparian corridor is to protect and restore Silver Creek and its associated riparian areas, and any other waterway specified in the Silverton comprehensive plan as having riparian areas determined to be significant, thereby protecting and restoring the hydrologic, ecologic, and land conservation functions these areas provide for the community.

1. To protect fish and wildlife habitat, enhance water quality, control erosion and sedimentation, and reduce the effects of flooding.

2. To protect and restore the natural beauty and distinctive character of Silver Creek as a community asset.

3. To enhance coordination among local, state, and federal agencies regarding development activities near waterways. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.7.160 Definitions.

The following definitions shall apply to SDC 2.7.150 to 2.7.230:

“Fish-bearing stream” means a stream inhabited at any time of the year by anadromous or game fish species, or fish that are listed as threatened or endangered species under the federal or state Endangered Species Act.

“Riparian area” means lands adjacent to rivers, streams, lakes, ponds, and other water bodies. They are transitional between aquatic and upland zones, and as such, contain elements of both aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems. They have high water tables because of their close proximity to aquatic systems, soils that are usually made up largely of water-carried sediments, and some vegetation that requires free (unbound) water or conditions that are more moist than normal.

“Riparian vegetation” means native ground cover, shrubs, trees, and other vegetation predominately influenced by their association with water.

“Top-of-bank” means the first major change in the slope of the incline from the ordinary high water level of a water body. A major change is a change of 10 degrees or more. If there is no major change within a distance of 50 feet from the ordinary high water level, then the top of bank will be the elevation two feet above the ordinary high water level. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.7.170 Riparian corridor – Applicability.

A. The provisions of SDC 2.7.150 through 2.7.230 shall be applied to Silver Creek and any other waterway specified in the Silverton comprehensive plan as having riparian areas determined to be significant. The provisions shall apply regardless of whether or not a building permit, development permit, or plan authorization is required, and do not provide any exemption from state or federal regulations. When a locally significant wetland is located within or adjacent to a riparian corridor, the riparian corridor setback will be applied, and shall be measured from the boundary of the wetland.

B. Applications for plan authorizations (except annexations), development permits, or building permits, and plans for proposed public facilities on parcels containing a riparian corridor, or a portion thereof, shall contain a to-scale drawing that clearly delineates the top-of-bank and riparian corridor boundary on the entire parcel or parcels.

C. When reviewing plan authorization or development permit applications for properties containing a riparian corridor, or portion thereof, the approving authority shall consider the purpose statements in SDC 2.7.150 in determining the extent of the impact on the riparian corridor.

D. The planning commission shall be the approving authority for applications for exceptions to the provisions herein pertaining to riparian corridors and said applications shall be processed as Type III applications in accordance with SDC 4.1.400. In addition, said request shall be submitted to the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife for habitat mitigation recommendation pursuant to OAR 635-415, Fish and Wildlife Habitat Mitigation Policy. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.7.180 Riparian corridor – Location.

The riparian corridor boundary shall extend 25 feet measured horizontally from the top-of-bank, as defined herein, or both sides of those waterways defined in SDC 2.7.170(A) and having an average annual stream flow of less than 1,000 cubic feet per second (cfs), unless a request to reduce the setback has been approved according to SDC 2.7.220. Where the top-of-bank has been relocated as part of an approved waterway restoration project, at the request of affected property owners, the riparian corridor boundary shall extend 25 feet from the original top-of-bank. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.7.190 Permitted activities within riparian corridors.

A. Any use, sign, or structure, and the maintenance thereof, lawfully existing on the date of adoption of the provisions herein is permitted within a riparian corridor. Such use, sign, or structure may continue at a similar level and manner as existed on the date of adoption of the provisions herein. The maintenance and alteration of pre-existing ornamental landscaping is permitted within a riparian corridor as long as no additional riparian vegetation is disturbed. The provisions of this section shall not be affected by any change in ownership of properties containing a riparian corridor.

B. The following activities, and maintenance thereof, are permitted within a riparian corridor, subject to obtaining applicable permits, if any, from the Oregon Department of State Lands and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. All plans for development and/or improvements within a riparian corridor shall be submitted to the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife for a habitat mitigation recommendation pursuant to OAR 635-415, Fish and Wildlife Habitat Mitigation Policy.

1. Waterway restoration and rehabilitation activities such as channel widening, realignment to add meanders, bank grading, terracing, reconstruction of road crossings, or water flow improvements.

2. Restoration and enhancement of native vegetation, including the addition of canopy trees; cutting of trees which pose a hazard due to threat of falling if the tree is left in the riparian area after felling; or removal of nonnative vegetation if replaced with native plant species at the same amount of coverage or density.

3. Normal farm practices, other than structures, in existence at the date of adoption of the provisions herein, on land zoned for farm use.

4. Normal flood control channel maintenance practices within a waterway, other than structures, necessary to maintain flow.

5. Replacement of a permanent legal nonconforming structure in existence at the date of adoption of the provisions herein with a structure in the same location, if it does not disturb additional riparian area, and in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 5.2 SDC, Nonconforming Uses and Development.

6. Expansion of a permanent legal nonconforming structure in existence at the date of adoption of the provisions herein, if the area of the expansion is not within the riparian corridor, and in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 5.2 SDC.

7. Perimeter mowing and other cutting necessary for hazard prevention.

C. New fencing may be permitted subject to consideration by the community development director or his/her designee in consultation with the director of public works and applicable state and federal agencies. An application for new fencing within a riparian corridor shall contain a to-scale drawing that clearly delineates the top-of-bank and riparian corridor boundary on the entire parcel or parcels, and shall indicate why the proposal is necessary and how it minimizes intrusion into the riparian corridor. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.7.200 Conditional uses within riparian corridors.

The following activities, and maintenance thereof, are allowed within a riparian corridor if compatible with SDC 2.7.150 and if designed to minimize intrusion. Such activities shall be subject to approval of a conditional use, which may be considered separately or in conjunction with another application review. The approving authority must determine that the proposal complies with at least one of the conditional use review criteria found in Chapter 4.4 SDC. Application permits, if any, from the Oregon Department of State Lands and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers shall subsequently be obtained. All development and improvement plans shall be submitted to the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife for a habitat mitigation recommendation pursuant to OAR 635-415, Fish and Wildlife Habitat Mitigation Policy.

A. Water-related or water-dependent uses, such as drainage facilities and irrigation pumps.

B. Utilities or other public improvements.

C. Streets, roads, or bridges where necessary for access or crossings.

D. Multi-use paths, access ways, trails, picnic areas, or interpretive and educational displays and overlooks, including benches and outdoor furniture. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.7.210 Prohibited activities within riparian corridors.

The following activities are prohibited within a riparian corridor, except as permitted in SDC 2.7.190 and 2.7.200:

A. Placement of new structures or impervious surfaces.

B. Excavation, grading, fill, stream alteration or diversion, or removal of vegetation except for perimeter mowing for fire protection purposes.

C. Expansion of areas of pre-existing nonnative ornamental landscaping such as lawns, gardens, etc.

D. Dumping, piling, or disposal of refuse, yard debris, or other material. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.7.220 Riparian corridors, reduction or deviation.

A request to reduce or deviate from the riparian corridor boundary provisions of this section may be submitted to the community development director or his/her designee for consideration. A deviation request may be approved as long as equal or better protection of the riparian area will be ensured through a plan for a conservation easement, restoration, enhancement, or similar means. Such a plan shall be submitted to the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife for habitat mitigation recommendation pursuant to OAR 635-415, Fish and Wildlife Habitat Mitigation Policy. In no case shall activities prohibited in SDC 2.7.210 be located any closer than 25 feet from the top-of-bank. The planning commission shall be advised of the outcome of the deviation or reduction requests. Any decision of the community development director may be appealed to the planning commission as provided in Article 4 of this title. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.7.230 Conservation and maintenance of riparian corridors.

When approving applications for the following: land divisions, planned developments, conditional uses, and variances, or for development of properties containing a riparian corridor or portion thereof, the approval authority shall assure long-term conservation and maintenance of the riparian corridor through one of the following methods:

A. The area shall be protected in perpetuity by a conservation easement recorded on deeds and plats prescribing the conditions and restrictions set forth in SDC 2.7.150 through this section and any imposed by state or federal permits; or

B. The area shall be protected in perpetuity through ownership and maintenance by a private nonprofit organization by conditions, covenants, and restrictions (CC&Rs) prescribing the conditions and restrictions set forth in SDC 2.7.150 through this section and any imposed by state or federal permits; or

C. The area shall be transferred by deed to a willing public agency or private conservation organization with a recorded conservation easement prescribing the conditions and restrictions set forth in SDC 2.7.150 through this section and any imposed by state or federal permits; or

D. The area shall be protected through other appropriate mechanisms acceptable to the city of Silverton which ensure long-term protection and maintenance. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


Chapter 2.8 PUBLIC (/P) OVERLAY DISTRICT

Sections:

2.8.110    Purpose.

2.8.120    Applicability.

2.8.130    Abandoning use – Transfer of ownership.

2.8.140    Changing use.

2.8.150    Allowed uses.

2.8.160    Public overlay district standards.

2.8.170    Public overlay design standards.

2.8.180    Special use standards.


2.8.110 Purpose.

The public overlay district (/P) is intended to identify those properties that are in public, semi-public, or governmental ownership. These properties generally contain uses that are considered essential public services or otherwise allow uses, services or facilities that enhance the livability and quality of life for the Silverton general public. These uses, facilities or services are generally noncommercial and/or not-for-profit. The intent of the public (/P) overlay district is to recognize existing facilities, allow these sites to continue to be used to meet public needs, and when these facilities, uses, or sites are no longer needed, provide a system that allows for transfer into private ownership in accordance with established zoning. Typical types of uses that may occur within the public overlay zone are: fairground; exposition center; conference center; overnight lodging and related uses; campgrounds; airport; public park; public playground; public play field; stadium; armory; auditorium; golf course; fire station; library; museum; military training facility; cemetery; mausoleum; school; educational institution; public school or institution for those with disabilities or special needs; penal institution; reformatory; detention and correction home, institution or school; hospital; public medical and dental clinic; or municipal or governmental service building and use (e.g., reservoir, water tower, pump station, sewage treatment facility, water treatment facility, refuse transfer station or landfill, or caretaker’s unit associated with the primary use). (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.8.120 Applicability.

The public overlay is available to properties in public, semi-public, or governmental ownership. A zone map amendment (Chapter 4.7 SDC) is required to apply the overlay to properties in public, semi-public, or government ownership that change to a public, semi-public or government use. The overlay zone is in addition to the site’s base zone. Development of site with the (/P) overlay shall be consistent with the comprehensive plan and the public overlay standards as identified below in accordance with Article 4. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.8.130 Abandoning use – Transfer of ownership.

Whenever property within the public overlay (/P) is transferred to private ownership, such transferred area shall have the public overlay removed and the base zoning shall be the applicable zoning district for the property. Future development shall be consistent with the provisions of the applicable base zone and other relevant sections of the development code. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.8.140 Changing use.

Any area shown on the official zoning map that has the public overlay (/P) shall be developed in accordance with the provisions of the public overlay zone and in accordance with Article 4. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


2.8.150 Allowed uses.

	Use Categories

(Examples of uses are in Chapter 1.6 SDC; definitions are in Chapter 1.5 SDC.)	Public (P)

	Residential Categories	 

	All residential uses (household living and group living) allowed, if:	 

	- Lawfully existing as of September 1, 2006, or	P

	- Replacement or rebuilding of residential structure conforming to the same footprint as previously existed as of April 5, 2010, or	P

	- New dwelling, freestanding, or	CU

	- New dwelling(s) built in conjunction with a permitted use, including caretaker dwellings	P

	Commercial Categories	 

	Drive-up/drive-in/drive-through (drive-up windows, kiosks, ATMs, similar uses/facilities), per SDC 2.3.160(A)	N

	Bed and breakfast inn, per SDC 2.2.200	N

	Educational services, not a school (e.g., tutoring or similar services)	P

	Entertainment, major event	P

	Mobile food vendor, per SDC 2.3.160(B)	S

	Offices	P

	Outdoor recreation, commercial	P

	Parking lot (when not an accessory use)	P

	Quick vehicle servicing or vehicle repair. (See also drive-up/drive-in/drive-through uses, per SDC 2.3.160)	 

	- Fully enclosed (e.g., garage)	N

	- Not enclosed	N

	Retail sales and service (see also drive-up uses, per SDC 2.3.160)	 

	- Fully enclosed (e.g., garage)	N

	- Not enclosed (other than accessory uses)	N

	- Eating establishments as an accessory use, enclosed in same building with primary use	P

	- Eating establishment not enclosed	N

	Self-service storage	N

	Industrial Categories	 

	Industrial service (see also drive-up uses)	 

	- Fully enclosed (e.g., office)	N

	- Not enclosed	N

	Manufacturing and production	 

	- Fully enclosed	N

	- Not enclosed	N

	Warehouse and freight movement	N

	Waste-related	CU

	Wholesale sales	 

	- Fully enclosed	N

	- Not enclosed	N

	Institutional Categories	 

	Basic utilities	P

	Renewable energy facilities	 

	- Accessory use	CU+S

	- Primary use	CU+S

	Nonrenewable energy facilities	N

	Cemeteries, mausoleums, crematoriums, funeral services	CU

	Colleges	CU

	Community service	P

	Daycare, adult or child daycare; does not include family daycare (16 or fewer children) under ORS 657A.250	P

	Parks and open space	P

	Religious institutions and houses of worship	CU

	- Transitional shelter communities, per the standards in SDC 2.2.200(N)	CU

	Schools	 

	- 20 or fewer students	P

	- More than 20 students	CU

	Wildlife rehabilitation facility	CU

	Other Categories	 

	Accessory structures (with a primary permitted use)	P

	Agriculture – animals	N

	Agriculture – nurseries and similar horticulture (see also, wholesale and retail uses)	CU

	Historic building alterations, per Chapter 3.5 SDC	S

	Mining	N

	Radio frequency transmission facilities and telecommunication towers and antennas, except those allowed as ancillary to a primary permitted use	CU

	Rail lines and utility corridors, except existing facilities on nonzoned RR properties are permitted	CU

	Temporary uses (limited to P and CU uses), per SDC 4.9.100	P/CU

	Transportation facilities (operation, maintenance, preservation, and construction in accordance with the city’s transportation system plan)	P

	Jails and detention facilities	CU

	Key:

P = Permitted, subject to land use review or design review (Chapter 4.2 SDC). Other uses may be allowed with a planned development.

S = Permitted with standards (SDC 2.3.160). Other uses may be allowed with a planned development.

CU = Conditional use required (Chapter 4.4 SDC). Other uses may be allowed with a planned development.

N = Not permitted.

(Ord. 18-22 § 3, 2018; Ord. 14-01 § 1 (Exh. A), 2014; Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010)


2.8.160 Public overlay district standards.

A. Land Development.

	All Main Buildings Including Dwellings

	 	Cemeteries, Educational Facilities, and Park Districts	Amusement, Recreation, Hospital, and Service Districts

	Maximum number of main buildings per lot	Not limited	Not limited

	Minimum Lot Area:	 	 

	Dwellings – Same as prescribed for dwellings in	RM-10 district	RM-10 district

	Minimum lot width	Not limited	Not limited

	Maximum lot coverage	30 percent	Not limited

	Maximum height	2.5 stories or 35 feet	6 stories or 70 feet

B. Yards.

1. The setbacks for the public overlay shall be the same as the underlying zoning district of the property.

2. Special Setbacks. Particular segments of arterial streets have been designated with special setback lines to provide better amenities along such streets. When a yard abuts such a street, the yard depth will be measured from the special setback line. See the official zoning map for the streets which have a special setback.

C. Building Orientation Standards. Developments subject to this section shall have their buildings oriented to a street, as generally shown in Figure 2.8.160(C)(1). All of the following criteria must be met:

1. Compliance with the setback and build-to line standards, where applicable in the underlying zone. The build-to line may be set back to provide additional space for pedestrian amenities between a building and its adjoining street. In the DC underlying zone, the maximum setback is five feet.

2. Except as provided in subsections (C)(4) and (5) of this section, all buildings shall have at least one primary building entrance (i.e., dwelling entrance, a tenant entrance, lobby entrance, or breezeway/courtyard entrance) facing an adjoining street (i.e., within 45 degrees of the street property line), or if the building entrance is turned more than 45 degrees from the street (i.e., front door is on a side elevation), the primary entrance shall not be more than 60 feet in the GC underlying zone, except to provide pedestrian amenities; a walkway shall connect the primary entrance to the sidewalk. In the DCF underlying zone, all buildings with street frontage must have at least one primary building entrance facing an adjoining street. Additionally, street-facing facades of buildings shall provide an entrance at least every 45 feet along the street.

3. Off-street parking, driveways, and other vehicle areas shall not be placed between buildings and the street(s) to which they are oriented. Off-street parking shall be oriented internally to the site, with parking bays separated by landscaping, as generally shown in Figure 2.8.160(C)(1). Bays shall contain no more than 10 parking spots each, as an average over all contiguous parking bays on the same parcel.

Figure 2.8.160(C)(1) - Building Orientation with Internal Parking
[IMAGE]


4. The building orientation standard may be met with vehicle areas allowed between the street right-of-way and a building’s primary entrance when the approval body finds that all of the following criteria are met:

a. Placing vehicle areas between the street right-of-way and building’s primary entrance will not adversely affect pedestrian safety, comfort or convenience, based on the distance from the street sidewalk to the building entrance, projected vehicle traffic volumes, and available pedestrian walkways;

b. The proposed vehicle areas are limited to one drive aisle of not more than 20 feet in width with adjoining bays of not more than eight consecutive parking spaces per bay (including ADA accessible spaces) on the side(s) of the drive aisle. (The intent of which is to create a drive aisle that is street-like, and to break up parking into small bays with landscaping.); and

c. The building’s primary entrance is connected to an adjoining street by a pedestrian crosswalk as specified under SDC 3.1.300.

5. Where a development contains multiple buildings and there is insufficient street frontage to which buildings can be oriented, a primary entrance may be oriented to plaza or courtyard. When oriented in this way, the primary entrance(s) plaza or courtyard shall be connected to the street by a pedestrian walkway meeting the standards in SDC 3.1.300. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008. Formerly 2.8.150)


2.8.170 Public overlay design standards.

A. Purpose. This section promotes the public health, safety, and welfare by requiring at least a minimum level of design on every building in the public overlay district. Design is important to identifying Silverton as a unique place with successful public use areas. The design standards are intended to:

1. Encourage architecture that is consistent with the character of Silverton.

2. Ensure that new development creates a close, intimate human scale and architectural designs address all four sides of a building.

3. Encourage the use of contextually appropriate materials, textures and colors.

4. Promote pedestrian-oriented uses by orienting buildings and their entrances to the street or to civic spaces abutting the street.

5. Create vibrant civic spaces (e.g., plazas, public art, cafe seating areas, etc.) oriented to take advantage of southern exposures; civic spaces should help identify the village, create intrigue, and offer weather protection and comfort to pedestrians while adding value to adjoining properties.

6. Break down large building masses and provide visual interest along the street.

7. Balance rhythm and continuity – encourage creativity in the design of building elevations, rooflines and facade elements.

8. Treat corner lots as focal points with vertical elements, public art, seating, and other design features.

9. Provide weather protection where commercial and mixed-use buildings abut the street.

B. Applicability. The following standards are applied through design review prior to building permit review. The applicant is required to demonstrate that the standards are met by complying with the criteria under each standard. Remodels of, or additions to, designated historic residential structures are subject to the requirements under Chapter 3.5 SDC. The provisions of this section may be adjusted through the design performance option in SDC 4.2.510.

C. Pedestrian Orientation. The design of all buildings on a site shall support a safe and attractive pedestrian environment. This standard is met when the approval body finds that all of the criteria in subsections (C)(1) through (8) of this section are met. Alternatively, the approval body may approve an alternate design under SDC 4.2.510 through a Type III procedure upon finding that the proposed design equally or better achieves the above standard.

1. The building orientation standards under SDC 2.8.160 are met;

2. Primary building entrances shall open directly to the outside and, if not abutting a street, shall have walkways connecting them to the street sidewalk; every building shall have at least one primary entrance that does not require passage through a parking lot or garage to gain access;

3. Corner buildings (i.e., buildings within 20 feet of a corner as defined by the intersecting curbs) shall have corner entrances, or shall provide at least one entrance within 20 feet of the street corner or corner plaza;

4. At least 50 percent of a building’s street-facing elevation(s) shall be located at the build-to line or closer to the street; build-to lines are prescribed by SDC 2.8.150;

5. Ground floor windows or window displays shall be provided along at least 50 percent of the building’s (ground floor) street-facing elevation(s). Design elements such as large regularly spaced and similarly shaped windows with window trim, and with transom or clerestory windows above building entrances are counted; windows and display boxes shall be integral to the building design and not mounted to an exterior wall;

6. Windows shall cover no more than 90 percent of the ground floor facade length, and shall not begin less than 18 inches or more than 30 inches above the sidewalk (except transom windows). Second and third story windows shall match the vertical and horizontal character of ground level windows;

7. Street-facing elevations shall be designed with weather protection, such as awnings, canopies, overhangs, or similar features. Such weather protection shall project a minimum of four feet and a maximum of eight feet over sidewalks or other pedestrian space;

8. Drive-up and drive-through facilities, when allowed, shall conform to SDC 2.3.160.

D. Compatibility. All new buildings and major remodels shall be designed consistent with the architectural context in which they are located. This standard is met when the approval body finds that all of the criteria in subsections (D)(1) through (6) of this section are met. Alternatively, the applicant may propose different design elements as provided under SDC 4.2.510, Design performance option.

1. There is continuity or effective transitions in building sizes between new and existing buildings;

2. The ground floor and upper floor elevations and architectural detailing are compatible with adjacent buildings;

3. Roof elevation is compatible with adjacent buildings (roof pitch, shape, height step-down);

4. There is continuity in the rhythm of windows and doors on the proposed building(s);

5. The relationship of buildings to public spaces, such as streets, plazas, other areas, and public parking, including on-street parking, is strengthened by the proposed building(s);

6. The materials, colors, and architectural style are compatible with Silverton’s character. Compatible materials include masonry, tile, stucco, split face concrete blocks, or wood. Unadorned poured or tilt-up concrete or metal siding are subject to design review. Entirely pre-cast concrete buildings are not permitted. Where blank walls are required for structural reasons, all such walls visible from public streets shall include a combination of architectural elements and features such as offsets, entry treatments, patterns of varied materials and colors, decorative murals and divisions into bays, or similar features.

E. Human Scale. The design of all buildings shall be to a human scale. This standard is met when the approval body finds that all of the criteria in subsections (E)(1) through (9) of this section are met. Alternatively, the applicant may propose different design elements as provided under SDC 4.2.510, Design performance option.

1. Regularly spaced and similarly shaped windows are provided on all building stories;

2. Ground floor spaces have tall ceilings (i.e., 12 through 16 feet) with display windows on the ground floor;

3. Display windows are trimmed, recessed, or otherwise defined by wainscoting, sills, water tables, or similar architectural features;

4. On multistory buildings, ground floors are defined and separated from upper stories by appropriate architectural features (e.g., cornices, trim, awnings, canopies, arbors, trellises, overhangs, or other features) that visually identify the transition from ground floor to upper story; such features should be compatible with the surrounding architecture;

5. The tops of flat roofs are treated with appropriate detailing (i.e., cornice, pediment, flashing, trim, or other detailing) that is compatible with the surrounding architecture;

6. Pitched roofs have eaves, brackets, gables with decorative vents, or other detailing that is consistent with the surrounding architecture;

7. Historic design and compatibility requirements under Chapter 3.5 SDC, where applicable, are met;

8. Where buildings with greater than 10,000 square feet of enclosed ground floor space are proposed, they shall provide articulated facades on all street-facing elevations. This criterion is met when there is a major break in the building plane not less than once for every 30 feet of a building’s horizontal length. Breaks in building plane include windows, primary entrances, weather protection (awnings, canopies, arbors, arcades), offsets/projections/changes in elevation or horizontal direction, sheltering roofs, terraces, a distinct pattern of divisions in surface materials, ornamentation, screening trees, small-scale lighting (e.g., wall-mounted lighting or up-lighting), and/or similar features as generally shown in Figure 2.3.180(E). See also subsection (C) of this section; and

9. Utility equipment within landscaped areas or attached to structures are screened from view from public rights-of-way. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010)


2.8.180 Special use standards.

A. Renewable Energy Facilities. Where renewable energy facilities are allowed, they shall require approval through conditional use review (Type III) and conform to all of the following standards.

1. Primary or Accessory Use. The use may be primary or accessory to an allowed use within the public overlay.

2. Maximum Height and Setback. Renewable energy facilities structures built according to the International Building Code shall meet the maximum height and setback standards of SDC 2.4.150(A).

3. Performance Standards. Renewable energy facilities shall not exceed the performance standards stated by SDC 2.4.170(C).

4. Landscaping. Screening and buffering for the facilities within the public overlay shall follow the standards of SDC 3.2.300.

5. Other Permit or Licensing Requirements. The owner of the facility shall be responsible for obtaining and complying with all other applicable permit and/or licensing requirements. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010)


Chapter 3.0 DESIGN STANDARDS ADMINISTRATION

Sections:

3.0.100    Design standards – Purpose.

3.0.200    Design standards – Applicability.


3.0.100 Design standards – Purpose.

The following provisions describe how to apply the provisions of this article and the relationship between this article and the land use provisions in Article 2. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


3.0.200 Design standards – Applicability.

This article is applied differently based on whether a project is classified as a major project or a minor project. In addition to the following criteria, each chapter of this article contains “applicability” directions.

A. Major Project. Major projects are those that require design review (Chapter 4.2 SDC), land division (Chapter 4.3 SDC), conditional use review (Chapter 4.4 SDC), or planned development (Chapter 4.5 SDC) approval. Such projects must conform to the applicable sections of all of the following chapters:

1. Land use district standards (Article 2).

2. Access and Circulation (Chapter 3.1 SDC).

3. Landscaping, Street Trees, Fences and Walls (Chapter 3.2 SDC).

4. Parking and Loading (Chapter 3.3 SDC).

5. Public Facilities (Chapter 3.4 SDC).

6. Historic Landmarks (Chapter 3.5 SDC).

B. Minor Project. Minor projects are small developments and land use approvals that do not require public improvements, and those that do not fall under the major project criteria, such as land use reviews. In general, the following chapters apply. (Some individual sections may not apply.)

1. Land use district standards (Article 2).

2. Access and Circulation (Chapter 3.1 SDC).

3. Landscaping, Street Trees, Fences and Walls (Chapter 3.2 SDC).

4. Parking and Loading (Chapter 3.3 SDC).

5. Historic Landmarks (Chapter 3.5 SDC).

C. Nonconforming Situations. See Chapter 5.2 SDC for provisions related to nonconforming uses and developments. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


Chapter 3.1 ACCESS AND CIRCULATION

Sections:

3.1.100    Purpose.

3.1.200    Vehicular access and circulation.

3.1.300    Pedestrian access and circulation.


3.1.100 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that developments provide safe and efficient access and circulation for pedestrians and vehicles. SDC 3.1.200 provides standards for vehicular access and circulation. SDC 3.1.300 provides standards for pedestrian access and circulation. General street improvement requirements are provided in SDC 3.4.100, with more specific requirements provided in the city of Silverton transportation system plan and the city’s public works design standards. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


3.1.200 Vehicular access and circulation.

A. Intent and Purpose. This section implements the access management policies of the city of Silverton transportation system plan. The intent of this section is to manage vehicular access and on-site circulation to ensure the continued operational safety, capacity and function of the transportation system.

B. Applicability. This section applies to vehicle access(es) and on-site circulation facilities in the city of Silverton. This section applies when lots are created, consolidated, or modified through a land division, partition, lot line adjustment, lot consolidation, or street vacation; when development is subject to land use review or design review; and when changes are proposed to existing regulations that will result in significant changes to access and circulation. Access to a designated state or county highway is subject to the provisions of this section and the requirements of the applicable roadway authority. Where regulations of the city conflict with those of the roadway authority, the more restrictive requirements apply.

C. Access Permit Required. Access to a public street (e.g., a new curb cut or driveway approach) requires an access permit. An access permit may be in the form of a letter from the roadway authority to the applicant, or it may be attached to a land use decision notice as a condition of approval. In either case, approval of an access permit shall follow the procedures and requirements of the applicable roadway authority, as determined through the review procedures in Article 4.

D. Traffic Impact Study Requirements. The public works director may require a traffic study prepared by a registered traffic engineer to determine access, circulation, and other transportation requirements in conformance with SDC 4.1.900, Traffic impact studies.

E. Conditions of Approval. The public works director or other road authority may require the closing or consolidation of existing curb cuts or other vehicle access points, recording of reciprocal access easements (i.e., for shared driveways), development of a frontage street, installation of traffic control devices, and/or other mitigation as a condition of granting an access permit, to ensure the safe and efficient operation of the street and highway system.

F. Corner and Intersection Separation – Backing onto Public Streets. New and modified accesses shall conform to the following standards:

1. Except as provided under subsection (F)(4) of this section, the distance between street intersections or other street accesses shall meet the minimum spacing requirements as provided in the transportation system plan.

2. New property access shall be subject to the design requirements of the transportation system plan and public works design standards. The public works director may limit or require the closure and/or combination of driveway approaches, and/or impose turning restrictions (i.e., right in/out, right in only, or right out only), consistent with public works design standards or those of other roadway authorities, as applicable.

3. Vehicular access to and from off-street parking areas shall not permit backing onto a public street, except as allowed through design review or a planned development approval. (Single-family dwellings and duplex dwellings are exempt.)

4. The roadway authority may reduce the required separation distance of access points where the standard would otherwise result in a taking of private property, or conformance to the standard is not feasible due to existing lot dimensions, development, other physical features, or conflicting code requirements (e.g., driveway grade requirements, or building or fire code requirements). Where the roadway authority finds that reducing the separation distance is warranted, the total number of access points to the site shall be limited to the minimum necessary to provide reasonable access and shared/joint access may be required.

G. Site Circulation. New developments shall be required to provide a circulation system that accommodates expected traffic generated from development. Pedestrian connections, including connections through large sites, connections between sites (as applicable), and to adjacent sidewalks, must be provided and shall conform to SDC 3.1.300.

H. Joint and Cross-Access – Requirements. The number of driveway and private street intersections with public streets shall be minimized by the use of shared driveway approaches for adjoining commercial, industrial and multifamily developments, and for other uses where they abut a collector or arterial street. When necessary for traffic safety and access management purposes, or to access flag lots, the city may require joint access and/or shared driveways in the following situations:

1. For shared parking areas.

2. For adjacent developments, where access onto an arterial or collector street is limited and access spacing standards cannot otherwise be met.

3. For multi-tenant developments, and developments on multiple lots or parcels. Such joint accesses and shared driveways shall incorporate all of the following:

a. A continuous service drive or cross-access corridor that provides for driveway separation consistent with the applicable roadway authority’s access management classification system and standards;

b. A design speed of 10 miles per hour and a maximum width of 20 feet, in addition to any parking alongside the driveway; additional driveway width or fire lanes may be approved when necessary to accommodate specific types of service vehicles, loading vehicles, or emergency service provider vehicles;

c. Driveway stubs to property lines (for future extension), turnarounds, and other design features to address emergency access requirements and to make apparent that the abutting properties may be required with future development to connect to the cross-access driveway.

I. Joint and Cross-Access – Reduction in Required Parking Allowed. When a shared driveway is provided or required as a condition of approval, the land uses adjacent to the shared driveway may have their minimum parking standards reduced in accordance with the shared parking provisions of SDC 3.3.300(D).

J. Joint and Cross-Access – Easement and Use and Maintenance Agreement. Pursuant to this section, and concurrent with final plat recordation, property owners sharing an access drive must provide a joint agreement, consistent with subsections (J)(1) through (3) of this section. For projects not involving a land division, the city may not issue certificate(s) of occupancy until the property owners have completed subsections (J)(1) through (3) of this section.

1. Record an easement with the deed allowing cross-access to and from other properties served by the joint-use driveways and cross-access or service drive;

2. Record an agreement with the deed that remaining access rights along the roadway for the subject property shall be dedicated to the city and pre-existing driveways will be closed and eliminated after construction of the joint-use driveway;

3. Record a joint maintenance agreement with the deed defining maintenance responsibilities of property owners.

K. Access Connections and Driveway Design. All openings onto a public right-of-way (access connections) and driveways shall conform to all of the following design standards:

1. Driveway Approaches. Driveway approaches, including private alleys, shall be designed and located to provide exiting vehicles with an unobstructed view of other vehicles and pedestrians, and to prevent vehicles from backing into the flow of traffic on the public street or causing conflicts with on-site circulation. Construction of driveway accesses along acceleration or deceleration lanes or tapers should be avoided due to the potential for vehicular conflicts. Driveways should be located to allow for safe maneuvering in and around loading areas. See also SDC 3.3.500, Loading areas.

2. Access Connections. Access connections shall be the minimum width practicable based on projected traffic volumes and functional requirements. For specific design and construction standards, refer to the public works design standards.

3. Driveways. Driveways shall meet the following standards, subject to review and approval by the public works director:

a. Single-Family Dwelling Driveways.

i. Maximum width of 12 feet per off-street parking space, up to a maximum of 32 feet for three or more off-street parking spaces.

ii. Recreational vehicle pads must be located within the side yard or rear yard to qualify for additional driveway width as an off-street parking space.

iii. No more than two driveways allowed per lot, with each driveway conforming to the requirements in subsection (K)(1) of this section.

iv. Combined driveways with abutting properties shall not exceed 40 feet in width.

v. Separate driveways must be spaced at least six feet apart.

b. Multiple-Family and Attached Dwelling Driveways.

i. Each family unit having separate vehicle access and fronting a different street shall be treated as a single-family dwelling, except that no more than one driveway per unit is allowed.

ii. Duplexes, triplexes and fourplexes with off-street parking spaces fronting onto a street shall meet the standards of SDC 2.2.180.

iii. Driveways serving multiple-family units with combined access onto a street shall not exceed a width of 32 feet for a single driveway, except where the public works director determines that the width shall be limited to 24 feet, such as in the case of a multifamily development with 10 or fewer dwellings.

c. Commercial and industrial use driveways shall be the minimum width necessary to efficiently and safely serve the proposed development. The maximum width allowed is 40 feet, except where the public works director determines that a greater width is necessary for traffic operations and safety at street intersections.

d. Driveway grades should be less than 12 percent. Those grades exceeding 12 percent shall be subject to review and approval by the building official. Grades of 12 percent may not exceed 300 feet in length. The applicant shall provide an engineered plan for any driveway exceeding a grade of 12 percent for review and approval by the building official. Before approval, the building official must determine the driveway does not pose a safety concern.

e. Driveway cross-slopes shall not exceed two percent, and shall be designed to properly accommodate stormwater runoff.

f. Driveways 150 feet in length or more shall be provided with a vehicle turnaround meeting the approval of the Silverton fire district.

g. All driveways must be located the maximum distance which is practical from a street intersection. In no instance shall the distance from an intersection be closer than the following as measured from the near driveway edge, and the through curb line, as shown by the following illustration:

	Arterial Street	80 feet

	Collector Street	60 feet

	Neighborhood/Local Street	40 feet

Where streets of different functional classifications intersect, the distance required is that of the classification which requires the greatest distance between the access point and the intersection.
[IMAGE]


4. Driveway Construction. Driveway aprons connecting a driveway to a public street shall be constructed of concrete and installed consistent with the city’s public works design standards. The public works director may require appropriate grade transitions between driveways and abutting sidewalks or walkways to address accessibility requirements. See Figure 3.1.200.K.

Figure 3.1.200.K Typical Driveway Openings with Sidewalks/Walkways
[IMAGE]


L. Fire Apparatus Access Ways. When required under the Uniform Fire Code, city-approved fire apparatus access ways shall be provided in accordance with city standards.

M. Vertical Clearances. Driveways, private streets, aisles, turnaround areas and ramps shall have a minimum vertical clearance of 13 feet, six inches for their entire length and width.

N. Vision Clearance. No visual obstruction (e.g., sign, structure, solid fence, or shrub vegetation) between two feet and eight feet in height shall be placed in “vision clearance areas” on streets, driveways, alleys, or mid-block lanes where no traffic control stop sign or signal is provided, as shown in Figure 3.1.200.N. The sides of the minimum vision clearance triangle are the curb line or, where no curb exists, the edge of pavement. Vision clearance requirements may be modified by the public works director upon finding that more or less sight distance is required (i.e., due to traffic speeds, roadway alignment, etc.). This standard does not apply to light standards, utility poles, tree trunks and similar objects.

Figure 3.1.200.N Vision Clearance Areas

(solid lines indicate curbs or edge of pavement)
[IMAGE]


O. Construction. The following construction standards apply to all driveways:

1. Surface Options. Driveways, parking areas, aisles, and turnarounds must be paved with asphalt or concrete. Other paving materials may be used, subject to approval by the public works director. For example, porous paving materials such as porous concrete, pavers set in sand, or concrete blocks that allow grass to grow through may be permitted to reduce surface water runoff and protect water quality.

2. Surface Water Management. All driveways, parking areas, aisles, and turnarounds shall allow on-site collection of surface waters to eliminate sheet flow of such waters onto public rights-of-way and abutting property. Surface water facilities shall be constructed in conformance with the standards contained in the public works design standards. (Single-family dwellings and duplex dwellings exempt.)

3. Driveway Aprons. When driveway approaches or “aprons” are required to connect driveways to the public right-of-way, they shall be paved with concrete surfacing and conform to the city’s engineering design criteria and standard specifications. (See subsection (K) of this section.) (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


3.1.300 Pedestrian access and circulation.

A. Site Layout and Design. To ensure safe, direct, and convenient pedestrian circulation, all developments, except single-family detached housing and duplex dwellings, shall provide a continuous pedestrian system. The pedestrian system shall be designed based on the criteria in subsections (A)(1) through (3) of this section:

1. Continuous Walkway System. The pedestrian walkway system shall extend throughout the development site and connect to all future phases of development, and to existing or planned off-site adjacent trails, public parks, and open space areas to the greatest extent practicable. The developer may also be required to connect or stub walkway(s) to adjacent streets and to private property with a previously reserved public access easement for this purpose in accordance with the provisions of SDC 3.1.200, Vehicular access and circulation, and SDC 3.4.100, Transportation standards.

2. Safe, Direct, and Convenient. Walkways within developments shall provide safe, reasonably direct, and convenient connections between primary building entrances and all adjacent streets, based on the following criteria:

a. Reasonably Direct. A route that does not deviate unnecessarily from a straight line or a route that does not involve a significant amount of out-of-direction travel for likely users.

b. Safe and Convenient. Routes that are reasonably free from hazards and provide a reasonably direct route of travel between destinations.

c. “Primary entrance” for commercial, industrial, mixed use, public, and institutional buildings is the main public entrance to the building. In the case where no public entrance exists, street connections shall be provided to the main employee entrance.

d. “Primary entrance” for residential buildings is the front door (i.e., facing a street, plaza or courtyard). For multifamily buildings where individual dwelling units do not have their own exterior entrance, the walkway may connect to a lobby, courtyard, or breezeway that serves as a common entrance to multiple dwellings.

3. Connections within Developments. Connections within developments shall be provided as required in subsections (A)(3)(a) through (c) of this section:

a. Walkways must connect all building entrances to one another to the extent practicable, as generally shown in Figure 3.1.300.A;

b. Walkways must connect all on-site parking areas, storage areas, recreational facilities and common areas, and connect off-site adjacent uses to the site to the extent practicable. Topographic or existing development constraints may be cause for not making certain walkway connections; and

Figure 3.1.300.A Pedestrian Pathway System (Typical)
[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]


c. Large parking areas shall be broken up so that no contiguous parking area exceeds one acre or 150 parking spaces, whichever is less. Parking areas may be broken up with plazas, landscape areas with pedestrian access ways (20 feet minimum total width), public streets or shopping streets (driveways with street-like features). For the purpose of this section, a “shopping street” means a raised sidewalk of at least four feet in width, six-inch curb, accessible curb ramps, street trees in planter strips or tree wells, and pedestrian-oriented lighting.

B. Walkway Design and Construction. Walkways, including those provided with pedestrian access ways, shall conform to all of the standards in subsections (B)(1) through (4) of this section, as generally illustrated in Figure 3.1.300.B:

Figure 3.1.300.B Pedestrian Walkway Detail (Typical)
[IMAGE]


1. Vehicle/Walkway Separation. Except for crosswalks (subsection (B)(2) of this section), where a walkway abuts a driveway or street it shall be raised six inches and curbed along the edge of the driveway/street. Alternatively, the decision-making body may approve a walkway abutting a driveway at the same grade as the driveway if the walkway has visually contrasting materials (e.g., pavers or stamped/scored concrete) and is protected from all vehicle maneuvering areas. An example of such protection is a row of decorative metal or concrete bollards designed to withstand a vehicle’s impact, with adequate minimum spacing between them to protect pedestrians.

2. Crosswalks. Where a walkway crosses a parking area, driveway, or street (“crosswalk”), it shall be clearly marked with painted or thermo-plastic striping or similar types of nonpermanent applications. Contrasting paving materials (e.g., stamped or scored concrete or pavers inlaid between asphalt) are permitted. The public works director may require the crosswalk be designed as a raised, speed table-type crossing area.

3. Walkway Width and Surface. Walkway and access way surfaces shall be concrete, asphalt, brick/masonry pavers, or other durable surface, as approved by the public works director, at least five feet wide. Multi-use paths (i.e., for bicycles and pedestrians) shall be concrete or asphalt and subject to the city of Silverton public works design standards.

4. Accessible Routes. Walkways shall conform to applicable Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) guidelines. The ends of all raised walkways, where the walkway intersects a driveway or street, shall provide ramps that are ADA accessible, and walkways shall provide unobstructed, direct routes to primary building entrances. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


Chapter 3.2 LANDSCAPING, STREET TREES, FENCES AND WALLS

Sections:

3.2.100    Purpose.

3.2.200    Landscape conservation.

3.2.300    Landscaping.

3.2.400    Street trees.

3.2.500    Fences and walls.


3.2.100 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to promote community health, safety, and welfare by protecting natural vegetation and setting development standards for landscaping, street trees, fences, and walls. Together, these elements of the natural and built environment contribute to the visual quality, environmental health, and character of the community. Trees provide climate control through shading during summer months and wind screening during winter. Trees and other plants can also buffer pedestrians from traffic. Walls, fences, trees, and other landscape materials also provide vital screening and buffering between land uses. Landscaped areas help to control surface water drainage and can improve water quality, as compared to paved or built surfaces. This chapter is organized into the following sections:

SDC 3.2.200, Landscape conservation, prevents the indiscriminate removal of significant trees and other vegetation, including vegetation associated with streams, wetlands, and other protected natural resource areas.

SDC 3.2.300, Landscaping, sets standards for and requires landscaping of all development sites that require land use review and design review. This section also requires buffering for parking and maneuvering areas, and between different land use districts. Note that other relevant standards are provided in Article 2, Land Use (Zoning) Districts, for specific types of development.

SDC 3.2.400, Street trees, sets standards for and requires planting of street trees for shading, comfort, water quality, and aesthetic purposes.

SDC 3.2.500, Fences and walls, regulates the design of fences and walls, including allowable height and materials, to promote security, personal safety, privacy, and aesthetics. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


3.2.200 Landscape conservation.

A. Applicability. All development sites containing significant vegetation, as defined below, shall comply with the standards of this section and be subject to development review. The purpose of this section is to incorporate significant native vegetation into the landscapes of development and to protect vegetation in sensitive natural areas. The use of mature, native vegetation within developments is a preferred alternative to removal of vegetation and replanting. Mature landscaping provides summer shade and wind breaks, controls erosion, and allows for water conservation due to larger plants having established root systems.

B. Significant Vegetation. “Significant vegetation” means street trees and plants within designated sensitive land areas such as floodplains, hillside protection areas, and wetlands, and trees not within such area that have a caliper of six inches or larger at four feet above grade; except that protection shall not be required for nonnative, invasive plants (blackberries, poison oak, poison ivy, etc.) and any plants designated by the city as prohibited.

C. Mapping and Protection Required. Significant vegetation shall be mapped as required by Chapter 4.2 SDC, Land Use Review and Design Review. Significant trees shall be mapped individually and identified by species and diameter or caliper at four feet above grade. A “protection” area shall be defined around the edge of all branches (drip-line) of each tree. Drip-lines may overlap between trees. The city also may require an inventory, survey, or assessment prepared by an arborist or other qualified professional to determine tree health, construction boundaries, building setbacks, and/or recommended protection or mitigation requirements.

D. Protection Standards. Trees on public lands shall not be removed, cut, felled, trimmed or otherwise damaged or destroyed, except as approved by the city. The city may approve removal or trimming when a tree poses an immediate hazard to public safety as determined by the public works director. Other significant vegetation (including vegetation on private property) identified as meeting the criteria in subsection (B) of this section shall be retained to the extent practicable to protect environmental values and to minimize the risk of erosion, landslide, and stormwater runoff. Where protection is impracticable because it would prevent reasonable development of public streets, utilities, or land uses permitted by the applicable land use district, the city may allow removal of significant vegetation from the building envelope as defined by required yard setbacks. Where yard areas must be disturbed to install streets or utilities, the applicant may be required to restore such areas after construction with landscaping or other means to prevent erosion and to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. With the owner’s consent, the city may accept a land dedication or become a party to a conservation easement on private property for conservation purposes.

E. Mitigation Required. Where removal of or impact to significant vegetation is proposed, or it is reasonable to expect it will be unavoidable during development, the city shall require mitigation through development review. Mitigation shall be proportionate to the loss of significant vegetation. Where complete mitigation on site is not practical due to limitations of the site, the city may accept an in-lieu fee for mitigation which will occur off site.

F. Construction. All significant vegetation on a site that is not otherwise designated and approved by the city for removal shall be protected prior to, during, and after construction in accordance with a limit-of-clearing and grading plan approved by the planning official. The city may require chain-link or other protective fencing around significant vegetation and limit grading activities and operation of vehicles and heavy equipment in and around significant vegetation areas to prevent damage to the resource and to prevent erosion, pollution, or landslide hazards.

G. Tree Felling. Review approval is required for the felling of five or more significant trees on a lot or property inside the city limits within a calendar year. Felling trees at the direction of the city or by the city necessary to remove or alleviate an immediate danger to life or property; removal of any tree that is defined as a nuisance under the Silverton Municipal Code; to restore utility service or to reopen or maintain a public street or easement is exempt from review.

An application following the submittal requirements for a design review shall be submitted to the city for review prior to any tree removal. The city may approve the request when the following review criteria are met:

1. Trees shall be retained in significantly large areas and dense stands so as to ensure against windthrow.

2. Wooded areas that will likely provide an attractive on-site amenity to occupants of future developments shall be retained.

3. Wooded areas associated with natural drainage ways and water areas will be maintained to preserve riparian habitat and minimize erosion. The wooded area to be retained shall be at least 10 feet in width or as required elsewhere in this code.

4. Wooded areas along ridges and hilltops will be retained for their scenic and wildlife value.

5. Tree felling on developable areas will be avoided to retain the wooded character of future building sites and so preserve housing and design options for future city residents.

6. Wooded areas along property lines shall be retained at a minimum width of 10 feet to provide buffers from adjacent properties.

7. The plan for tree felling shall be consistent with the preservation of the site’s future development potential and zoning.

H. Exemptions. The protection standards in subsections (D) and (E) of this section do not apply to:

1. Dead or Diseased Vegetation. Dead or diseased vegetation meeting the criteria for “significant vegetation” may be removed after approval of a Type I land use review.

2. Hazardous Vegetation and Other Emergencies. Significant vegetation may be removed without land use approval when the vegetation poses an immediate threat to life or safety or protection of property (e.g., windstorm damage, fallen-over house, road or power line, blocked drainage way, or similar circumstance). (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


3.2.300 Landscaping.

A. Applicability. This section shall apply to all new developments requiring land use review and design review.

B. Landscaping Plan Required. A landscape plan is required. All landscape plans shall conform to the requirements in SDC 4.2.500(B)(5).

C. Landscape Area Standards. Landscape areas shall be as provided in the base zone (Article 2) and other applicable provisions of this code (e.g., parking areas, buffering, screening, street trees, etc.).

D. Landscape Materials. Permitted landscape materials include trees, shrubs, ground cover plants, nonplant ground covers, and outdoor hardscape features, as described below. “Coverage” is based on the projected size of the plants at maturity, i.e., typically three years after planting.

1. Existing Vegetation. Existing noninvasive vegetation may be used in meeting landscape requirements. When existing mature trees are protected on the site (e.g., within or adjacent to parking areas) the decision-making body may reduce the number of new trees required by a ratio of one inch caliper of new tree(s) for every one-inch caliper of existing tree(s) protected.

2. Plant Selection. A combination of deciduous and evergreen trees, shrubs, and ground covers shall be used for all planted areas, the selection of which shall be based on local climate, exposure, water availability, and drainage conditions. When new vegetation is planted, soils shall be amended, as necessary, to allow for healthy plant growth.

3. “Nonnative, invasive” plants, as per SDC 3.2.200(B), shall be removed during site development and the planting of new invasive species is prohibited.

a. Trees Prohibited in Right-of-Way. Because of their potential negative impact on public infrastructure, it is unlawful to plant any of the following trees in or on a public right-of-way: box elder, tree of heaven, golden chain, holly, silver maple, bamboo, poplar, willow, conifer, cottonwood, fruit trees (other than ornamental fruit trees), nut trees (other than ornamental nut trees), and ailanthus.

b. Trees Requiring Approval. It is unlawful to plant willow, cottonwood or poplar trees anywhere in the city unless the public works director approves the site as one where the tree roots will not be likely to interfere with public sewers.

4. Hardscape features, such as plazas, pathways, patios and other pedestrian amenities may count toward 10 percent of the required landscape area, except in the commercial districts, where hardscape features may count toward 50 percent of the landscape area; provided, that such features conform to SDC 2.3.170. Street trees, where required, do not count toward the minimum landscape area. Swimming pools, sports courts, decks and similar facilities may not be counted toward fulfilling the landscape requirement in any zone.

5. Ground Cover Standard. All landscaped areas, whether or not required, that are not planted with trees and shrubs, or covered with nonplant material (subsection (D)(8) of this section), shall have ground cover plants that are sized and spaced with a minimum of one plant per 12 inches on center in triangular spacing, or other planting pattern that is designed to achieve 50 percent or greater coverage of all areas not covered by shrubs or trees.

6. Tree Size. Trees shall have a minimum diameter or caliper four feet above grade of two inches or greater at time of planting.

7. Shrub Size. Shrubs shall be planted from five-gallon containers or larger.

8. Nonplant Ground Covers. Bark dust, chips, aggregate, or other nonplant ground covers may be used, but shall cover no more than 50 percent of the area to be landscaped and shall be confined to areas underneath plants. Nonplant ground covers cannot be a substitute for ground cover plants.

9. Significant Vegetation. Significant vegetation protected in accordance with SDC 3.2.200 may be credited toward meeting the minimum landscape area standards. Credit may be granted for trees at a ratio of one caliper inch per inch of tree(s) protected, except that parking lot landscaping shall be provided as required by subsection (E)(3) of this section. The street tree standards of SDC 3.2.400 may be waived by the city when existing significant trees protected within the front yard provide the same or better shading and visual quality as would otherwise be provided by street trees.

10. Stormwater Facilities. Stormwater facilities (e.g., detention/retention ponds and swales designed for water quality treatment), when allowed, shall be landscaped with water-tolerant, native plants.

E. Landscape Design Standards. All yards, parking lots, and required street tree planter strips shall be landscaped to provide, as applicable, erosion control, visual interest, buffering, privacy, open space and pathway identification, shading, and wind buffering, based on the following criteria and standards:

1. Yard Setback Landscaping Design. Landscaping in yards shall:

a. Provide visual screening and privacy within side and rear yards; while leaving front yards and building entrances mostly visible for security purposes.

b. Use shrubs and trees as wind breaks and to screen parking areas.

c. Retain natural vegetation.

d. Define pedestrian pathways and open space areas with landscape materials.

e. Provide focal points within a development, for example, by preserving large or unique trees or groves, hedges, and flowering plants.

f. Use trees to provide summer shading within common open space areas and within front yards when street trees cannot be provided.

g. Use a combination of plants for year-long color and interest.

h. Use landscaping to screen outdoor storage and mechanical equipment areas, and to enhance graded areas such as berms, swales, and detention/retention ponds.

2. Yard Setback Landscaping Requirements. Landscaping requirements listed by type of use:

a. Residential, Single-Family. All front yards (exclusive of access ways and other permitted intrusions) are required to be landscaped with one tree at least six feet in height (two-inch minimum caliper) and two five-gallon shrubs or accent plants per 1,000 square feet of required yard area with the remaining area to be treated with an attractive ground cover (e.g., lawn, bark, rock, ivy, evergreen shrubs) within six months of issuance of an occupancy permit.

b. Commercial and Multifamily. All required yards adjacent to a street (exclusive of access ways and other permitted intrusions) are required to be landscaped with one tree at least six feet in height (two-inch minimum caliper) and five five-gallon shrubs or accent plants per 1,000 square feet of required yard area with the remaining area to be treated with an attractive ground cover (e.g., lawn, bark, rock, ivy, evergreen shrubs) prior to issuance of an occupancy permit.

c. Industrial and Public/Semi-Public. All required yards adjacent to a street (exclusive of access ways and other permitted intrusions) are required to be landscaped with one tree at least six feet in height (two-inch minimum caliper) and five-gallon shrubs or accent plants per 1,000 square feet of required yard area, with the remaining area to be treated with an attractive ground cover (e.g., lawn, bark, rock, ivy, and evergreen shrubs) prior to issuance of an occupancy permit. Where the yard adjacent to a street of an industrially or publicly/semi-publicly zoned property is across a right-of-way from other industrially, commercially, or publicly/semi-publicly zoned property, only 30 percent of such yard area must be landscaped.

3. Parking Areas. A minimum 10 percent of the total surface area of all parking areas, as measured around the perimeter of all parking spaces and maneuvering areas, shall be landscaped. Such landscaping shall consist of “evenly distributed” shade trees with shrubs and/or ground cover plants that conform to the criteria in subsections (E)(1)(a) through (h) of this section. “Evenly distributed” means that the trees and other plants are distributed around the parking lot perimeter and between parking bays to provide a partial canopy. At a minimum, one tree per 10 parking spaces on average shall be planted to create a partial tree canopy over and around the parking area. Parking areas shall include landscape islands with trees to break up the parking area into rows of not more than 10 contiguous (side-by-side) parking spaces. All parking area landscapes shall have dimensions of not less than 24 square feet of area, or not less than four feet in width by six feet in length, to ensure adequate soil, water, and space for healthy plant growth. Such areas shall have irrigation or temporary irrigation to ensure plant survival and success.

Figure 3.2.300(E)(1) General Landscape Areas (Typical)
[IMAGE]


4. Screening and Buffering Required. Screening and buffering are required under the following conditions:

a. Parking/Maneuvering Area Adjacent to Streets and Drives. Where a parking or maneuvering area is adjacent and parallel to a street or driveway, an evergreen hedge, decorative wall (masonry or similar quality material) with openings, arcade, trellis, or similar partially opaque structure six feet in height shall be established between street and driveway. The required screening shall have breaks to allow visibility (natural surveillance) into the site and to allow pedestrian access to any adjoining walkways. Hedges used to comply with this standard shall be a minimum of 36 inches in height at maturity, and shall be of such species, number, and spacing as to provide year-round screening within one year after planting. Vegetative ground cover is required on all surfaces between the wall/hedge and the street/driveway line.

b. Parking/Maneuvering Area Adjacent to Building. Where a parking or maneuvering area or driveway is adjacent to a building, the area shall be separated from the building by a curb and a raised walkway, plaza, or landscaped buffer not less than five feet in width and six feet in height. Raised curbs, bollards, wheel stops, or other design features shall be used to protect pedestrians, landscaping, and buildings from being damaged by vehicles. Where parking areas are located adjacent to residential ground-floor living space, a four-foot-wide landscape buffer with a curbed edge may fulfill this requirement.

c. Screening of Mechanical Equipment, Outdoor Storage, Service and Delivery Areas, and Other Screening When Required. All mechanical equipment, outdoor storage and manufacturing, and service and delivery areas shall be screened from view from all public streets and adjacent residential districts. When these or other areas are required to be screened, such screening shall be provided by:

i. A decorative wall (i.e., masonry or similar quality material);

ii. An evergreen hedge;

iii. An opaque or sight-obscuring fence complying with SDC 3.2.500; or

iv. A similar feature accepted by the approval authority providing an adequate screen.

Walls, fences, and hedges shall comply with the vision clearance requirements and provide for pedestrian circulation, in accordance with Chapter 3.1 SDC, Access and Circulation. (See SDC 3.2.500 for standards specific to fences and walls.)

d. Existing Significant Vegetation. Where significant vegetation exists it shall be preserved as a “buffer” around the development/subdivision within the setback areas at a minimum. The reviewing body may require preservation of other tree groves and clusters of significant vegetation through design review or the planned development process when an applicant has requested an adjustment to code standards, as provided under Chapters 4.2 and 4.5 SDC.

e. Between Different Land Uses. Perimeter screening and buffering requirements of Table 3.2.300(E)(2), Table 3.2.300(E)(3) and Figure 3.2.300(E)(4) are in addition to standard setbacks of the applicable zoning district and the yard setback landscaping requirements of subsection (E)(2) of this section. Perimeter screening and buffering shall be located as near to the property line as possible. In a case of two overlapping screening and buffering types, the higher type shall prevail. To determine the type of perimeter screening and buffering required, the following procedures shall be used:

i. Identify the subject property’s zoning district. Identify the adjacent property(ies) zoning district(s) and determine if the property(ies) is developed or vacant.

ii. Determine the perimeter screening and buffering type by referring to Table 3.2.300(E)(2).

iii. Determine the perimeter screening and buffering type standards by referring to Table 3.2.300(E)(3). For the landscaping requirements, all plant units shall be rounded up and existing vegetation may be used to satisfy planting requirements.

iv. Determine the perimeter screening and buffering structures by referring to Figure 3.2.300(E)(4).

v. Screening and buffering requirements for developments adjacent to the city limits or urban growth boundary shall be determined by the community development director or designee.

vi. When the subject property develops prior to an adjacent vacant property, the vacant perimeter screening and buffering type shall be used. When the adjacent vacant property develops, all remaining screening and buffering requirements of Table 3.2.300(E)(2) shall be installed between the two developed uses.

vii. The perimeter screening and buffering standards of this section are not required when properties are separated by a public street.

viii. When different land uses are developed with a planned development, screening and buffering standards between those uses shall be similar to Table 3.2.300(E)(2), as determined by the community development director or designee.

Perimeter Screening and Buffering Types

Table 3.2.300(E)(2)

	 	ADJACENT LAND USE DISTRICT	 

	 	 	DEVELOPED	VACANT	 

	 	 	R-1

AR	R-5	RM-10

RM-20

DCF	DC

GC

P	IP

LI

I	R-1

AR	R-5	RM-10

RM-20

DCF	DC

GC

P	IP

LI

I

	SUBJECT PROPERTY 

LAND USE DISTRICT	R-1

AR	0	1	2	3	4	0	1	2	3	3

	R-5	1	0	2	3	4	1	0	3	3	3

	RM-10

RM-20

DCF	2	2	0	3	4	2	2	0	3	3

	DC

GC

P	3	3	3	0	3	3	3	3	0	3

	IP

LI

I	4	4	4	3	0	4	4	4	3	0

Perimeter Screening and Buffering Standards

Table 3.2.300(E)(3)

	SCREENING AND BUFFERING TYPE	PLANT UNITS PER 100 LINEAL FEET	ADDITIONAL SETBACK OPTIONS (IN FEET)	PLANT UNIT MULTIPLIER	STRUCTURE REQUIRED (TABLE 3.2.300(E)(3))

	1	2 Canopy Trees

2 Understory Trees	5.0

7.5

10.0

12.5	1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4	F-1

F-1

None

None

	2	2 Canopy Trees

4 Understory Trees	5.0

7.5

10.0

12.5	1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4	F-2

F-2

F-2

F-2

	3	5 Canopy Trees

10 Understory Trees

15 Shrubs	10.0

15.0

20.0

25.0	0.9

1.0

0.8

0.6	BW-1

BW-1

F-3

F-3

	4	6 Canopy Trees

9 Understory Trees

36 Shrubs

18 Evergreen Trees	20.0

30.0

40.0

50.0	0.6

0.8

1.0

0.8	BW-2

BW-2

BW-1

BW-1


[IMAGE]


Perimeter Screening and Buffering Structures

Figure 3.2.300(E)(4)

F. Irrigation. All required landscape areas except for single-family dwellings, duplexes and triplexes shall be provided with a piped underground water supply irrigation unless a licensed landscape architect or certified nurseryman submits written verification that the proposed plant materials do not require irrigation. Irrigation systems installed in the public right-of-way require an encroachment permit. The use of indigenous drought-tolerant plants from the city’s approved plant list is encouraged, and may be required where exposure, slope or soil conditions warrant. Irrigation shall be provided for plants that are not drought-tolerant.

G. Maintenance. If the plantings fail to survive, the property owner shall replace them with an equivalent specimen (i.e., evergreen shrub replaces evergreen shrub, deciduous tree replaces deciduous tree, etc.) within six months of their dying or removal, whichever comes first. All manmade features required by this code shall be maintained in good condition, or otherwise replaced by the owner within six months of any such feature being removed or irreversibly damaged (whichever comes first).

1. Height Requirements. Trees or shrubs growing in the right-of-way or on private property must be trimmed to maintain a minimum canopy height of eight feet above sidewalks, or 12 feet above streets or alleys.

2. Trimming – Specifications – Owner Responsibility.

a. Trees, shrubs or plants standing in or upon any public street or alley, or on private grounds, and having branches projecting into the public street or sidewalk, shall be kept trimmed by the owner or owners of the property adjacent to or in front of such trees, shrubs or plants, growing so that:

i. The lowest branches shall not be less than a minimum of 12 feet above any surface of the street pavement, and shall not be less than 14 feet above the surface of streets designated as state highways;

ii. The lowest branches shall not be less than a minimum of eight feet above any surface of a sidewalk;

iii. The highest branches of any bush or shrub on private property shall comply with the clear vision area requirements.

b. Newly planted trees may remain untrimmed; provided, that they do not interfere with street traffic or persons using the sidewalk, or obstruct the light of any street electric lamp.

3. Trimming – Notice to Comply. Whenever the owner or owners, lessees, occupants or persons in charge of private grounds neglect or refuse to trim any tree, shrub or plant, as provided in this code, the city shall serve upon such owner or owners, lessees, occupants or persons in charge a written notice to trim such tree or trees, shrubs or plants within 10 days after giving of such notice; failure to do so will be considered in violation of this chapter and subject to the penalties provided in this code. Such notice shall be served upon the owner or owners, lessees, occupants, person in charge, or occupant of the property by posting the same upon such property or near to the trees, shrubs or plants to be trimmed.

4. Trimming – City to Perform Work When. If the owner or owners, lessees, occupants or persons in charge of the property fail and neglect to trim such trees, shrubs or plants within 10 days after receiving said notice, the city manager or duly authorized representative may cause any vegetation in or upon any parking strip, street right-of-way or other public place in the city to be trimmed, pruned, or removed.

5. Removal of Trees or Shrubs.

a. The city manager may remove or cause or order to be removed any tree, plant or shrubs, or part thereof, planted or growing in or upon any public street or alley which is in unsafe conditions, which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers or other public improvements, or is affected with an injurious fungal disease, insect or other pest.

b. Whenever, in the opinion of the city manager, trimming or treatment of any such tree or shrub located on private ground but have branches extending over any public street or alley is deemed necessary, the city manager shall have the power to trim or treat any such branch or branches, or cause or order the same to be trimmed or treated. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


3.2.400 Street trees.

Street trees shall be planted in all new subdivisions and any project classified as a major project, except where specifically exempt under this code or where the reviewing body approves an adjustment to the street design standards under SDC 3.4.100, Transportation standards. Planting of street trees shall generally follow construction of curbs and sidewalks; however, the city may defer tree planting until final inspection of completed dwellings to avoid damage to trees during construction. The planting and maintenance of street trees shall conform to the following standards and guidelines and any applicable road authority requirements:

A. Growth Characteristics. Trees shall be selected based on climate zone, growth characteristics and site conditions, including available space, overhead clearance, soil conditions, exposure, and desired color and appearance. Drought-resistant trees should be chosen where they suit the specific soil type.

B. Caliper Size. The minimum diameter or caliper size at planting, as measured four feet above grade, is two inches.

C. Spacing and Location. The intent of this section is to provide a procession of trees for shade, buffering, pedestrian comfort and aesthetics on all city streets. Street trees shall be spaced so that there is at least one tree planted for every 35 feet of street frontage, except where existing utilities, vision clearance requirements or similar factors preclude such spacing. Actual spacing of trees may vary based on the growth habits of selected trees. See the city of Silverton street trees list.

D. Soil Preparation, Planting and Care. The developer shall be responsible for planting street trees, including soil preparation, ground cover material, staking, and temporary irrigation for one year after planting. The developer shall also be responsible for tree care (pruning, watering, fertilization, and replacement as necessary) during the first two years after planting, after which the adjacent property owners shall maintain the trees.

E. Assurances. The city shall require the developer to provide a performance and maintenance bond or cash deposit in an amount determined by an estimate provided by the developer or by the community development director, to ensure the planting of the tree(s) and care during the first year after planting.

F. Street Tree List. A list of approved street trees is available at Silverton City Hall. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


3.2.500 Fences and walls.

Construction of fences and walls shall conform to all of the following requirements:

A. General Requirements. All fences, walls, or hedges shall comply with the height limitations of the respective zoning district (Article 2, Tables 2.2.120.A and 2.3.120) and the standards of this section. The city may require installation of walls and/or fences as a condition of development approval, in accordance with land division approval (e.g., flag lots), approval of a conditional use, or design review approval. A building permit is required for fences greater than six feet in height (see also SDC 3.2.300 for landscape screening wall requirements). All fences shall be located outside any vision clearance area.

B. Dimensions.

1. The combined height of fences and/or retaining walls and/or other decorative landscape elements (i.e., rocks, railroad ties, etc.) within a front yard setback or in front of the front facade of a building shall not exceed 42 inches as measured from the grade closest to the street right-of-way. Fences in the front yard of corner lots may be six feet in height, provided the fence is 50 feet from the through-curb intersection and set back at least five feet from the property line.


[IMAGE]


2. Fences built atop retaining walls shall conform to the following standards:

a. When the retaining wall is not adjacent to or abutting a public right-of-way and is less than 30 inches in height from finished grade, the maximum height of the fence shall be six feet in a residential zoning district and eight feet in a commercial or industrial zoning district.

b. When the retaining wall is not adjacent to or abutting a public right-of-way and is greater than 30 inches in height from finished grade, the combined height of the wall and fence from finished grade shall not exceed eight and one-half feet in a residential zoning district and 10 feet in a commercial or industrial zoning district.

c. Fences located on top of retaining walls greater than 30 inches in height from finished grade and not adjacent to or abutting a public right-of-way may exceed the total allowed combined height listed in subsection (B)(2)(b) of this section; provided, that the fence is located a minimum of two feet from the retaining wall and the fence height does not exceed six feet in height with a maximum combined height of 15 feet (the maximum height requirement does not apply to any safety measure required by the International Building Code).

3. One arbor, gate, or similar garden structures not exceeding eight feet in height and six feet in width is allowed per yard; provided, that it is not within a required clear vision area.

4. Walls and fences to be built for required buffers shall comply with SDC 3.2.300.

5. Fences and walls shall comply with the vision clearance standards of SDC 3.1.200.

C. Maintenance. For safety and for compliance with the purpose of this chapter, walls and fences required as a condition of development approval shall be maintained in good condition, or otherwise replaced by the property owner.

D. Materials.

1. Permitted materials: wood, chain-link steel, iron, bricks, stone, rusticated concrete masonry block, stucco, or similar masonry, and nonprohibited evergreen plants are permitted. Poured concrete walls must be striated, battered, scored or have other finished surface. Materials on all projects other than single-family and duplex dwellings on individual lots are subject to review and approval through design review.

2. Prohibited materials: unfinished concrete blocks, straw bales, barbed or razor wire, scrap lumber or other scrap materials, sheet metal, hedges taller than eight feet and similar fence and wall materials are prohibited. Electric fences are also prohibited.

3. Masonry walls exceeding four feet in height are subject to review and approval by the building official. Fences and walls taller than six feet are subject to landscape screening and require a building permit.


[IMAGE]


(Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


Chapter 3.3 PARKING AND LOADING

Sections:

3.3.100    Purpose.

3.3.200    Applicability.

3.3.300    Automobile parking standards.

3.3.400    Bicycle parking requirements.

3.3.500    Loading areas.


3.3.100 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide basic and flexible standards for development of vehicle and bicycle parking. The design of parking areas is critically important to the economic viability of some commercial areas, pedestrian and driver safety, the efficient and safe operation of adjoining streets, and community image and livability. Historically, some communities have required more parking than is necessary for some land uses, paving extensive areas of land that could be put to better use. Because vehicle parking facilities occupy large amounts of land, they must be planned and designed carefully to use the land efficiently, minimize stormwater runoff, and maintain the visual character of the community. This chapter recognizes that each development has unique parking needs and provides a flexible approach for determining parking space requirements (i.e., “minimum” and “performance-based” standards). This chapter also provides standards for bicycle parking because many people use bicycles for recreation, commuting, and general transportation. Children as well as adults need safe and adequate spaces to park their bicycles throughout the community. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


3.3.200 Applicability.

All developments subject to land use review or design review (Chapter 4.2 SDC), including modifications to existing parking facilities, must comply with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


3.3.300 Automobile parking standards.

A. Vehicle Parking – Minimum Standards by Use. The number of required off-street vehicle parking spaces is determined in accordance with the standards in Table 3.3.300.A or, alternatively, through a separate parking demand analysis as described in subsection (A)(2) of this section.

1. Where a use is not specifically listed in this table, parking requirements are determined by finding that a use is similar to one of those listed in terms of parking needs, or by estimating parking needs individually using the demand analysis option described below.

2. An applicant may propose parking in amounts less than listed in Table 3.3.300.A by submitting a parking demand analysis to the community development director for review and approval. The parking demand analyses must be based on the proposed use and provide an estimate of parking demand based on the number of employees and customers/visitors who are likely to travel to the subject site by automobile, transit, bicycle and foot. The analysis is reviewed through a Type II land use review, or a Type III review if the request is part of an application that is already subject to Type III review. The reviewing body may approve, approve with conditions or deny the proposal.

3. Parking that counts toward the minimum requirement is parking in garages, carports, parking lots, bays along driveways, shared parking, and designated on-street parking when approved through land use review or design review, as applicable, and subject to subsection (C) of this section. In recognition that downtown is the most compact and walkable area of Silverton, off-street parking requirements are waived in the downtown commercial (DC) district.

Table 3.3.300.A – Minimum Required Parking by Use 

	Use Categories

(Examples of uses are in Chapter 1.6 SDC; definitions are in Chapter 1.5 SDC.)	Minimum Parking per Land Use

(fractions rounded down to the closest whole number)

	Residential Categories	 

	Household Living	 

	Accessory dwelling	None, when the primary single-family dwelling provides 2 spaces and there is on-street parking. If no on-street parking is available then 1 additional space must be provided.

	Single-family dwelling, including attached and detached dwellings and manufactured homes	2 spaces per dwelling unit provided on-street parking is available. If on-street parking is not available, then each unit must provide 3 spaces.

	Duplex	3 spaces per duplex

	Multifamily	1 space per studio or 1-bedroom unit plus 1 visitor space for each 4 units

	1.5 spaces per 2-bedroom unit plus 1 visitor space for each 4 units

	2.25 spaces per 3-bedroom or larger unit plus 1 visitor space for each 4 units

	Group living, such as nursing or convalescent homes, rest homes, assisted living, congregate care, and similar special needs housing 	1 space per 4 bedrooms plus 1 space per employee based on the largest shift

	Commercial Categories	 

	Drive-up/drive-in/drive-through facilities (drive-up windows, kiosks, ATMs, similar uses/facilities), per SDC 2.3.160	No parking requirement if drive-up/drive-in/drive-through is in conjunction with a business. If not in conjunction with a business, then one space per employee is required. See SDC 2.3.160 for queuing area requirements

	Bed and breakfast inn	1 space per rentable bedroom plus 1 space for owner/manager

	Educational services, not a school (e.g., tutoring or similar services)	1 space per 500 sq. ft. floor area

	Entertainment, major event	1 space for every 4 event attendees plus 1 space for every 3 employees

	Offices	1 space per 400 sq. ft. of floor area

	Outdoor recreation, commercial	1 space for every 4 event attendees plus 1 space for every 3 employees

	Parking lot (when not an accessory use)	None

	Quick vehicle servicing or vehicle repair. (See also drive-up/drive-in/drive-through uses, per SDC 2.3.160)	2 spaces per service bay plus 1 per employee

	Retail sales and service (See also drive-up uses)	Retail: 1 space per 400 sq. ft., plus 1 space for each 3 employees except bulk retail (e.g., auto, boat, trailers, nurseries, lumber and construction materials, furniture, appliances, and similar sales) 1 per 1,000 sq. ft.

	Restaurants and Bars: 8 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. floor area

	Health Clubs, Gyms: 1 space per piece of workout equipment or workout station; plus one space for every 3 employees

	Continuous Entertainment (e.g., bowling alleys): 1 space for every 4 patrons or 1 space per bowling lane plus 1 space for every 3 employees

	Lodging (hotels, motels, inns), (see also bed and breakfast inns): 1 space per rentable room plus 1 space for every 3 employees. For associated uses, such as restaurants, entertainment uses, and bars, see above

	Theaters and Cinemas: 1 space per every 4 seats

	Self-service storage	2 spaces

	Industrial Categories	 

	Industrial service (See also drive-up uses)	A minimum of 2 spaces; 1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area

	Manufacturing and production 	A minimum of 2 spaces; 1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area

	Warehouse and freight movement	A minimum of 2 spaces; 1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area

	Wholesale Sales	 

	- Fully enclosed	1 space per 1,000 sq. ft.: A minimum of 2 spaces

	- Not enclosed	1 space per 1,000 sq. ft.: A minimum of 2 spaces

	Institutional Categories	 

	Basic utilities	None

	Community service	1 space per 200 sq. ft. of floor area

	Daycare, adult or child daycare; does not include family daycare (12 or fewer children) under ORS 657A.250	1 drop-off space for every 10 children plus 1 space for each employee

	Parks and open space	1 space for every 4 attendees or per CU review (Chapter 4.4 SDC) for active recreation areas

	Religious institutions and houses of worship	1 space per every 4 seats of the main assembly area; or per CU review, as applicable

	Schools	Grade, elementary, middle, junior high schools: 2 spaces per classroom

	High schools: 1 space per 6 students plus 1 space per full-time employee

	Other Categories	 

	Accessory uses (with a permitted use)	No standard, except some uses may be required to provide parking under the minimum standards for primary uses, as determined by the decision body through land use review, conditional use review, or site design review

	Agriculture – Nurseries and similar horticulture	See retail sales and wholesale, as applicable

	Radio frequency transmission facilities	None

	Rail lines and utility corridors, except those existing prior to effective date of the ordinance codified in this title.	None

	Temporary uses (limited to “P” and “CU” uses), per SDC 4.9.100.	As determined per SDC 4.9.100

	Transportation facilities (operation, maintenance, preservation, and construction in accordance with the city’s transportation system plan)	None

B. Vehicle Parking – Minimum Accessible Parking.

1. Accessible parking shall be provided for all uses in accordance with the standards in Table 3.3.300.B; parking spaces used to meet the standards in Table 3.3.300.B shall be counted toward meeting off-street parking requirements in Table 3.3.300.A;

2. Such parking shall be located in close proximity to building entrances and shall be designed to permit occupants of vehicles to reach the entrance on an unobstructed path or walkway;

3. Accessible spaces shall be grouped in pairs where possible;

4. Where covered parking is provided, covered accessible spaces shall be provided in the same ratio as covered nonaccessible spaces;

5. Required accessible parking spaces shall be identified with signs and pavement markings identifying them as reserved for persons with disabilities; signs shall be posted directly in front of the parking space at a height of no less than 42 inches and no more than 72 inches above pavement level. Van spaces shall be specifically identified as such.

Table 3.3.300.B – Minimum Number of Accessible Parking Spaces 

Source: ADA Standards for Accessible Design 4.1.2(5)

	Total Number of Parking Spaces Provided (per lot)	Total Minimum Number of Accessible Parking Spaces (with 60-inch access aisle, or 96-inch aisle for vans*)	Van Accessible Parking Spaces (with min. 96-inch-wide access aisle)	Accessible Parking Spaces (with min. 60-inch wide access aisle)

	 	Column A	 	 

	1 to 25	1	1	0

	26 to 50	2	1	1

	51 to 75	3	1	2

	76 to 100	4	1	3

	101 to 150	5	1	4

	151 to 200	6	1	5

	201 to 300	7	1	6

	301 to 400	8	1	7

	401 to 500	9	2	7

	501 to 1,000	2% of total parking provided in each lot	1/8 of Column A**	7/8 of Column A***

	1,001	20 plus 1 for each 100 over 1,000	1/8 of Column A**	7/8 of Column A***

	*vans and cars may share access aisles	 

	**one out of every eight accessible spaces	***seven out of every eight accessible parking spaces

C. On-Street Parking. On-street parking shall conform to the following standards:

1. Dimensions. The following constitutes one on-street parking space:

a. Parallel parking, each 22 feet of uninterrupted curb;

b. Diagonal (45- to 60-degree) parking, each with 12 feet of curb;

c. Ninety-degree (perpendicular) parking, each with nine feet of curb.

2. Location. When approved through land use review or design review, as applicable, on-street parking may be counted toward the minimum standards in Table 3.3.300.A when it is on the block face abutting the subject site. An on-street parking space must not obstruct a required clear vision area and it must not violate any law or street standard.

3. Public Use Required for Credit. On-street parking spaces counted toward meeting the parking requirements of a specific use may not be used exclusively by that use, but shall be available for general public use at all times. Signs or other actions that limit general public use of on-street spaces are prohibited.

D. Shared Parking. Required parking facilities for two or more uses, structures, or parcels of land may be satisfied by the same parking facilities used jointly, to the extent that the owners or operators show that the need for parking facilities does not materially overlap (e.g., uses primarily of a daytime versus nighttime nature; weekday uses versus weekend uses); and provided, that the right of joint use is evidenced by a recorded deed, lease, contract, or similar written instrument establishing the joint use. The city may approve owner requests for shared parking through land use review or design review, as applicable.

E. Off-Site Parking. Except for single-family dwellings, the vehicle parking spaces required by this chapter may be located on another parcel of land, provided the parcel is within 500 feet of the use it serves and the city has approved the off-site parking through land use review or design review, as applicable. The distance from the parking area to the use shall be measured from the nearest parking space to a building entrance, following a sidewalk or other pedestrian route. The right to use the off-site parking must be evidenced by a recorded deed, lease, easement, or similar written instrument.

F. General Parking Standards.

1. Location. Parking is allowed only on streets, within garages, carports, and other structures, or on driveways or parking lots that have been designed and developed in conformance with this code. Article 2, Land Use (Zoning) Districts, prescribes parking location for some land uses (e.g., the requirement that parking for some multiple-family and commercial developments be located to the side or rear of buildings), and Chapter 3.1 SDC, Access and Circulation, provides design standards for driveways. Street parking spaces shall not include space in a vehicle travel lane (including emergency or fire access lanes), public right-of-way, pedestrian access way, landscape, or other undesignated area.

2. Mixed Uses. If more than one type of land use occupies a single structure or parcel of land, the total requirements for off-street automobile parking shall be the sum of the requirements for all uses, unless it can be shown that the peak parking demands are less (i.e., the uses operate on different days or at different times of the day). The city may reduce the total parking required accordingly through land use review or design review, as applicable.

3. Availability of Facilities. Owners of off-street parking facilities may post a sign indicating that such off-street parking, or portions thereof, is available only for residents, customers, and/or employees.

4. Lighting. Parking areas shall have lighting to provide not less than two footcandles of illumination over walkways leading to and from parking area. Similar lighting should be provided over parking areas but complete illumination of parking spaces at two footcandles is not required. Light standards shall be directed downward only and shielded to prevent lighting spillover into any adjacent residential district or use and to prevent light pollution in the night sky.

5. Screening of Parking Areas. Parking spaces shall be located or screened so that headlights do not shine onto adjacent residential uses, per subsection (E) of this section.

G. Parking Stall Design and Minimum Dimensions. All off-street parking spaces shall be improved to conform to city standards for surfacing, stormwater management, and striping. Standard parking spaces shall conform to the following standards and the dimensions in Figures 3.3.300.F(1) and (2), and Table 3.3.300.F:

1. Motor vehicle parking spaces shall measure nine feet wide by 18 feet long or by 16 feet long, with not more than a two-foot overhang when allowed;

2. All parallel motor vehicle parking spaces shall measure eight feet wide by 22 feet;

3. Parking area layout shall conform to the dimensions in Figures 3.3.300.F(1) and (2), and Table 3.3.300.F in this section;

4. Not more than 20 percent of the total parking spaces in a parking lot may be designated for compact cars and shall measure eight feet wide by 16 feet long. Such spaces must be signed and/or the space painted with “Compact Car Only”;

5. Parking areas shall conform to Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) standards for parking spaces (dimensions, van-accessible parking spaces, etc.). Parking structure vertical clearance and van-accessible parking spaces should refer to federal ADA guidelines; and

6. Bicycle parking shall be on a two-foot by six-foot minimum concrete pad per bike, or within a garage or patio of residential use.

Figure 3.3.300.F(1) – Parking Area Layout
[IMAGE]


Figure 3.3.300.F(2) Disabled Person Parking Requirements
[IMAGE]


Table 3.3.300.F – Parking Area Layout 

	 	PARKING ANGLE

< °	CURB LENGTH	STALL DEPTH	AISLE WIDTH	BAY WIDTH	STRIPE LENGTH

	 	SINGLE D1	DOUBLE D2	ONE WAY A1	TWO WAY A2	ONE WAY B1	TWO WAY B2

	Standard Space

(See Figure 3.3.300.F(2) for ADA space requirements)

 	90° Compact	9 ft.

8 ft.	18 ft.

16 ft.	36 ft.

32 ft.	23 ft.

23 ft.	23 ft.

23 ft.	59 ft.

55 ft.	59 ft.

55 ft.	18 ft.

16 ft.

	60°	10 ft.	20 ft.	40 ft.	17 ft.	18 ft.	57 ft.	58 ft.	23 ft.

	45°	12 ft.	18 ft. 6 in.	37 ft.	13 ft.	18 ft.	50 ft.	55 ft.	26 ft. 6 in.

	30°	17 ft.	16 ft. 6 in.	33 ft.	12 ft.	18 ft.	45 ft.	51 ft.	32 ft. 8 in.

	0°	22 ft.	8 ft.	16 ft.	12 ft.	18 ft.	28 ft.	34 ft.	8 ft.

	Important cross-references: See also Article 2, Land Use (Zoning) Districts, for parking location requirements for some multifamily and commercial land uses; Chapter 3.1 SDC, Access and Circulation, for driveway standards; and Chapter 3.2 SDC, Landscaping, Street Trees, Fences and Walls. 

(Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


3.3.400 Bicycle parking requirements.

Except for single-family dwellings and duplex dwellings, all uses that are subject to land use review or site design review, as applicable, shall provide bicycle parking, in conformance with the standards in Table 3.3.400, and subsections (A) through (I) of this section.

A. Minimum Required Bicycle Parking Spaces. Uses must provide bicycle parking spaces, as designated in Table 3.3.400. Where two options are provided (e.g., two spaces, or one per eight bedrooms), the option resulting in more bicycle parking is used.

Table 3.3.400 

	Use Categories	Specific Uses	Number of Spaces

(near building entry)

	Residential Categories	 	 

	Multifamily dwellings

(3 or more units)	Multifamily	2 or 1 space per unit

	Group living	Group living	2 or 1 space per every 2 bedrooms

	Dormitory	1 per 2 bedrooms

	Commercial Categories	 	 

	Retail sales and service	Retail sales and service	2 or 1 space per every 10 automobile spaces required

	Lodging	2 or 1 per every 10 automobile spaces required

	Office	 	2 or 1 space per every 10 automobile spaces required

	Commercial outdoor recreation	 	8 or 1 per 10 automobile spaces

	Major event entertainment	 	8 or 1 per 20 seats or per CU review

	Industrial Categories	 	 

	Manufacturing and production	 	2 or 1 per every 10 automobile spaces required

	Warehouse and freight movement	 	2 or 1 per floor area

	Institutional Categories	 	 

	Basic utilities	Bus transit center	8

	Community service	Community service	2 or 1 per every 10 required automobile spaces

	Park and ride	8

	Parks (active recreation areas only)	 	8 or per CU review

	Schools	Grades 2 – 5	1 per classroom, or per CU review

	Grades 6 – 12	4 per classroom, or per CU review

	Colleges	Excluding dormitories (see group living, above)	2 or 4 per classroom, or per CU review

	Medical centers	 	2 or 1 per 10 required automobile spaces, or per CU review

	Religious institutions and places of worship	 	2 or 1 per 10 required automobile spaces

	Daycare	 	2 or 1 per 2,000 sq. ft. of net building area

	Other Categories	 	 

	Other categories	 	Determined through land use review, site design review or CU review, as applicable

B. Exemptions. This section does not apply to single-family and duplex dwellings, home occupations, agriculture and livestock uses.

C. Long-Term Bicycle Parking. Long-term bicycle parking (covered or enclosed) may be used to fulfill bicycle parking requirements.

D. Location. Bicycle parking when located outside the building it is intended to serve must be no farther from the main building entrance than the distance to the closest motor vehicle space, or 50 feet, whichever is less.

E. Visibility and Security. Bicycle parking for customers and visitors of a use must be visible from street sidewalks or building entrances, so that it provides sufficient security from theft and damage.

F. Design Options. Bicycle parking requirements for multiple-family uses and employee parking can be met by providing a bicycle storage room, bicycle lockers, racks, or other secure storage space inside or outside of the building. For example, covered bicycle parking may be under a stairway, projecting walls, or roof overhangs. Bicycle parking, when allowed within a public right-of-way, must conform to the city of Silverton’s public works design standards.

1. Bike racks must be securely anchored to the ground, wall or other structure.

2. Racks for required bicycle parking spaces shall ensure that bicycles may be locked to them without undue inconvenience. Provision of bicycle lockers for long-term (employee) parking is encouraged but not required.

3. Bicycle parking spaces shall be at least two feet wide by six feet long and, when covered, have a vertical clearance of seven feet. An access aisle of at least five feet in width shall be provided and maintained beside or between each row of bicycle parking.

4. Each bicycle parking space must be accessible without moving another bicycle.

G. Lighting. For security, outdoor bicycle parking shall be at least as well lit as primary building entrances and vehicle parking areas.

H. Reserved Areas. Areas designated for bicycle parking shall be clearly marked and reserved for bicycle parking only; for example, with appropriate signage or pavement stenciling.

I. Hazards. Bicycle parking shall not impede or create a hazard to pedestrians. Parking areas shall be located so as to not conflict with vision clearance standards (Chapter 3.1 SDC). (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


3.3.500 Loading areas.

A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide standards for a minimum number of off-street loading spaces that will ensure adequate loading areas for large uses and developments, and to ensure that the appearance of loading areas is consistent with that of parking areas.

B. Applicability. This section applies to residential multifamily projects with 50 or more dwelling units, and nonresidential and mixed-use buildings with 20,000 square feet or more total floor area.

C. Number of Loading Spaces.

1. Multifamily Residential Buildings. Buildings where all of the floor area is in residential use shall meet the following standards:

a. Fewer than 50 dwelling units on a site that abuts a local street: No loading spaces are required.

b. All other buildings: One space per 50 units.

2. Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Buildings. Buildings where any floor area is in nonresidential uses shall meet the following standards:

a. Less than 20,000 square feet total floor area: no loading spaces required.

b. Twenty thousand to 50,000 square feet of total floor area: one loading space.

c. More than 50,000 square feet of total floor area: two loading spaces.

D. Size of Spaces. Required loading spaces shall be at least 35 feet long and 10 feet wide, and shall have a height clearance of at least 13 feet.

E. Placement, Setbacks, and Landscaping. Loading areas shall conform to the setback and perimeter landscaping standards in Articles 2 and 3. Where parking areas are prohibited between a building and the street, loading areas are also prohibited. In the downtown commercial (DC) and downtown commercial fringe (DCF) districts, the reviewing body may approve a loading area adjacent to or within the street right-of-way through design review or conditional use review, as applicable, where it finds that loading and unloading operations are short in duration (i.e., less than one hour), do not obstruct traffic during peak traffic hours, and do not interfere with emergency response services. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


Chapter 3.4 PUBLIC FACILITIES

Sections:

3.4.010    Purpose and applicability.

3.4.100    Transportation standards.

3.4.200    Public use (park) areas.

3.4.300    Sanitary sewers, water, street lights and fire protection.

3.4.400    Storm drainage and erosion control.

3.4.500    Sidewalks.

3.4.600    Utilities.

3.4.700    Construction plan approval and assurances.

3.4.800    Installation.

3.4.900    Easements.


3.4.010 Purpose and applicability.

A. Purpose. This chapter provides general development standards and approval criteria for public improvements. The code incorporates by reference the city’s public facility master plans, including plans for domestic water (specifically Chapter 2 – Design Criteria), sanitary sewer (specifically Chapter 5 – Water Quality and Regulatory Issues and Chapter 10 – Recommended Plan), storm drainage (specifically Chapter 3 – Storm Water System Design Criteria and Chapter 7 – Water Quality), parks (specifically the Goals and Policies and Strategies and Actions), and transportation (specifically all TSP Action Items in Chapter 2 and all Access Management Items in Chapter 8). The code also incorporates by reference Silverton’s public works design standards (specifically Chapters 1 through 5 and Appendices A through H). This chapter is intended to provide minimum requirements for public facilities. It is not intended to duplicate or replace the design standards contained in the above documents.

B. When Standards Apply. Development may occur only upon the city of Silverton reviewing and approving all proposed public facilities, finding them in conformance with requirements established in this chapter.

C. Engineering Design Criteria, Standard Specifications and Details. Unless otherwise provided herein, construction, reconstruction, and repair of public facilities in the city of Silverton, including but not limited to transportation facilities, water, sanitary sewer, storm drainage, parks, and other facilities, shall occur only in accordance with the city of Silverton public works design standards. The design standards’ specifications, standards, and details are hereby incorporated into this code by reference.

D. Conditions of Development Approval. Development shall not occur until all required public facilities are in place or guaranteed, in conformance with the provisions of this code and the city’s design standards. Improvements required as a condition of development approval, when not voluntarily accepted by the applicant, must be roughly proportional to the impact of the development on public facilities. Findings in the development approval must indicate how the required improvements are directly related and roughly proportional to the impact of development. (Ord. 19-09 § 1, 2019; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


3.4.100 Transportation standards.

A. Development Standards. The following standards shall be met for all new uses and developments:

1. All new lots created, consolidated, or modified through a land division, partition, lot line adjustment, lot consolidation, or street vacation must have frontage or approved access to a public street, except as specifically allowed through a planned development approval under Chapter 4.5 SDC or as provided for flag lots under Chapter 4.3 SDC, Land Divisions and Property Line Adjustments.

2. Streets within or abutting a development shall be fully improved in accordance with the transportation system plan and the design standards. Three-quarter-street improvements may be accepted only when requiring a full-width street improvement cannot be justified based on the proportionate impact of the development on the transportation system, as approved by the public works director. Where a less than full street is allowed, the minimum total paved width shall not be less than 28 feet to provide for two travel lanes and bicycle lanes, unless otherwise approved by the public works director.

3. Development of new streets, and additional street width or improvements planned as a portion of an existing street, shall be improved in accordance with this section, and public streets shall be dedicated to the applicable road authority.

4. When development occurs with frontage on a substandard right-of-way and right-of-way dedication is not required as part of the development, the setback for the new development shall be calculated based on the anticipated future right-of-way.

5. All new streets and drives shall be paved in accordance with design standards.

B. Guarantee. The city may accept a future improvement guarantee in lieu of street improvements if the following conditions exist:

1. Due to the developed condition of adjacent properties it is unlikely that street improvements would be extended in the near future, and deferring the improvement associated with the project under review does not, by itself, reduce street safety or capacity; and

2. Deferral of the improvement, or a part of the improvement, does not create a potential safety hazard to motorists, bicyclists, or pedestrians; and

3. Deferral of the improvement does not preclude future improvements in conformance with city plans; or

4. The improvement is not roughly proportional to the proposed development; and

5. The applicant has not voluntarily agreed to complete the street improvements with proposed development.

C. Creation of Rights-of-Way for Streets and Related Purposes. Streets shall be created through the approval and recording of a final subdivision or partition plat; except the city may approve the creation of a street by acceptance of a deed; provided, that the street is deemed in the public interest by the city council for the purpose of implementing the transportation system plan, and the deeded right-of-way conforms to the standards of this code.

D. Creation of Access Easements. The city may approve an access easement when the easement is necessary to provide for access and circulation in conformance with Chapter 3.1 SDC, Access and Circulation. Access easements shall be created and maintained in accordance with applicable provisions of the Uniform Fire Code.

E. Street Location, Width, and Grade. The location, width and grade of all streets shall conform to Figures 3.4.100(E)(1) through (3), the transportation system plan, and approved street plans or subdivision plats. Street location and design shall be determined in relation to existing and planned streets, topographic conditions, public convenience and safety, and in appropriate relation to the proposed use of the land to be served by such streets as follows:

1. Street grades shall be approved by the public works director in accordance with the design standards; and

2. Where the location of a street is not shown in an existing street plan, the location of streets in a development shall either:

a. Provide for the continuation and connection of existing streets in the surrounding areas, conforming to the street standards of this section; or

b. Conform to a street plan adopted by the city if it is impractical to connect with existing street patterns because of particular topographical or other existing conditions of the land. Such a plan shall be based on the type of land use to be served, the volume of traffic, the capacity of adjoining streets, and the need for public convenience and safety.


[IMAGE]


Arterial Street Cross-Sections

Figure 3.4.100(E)(1)


[IMAGE]


Collector Street Cross-Sections

Figure 3.4.100(E)(2)


[IMAGE]


Local/Neighborhood Street Cross-Sections

Figure 3.4.100(E)(3)

F. Minimum Rights-of-Way and Street Sections. Street rights-of-way and improvements must conform to the standards and specifications of the transportation system plan and design standards. Where a range of right-of-way or roadway width is indicated, the width shall be the narrower in the range unless unique and specific conditions exist as determined by the reviewing body based upon the following factors:

1. Street classification in the transportation system plan;

2. Anticipated traffic generation;

3. On-street parking needs;

4. Sidewalk and bikeway requirements based on anticipated level of use;

5. Requirements for placement of utilities;

6. Street lighting;

7. Minimize drainage, slope, and sensitive lands impacts;

8. Street tree location, as provided for in Chapter 3.2 SDC;

9. Protection of significant vegetation, as provided for in Chapter 3.2 SDC;

10. Safety and comfort for motorists, bicyclists, and pedestrians;

11. Street furnishings (e.g., benches, lighting, bus shelters, etc.), when provided;

12. Access needs for emergency vehicles; and

13. Transition between different street widths (i.e., existing streets and new streets).

G. Subdivision Street Connectivity. All subdivisions shall conform to all the following access and circulation design standards, as applicable:

1. Connectivity to Abutting Lands. The street system of proposed subdivisions shall be designed to connect with existing, proposed, and planned streets outside of the subdivision as provided in this section. Wherever a proposed development abuts unplatted land or a future development phase of the same development, street stubs shall be provided to allow access to future abutting subdivisions and to logically extend the street system into the surrounding area. All street stubs shall be provided with a temporary turnaround unless specifically exempted by the fire marshal, and the restoration and extension of the street shall be the responsibility of any future developer of the abutting land.

2. When Abutting an Arterial Street. Property access to abutting arterials shall be minimized. 

Where such access is necessary, shared driveways may be required in conformance with SDC 3.1.200. If vehicle access off a secondary street is possible, then the road authority may prohibit access to the arterial.

3. Continuation of Streets. Planned streets shall connect with surrounding streets to permit the convenient movement of traffic between residential neighborhoods and to facilitate emergency access and evacuation. Connections shall be designed to meet or exceed the standards in subsection (G)(4) of this section and to avoid or minimize through traffic on local streets. Appropriate design and traffic control and traffic calming measures, as provided in subsection (H) of this section, are the preferred means of discouraging through traffic.

4. Street Connectivity and Formation of Blocks. In order to promote efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation throughout the city, subdivisions and site developments of more than two acres shall be served by a connecting network of public streets and/or pedestrian access ways, in accordance with the following standards (minimum and maximum distances between two streets or a street and its nearest access way):

a. Residential districts: minimum of 100-foot block length and maximum 600-foot length with a desired block length of 500 feet;

b. Downtown commercial and downtown commercial fringe districts: block lengths shall be consistent with the existing town plat, as of November 5, 2008;

c. General commercial district: minimum of 100-foot block length and maximum 600-foot length;

d. Not applicable to the industrial districts.

Figure 3.4.100.G – Street Connectivity and Formation of Blocks
[IMAGE]


5. Pedestrian Access Way Standards. Where it is impractical to make a street connection in conformance with the standards in subsection (G)(4) of this section, a pedestrian access way must be provided at or near the middle of a block in lieu of the street connection, as generally shown in Figure 3.4.100.G. The city may also require developers to provide an access way where a cul-de-sac or other street is planned and the access way would connect the streets or provide a connection to other developments. Such accessories shall conform to all of the following standards:

a. Access ways shall be no less than 20 feet wide with a minimum eight-foot-wide paved surface, or wider if utilities are provided, and located within a right-of-way or easement allowing public access and, as applicable, emergency vehicle access;

b. If the streets within the subdivision or neighborhood are lighted, access ways in the subdivision must also be lighted. Access way lighting must provide at least two footcandles of illumination. Light standards shall be directed downward only and shielded to prevent lighting spillover and to prevent light pollution in the night sky;

c. A right-of-way or public access easement provided in accordance with subsection (G)(5)(a) of this section that is less than 20 feet wide may be allowed on steep slopes where the decision body finds that stairs, ramps, or switch-back paths are necessary;

d. Access ways must be wheelchair accessible except where existing topography precludes access; and

e. The city may require landscaping and fences as part of the required access way improvement to buffer pedestrians from adjacent vehicles, or to screen access ways from the view of adjacent residences.

H. Traffic Signals and Traffic Calming Features.

1. Traffic signals shall be required with development when traffic signal warrants are met, in conformance with the Highway Capacity Manual and Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where a proposed development results in an immediate need for a traffic signal, a signal meeting approved specifications shall be installed in conformance with the roadway authority’s requirements prior to occupancy of the development. The developer’s cost and the timing of improvements may be partially reimbursable through system development charge credits or other reimbursement approved by the public works director.

2. When an intersection meets or is projected to meet traffic signal warrants, the city may accept alternative mitigation, such as a roundabout, in lieu of a traffic signal, if approved by the public works director and the applicable road authority if different than the city.

3. The city may require the installation of traffic calming features such as curb extensions, reduced street width (parking on one side), medians with pedestrian crossing refuges, traffic tables or other features to reduce vehicle speeds in neighborhoods and other areas with high pedestrian use.

I. Future Street Plan and Extension of Streets.

1. A future street plan shall be filed by the applicant in conjunction with an application for a subdivision in order to facilitate orderly development. The plan must show the pattern of existing and proposed future streets from the boundaries of the proposed land division and include other divisible parcels within 600 feet surrounding and adjacent to the subject site. The street plan is not binding; rather, it is intended to show potential future street extensions with future development.

2. Streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the parcel or tract to be developed when the city determines that the extension is necessary to give street access to, or permit a satisfactory future division of, adjoining land. The point where the streets temporarily end shall conform to subsections (I)(2)(a) through (d) of this section:

a. These extended streets or street stubs to adjoining properties are not considered to be cul-de-sacs since they are intended to continue as through streets when the adjoining property is developed.

b. A temporary barricade approved by the public works director shall be constructed at the end of the street by the subdivider and shall not be removed until authorized by the city or other applicable agency with jurisdiction over the street. The cost of the barricade shall be included in the street construction cost.

c. Temporary street ends must provide turnarounds constructed to Uniform Fire Code standards for streets over 150 feet in length. See also SDC 3.1.200.

d. A one-foot-wide reserve strip shall be required to be dedicated to the city at the terminus of the stub street.

J. Street Alignment and Design. The alignment, design and construction of all streets, including vehicle and bicycling travel lanes, bus pullouts and waiting areas, sidewalks, planter strips, tree wells, street furnishings, driveway approaches (dimensions, spacing, access limitations), intersections, grades, horizontal and vertical curves, cul-de-sacs, and other improvements, shall conform to the city of Silverton design standards.

K. Streets Adjacent to Railroad Right-of-Way. When a transportation improvement is proposed within 300 feet of a public railroad crossing, or a modification is proposed to an existing public crossing, the Oregon Department of Transportation and the rail service provider shall be notified and given an opportunity to comment. Private crossing improvements are subject to review and licensing by the rail service provider.

L. Development Adjoining Arterial Streets. Where a development adjoins or is crossed by an existing or proposed arterial street, residential access shall be separated from through traffic and designed to minimize traffic conflicts. (See also the access requirements under SDC 3.1.200.) The reviewing body may require one or more of the following improvements to ensure the continued operational safety of the transportation system and land use compatibility:

1. A parallel access street (frontage road) along the arterial street with a landscape median separating the two streets.

2. Deep lots (120 feet or greater) abutting the arterial street to provide at least 10 feet of landscape buffering along the arterial, provided vehicle access is from a secondary street. Where a secondary street is not available and direct access to the arterial is necessary, such lots shall combine and share driveways.

3. Screen planting within a nonaccess reservation (e.g., public easement or tract) of not less than 10 feet in width at the rear or side property line along the arterial.

4. Other treatment approved by the city that is consistent with the intent of this section.

M. Private Streets. Private streets are permitted solely within manufactured home parks when the review body determines that public streets are not needed to provide for circulation and/or access to neighboring properties.

N. Street Names. The developer shall submit proposed street names to the city of Silverton community development department for review and submittal to the Marion County road naming committee for approval prior to recording the final plat. No new street name shall be used that duplicates or could be confused with the name of an existing street in the vicinity. Street names, signs, and numbers shall conform to the established pattern in the surrounding area, except as requested by emergency service providers.

O. Survey Monuments. Upon completion of public improvements and prior to acceptance by the city, it shall be the responsibility of the developer’s registered professional land surveyor to establish survey monuments in accordance with city and Marion County standards and provide certification to the public works director of all public improvements and as-builts.

P. Street Signs. All street signs must be reviewed and approved by the public works department or other roadway authority, as applicable, before they are installed. The developer is responsible for the cost of all signs required in the development. Street name signs shall be installed at all street intersections. Stop signs and other signs may also be required.

Q. Mailboxes. Plans for mailboxes must be approved by the United States Postal Service and the public works department prior to installation.

R. Street Light Standards. Street lights must be reviewed and approved by the public works department prior to installation.

S. Street Cross-Sections. Cross-sections shall conform to the city of Silverton public works design standards. The final lift of asphalt or concrete pavement shall be placed on all new constructed public roadways prior to final city acceptance of the roadway unless otherwise approved by the public works director.

T. Alley Standards. Use of alleys may be considered as part of residential neighborhood design. A narrower minor local street (28-foot paved surface) will be allowed with alley access because the alley will reduce some of the parking and access functions usually found on the frontage street. To the maximum extent possible, all private utilities must be located in the alley and curb cuts will not be permitted along the frontage street. The standard six-foot planter strip and five-foot setback sidewalks are required along the frontage street. Alleys shall be consistent with the city’s public works design standards, paved with a dustless surface (i.e., concrete or asphaltic concrete), and shall follow the general development standards governing streets. As an incentive, lots with alley access may be up to 1,000 square feet smaller than the standard minimum lot size of the zone. 

U. Level of Service Standard.

1. City performance standards shall be used to evaluate developments impacting city or county facilities. The level of service standard shall be LOS D based on the Highway Capacity Manual methodology and a v/c ratio of 0.85 for signalized and all-way stop controlled intersections. For unsignalized intersection, the level of service standard shall be LOS D based on the Highway Capacity Manual and a v/c ratio of 0.90. ODOT v/c ratio standards shall apply to ODOT facilities.

2. For signalized intersections, adequate level of service is LOS D, based on a weighted average of vehicle delay for the intersection.

3. For stop-controlled intersections, adequate level of service is LOS D. Level of service for two-way stop-controlled intersections is based on individual vehicle movement, and all-way stop controlled intersections is based on a weighted average of vehicle delay for the intersection.

4. An amendment or other land use application that requires analysis of traffic capacity and allows development that either (a) may cause a transportation facility to perform below the standards established in subsections (U)(1) and (U)(2) of this section, or (b) adds vehicle trips to a facility that is already performing below the standards established in subsections (U)(1) and (U)(2) of this section may be approved if:

a. Development resulting from the amendment or other land use application will mitigate the impacts of the amendment or other land use application in a manner that avoids further degradation to the performance of the facility by the time of development through one or more of the following:

i. One or more combination of transportation improvements or measures are imposed to mitigate the transportation impacts of the amendment or other land use application in a manner that avoids further degradation to the performance of the facility by the time of any development.

ii. On-site and off-site improvements beyond required frontage improvements.

iii. Payment of a fee in lieu of construction.

iv. Correction of off-site transportation deficiencies within the study area that are not substantially related to development impacts.

v. Construction of on-site facilities or facilities located within the right-of-way adjoining the development site that exceed minimum required standards and that have a transportation benefit to the public. (Ord. 19-09 § 2, 2019; Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


3.4.200 Public use (park) areas.

A. Dedication of Public Use (Park) Areas.

1. The availability of parkland and open space is a critical element in maintaining and improving the quality of life in Silverton. All new development that results in the creation of new residential dwelling units (subdivisions, partitions, planned unit developments, multifamily developments, manufactured home parks, etc.) is required to provide through payment and/or dedication public use areas (such as parks, playgrounds, community centers, trails, etc.) based on the city’s most current parks and recreation master plan.

2. Where a proposed park, playground, or other public use area shown in a plan adopted by the city is located in whole or in part in a subdivision, planned unit development and/or other development proposal, the city may require the dedication and/or reservation and/or improvement thereof for public use (parks, playgrounds, trails, etc.) purposes; provided, that the impact of the development on the city park system is roughly proportionate to the dedication/reservation/improvement being required. However, the city is under no obligation to accept such areas or improvements offered for dedication or sale.

3. The amount of land and park improvements, when required, shall be proportionate to the impact the development will have in generating park need based on the number of proposed dwelling units. All required improvements shall conform to the level of service standards identified in the city of Silverton’s most current parks master plan and as refined and adopted by the parks and recreation system development charges (SDC) methodology. The 2008 park and recreation master plan estimated a 2030 population of 14,400 and need for 115.25 acres of new parklands (based on eight acres of neighborhood park and community parkland per 1,000 population), 20 acres of new natural areas, 13,467 lineal feet of trails, and other improvements (community center, swimming pool, etc.), to serve the new need. (Note: This amount of needed land does not address the existing deficiencies since improvement fee SDCs may only be used for growth needs.) The required parkland dedication is in addition to any street tree planter strips, stormwater facilities, or other open space improvements that may be donated or otherwise required.

4. Any required parkland dedication and/or improvements in excess of the proportionate share impact of the development shall be eligible for reimbursement. The city may accept a cash payment (also known as a system development charge) in lieu of parkland dedication and/or improvement where it finds that due to location, size, or other considerations the proposed land and/or improvements would not provide suitable park facilities.

5. The Silverton city council may permit a noncity (public or private) entity to own and manage the park area required in subsection (A)(3) of this section; provided, that the city and park provider shall first enter into a legal agreement assuring that city residents will have public access to the park. The agreement, at a minimum, shall also describe the types of park uses and facilities that are to be provided, park operating hours, and ongoing maintenance responsibilities. All property taxes are the responsibility of the property owner.

6. Land that has been required to meet park needs shall be dedicated to the city or if it is to be owned by a public or private entity then the city council shall approve of the alternative ownership and legal documents acceptable to the city attorney shall be provided that assure public access, park operating hours, and ongoing maintenance responsibilities.

7. Dedication Procedures. Prior to approval of the final plat, the developer shall dedicate land as previously determined by the city in conjunction with approval of the tentative plan. Dedication of land in conjunction with multifamily development (when there is no final plat) shall be required prior to the issuance of permits and commencement of construction.

a. Prior to acceptance of required parkland dedications, the applicant/developer shall complete the following items for all proposed dedication areas:

i. The developer shall clear, fill and/or grade all land to the satisfaction of the city, install sidewalks on the parkland adjacent to any street and seed the parkland; and

ii. The developer shall submit a Phase 1 Environmental Site Assessment completed by a qualified professional according to the American Society of Testing and Materials Standards (ASTM 1527). The results of this study shall reflect a clean environmental record.

b. Additional Requirements.

i. In addition to a formal dedication on the plat to be recorded, the subdivider shall convey the required lands to the city by general warranty deed. The developer of a multifamily development or manufactured home park shall deed the lands required to be dedicated by a general warranty deed. In any of the above situations, the land so dedicated and deeded shall not be subject to any reservations of record, encumbrances of any kind or easements which, in the opinion of the director, will interfere with the use of the land for park, open space, or recreational purposes.

ii. Where any reservations, encumbrances, or easements exist, the city may require payment in lieu of dedication of land unless it chooses to accept the land subject to the encumbrances.

c. Phased Development. In a phased development, the required parkland shall be dedicated prior to approval of the final plat for the first phase. Improvements to the land as required by subsection (A)(7)(a)(i) of this section shall be made prior to approval of the final plat for the phase that includes the parkland.

8. Cash in Lieu of Dedication. At the city’s discretion, the city may accept cash payment in lieu of land dedication. The amount of the cash payment shall be set by the city council by resolution and shall be based on the parks and recreation system development charges (SDC) methodology update report. The fee shall be paid prior to the signing of the final plat, or with multifamily development (when there is no final plat) payment shall be required prior to the issuance of permits and prior to the commencement of construction.

B. System Development Charge Credit. Dedication of land or facilities to the city for parks, voluntary or otherwise, may be eligible for credit toward any required system development charge for parks. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


3.4.300 Sanitary sewers, water, street lights and fire protection.

A. Sanitary Sewer, Storm Drainage and Water System Improvements. Sanitary sewer system and water system improvements shall be installed with new development in accordance with the city’s sanitary sewer master plan, water system master plan, and public works design standards. When streets are required to be stubbed to the edge of the subdivision, sewer and water system improvements shall also be stubbed with the streets, except where the public works director finds that future extension is not practical due to topography or other constraints. Where public sanitary sewer or water service is not available within 300 feet of a property, private wells and septic systems may provide service for the development of a single-family dwelling or use serving the public on parcels containing at least two acres; provided, that a petition for improvement/waiver of remonstrance is signed for their share of the costs for and future connection to public water and sewer services. These provisions are supplementary to the provisions in Chapters 13.12 and 13.36 SMC. Any private well or septic system allowed by this section must be approved by Marion County and the State Water Resources Department.

B. Plan Approval. Development permits for sewer and water system improvements shall not be issued until the public works director has approved all sanitary sewer and water plans in conformance with city standards.

C. Over-Sizing Facilities. The city may require as a condition of development approval that sewer and water systems serving new development be sized to accommodate future development within the area as projected by the applicable water and sewer master plans and public works design standards. Oversizing of facilities may be eligible for credit toward system development charges.

D. Street Lights. Street lights shall be provided in all developments within the city and shall be provided in accordance with the city’s design standards. The reviewing body may add street lights at other locations and authorize specific exceptions to the above priorities when necessary in order to enhance the public safety and welfare.

E. Fire Protection. Developers shall provide third party verification of existing and proposed water service mains and hydrant flow supporting the development site. Hydrant flow analyses and plans for hydrants and water service mains shall be subject to review and approval by the fire marshal as part of the development review process.

F. Inadequate Facilities. Development may only occur where existing or proposed public facilities are adequate to serve the site as required per subsection (A) of this section. If services do not meet these standards, service upgrades may be required or the development permits may be restricted by the city. Deficiencies in the existing water or sewer system that cannot be rectified by the development and that if not rectified will result in a threat to public health or safety, surcharging of existing mains, or violations of state or federal standards pertaining to operation of domestic water or sewerage treatment systems will not be approved. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


3.4.400 Storm drainage and erosion control.

A. General Provisions. The city shall issue a development permit only where adequate provisions for stormwater runoff and erosion control have been made in conformance with the city of Silverton storm drainage master plan and public works design standards.

B. Accommodation of Upstream Drainage. Culverts and other drainage facilities shall be large enough to accommodate existing stormwater. Such facilities shall be subject to review and approval by the public works director.

C. Effect on Downstream Drainage. Where it is anticipated by the public works director that the additional runoff resulting from the development will overload an existing drainage facility, the city shall withhold approval of the development until provisions have been made for improvement of the potential condition or until provisions have been made for storage of additional runoff caused by the development. Stormwater detention and/or retention facilities, including water quality treatment, may be required in conformance with city standards.

D. Over-Sizing. The city may require as a condition of development approval that storm drainage systems serving new development be sized to accommodate future development within the area as projected by the applicable storm drainage master plan. Over-sizing of facilities may be eligible for credit towards SDCs.

E. Existing Watercourse. Where a proposed development is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel, or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the lines of such watercourse and such further width as will be adequate for conveyance and maintenance to protect the public health and safety.

F. Erosion Control. Specific erosion control measures shall be designed, installed and monitored in conformance with the city’s design standards. City-approved erosion control measures must be in place prior to, during and after construction activities for projects that disturb one or more acres of land over a period of time. A National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit must be obtained from the Department of Environmental Quality prior to the issuance of a development permit or land use permit.

G. Detention. All required stormwater detention must provide for the 25-year storm event. Detention shall be located in underground facilities, or, if aboveground detention is utilized, it shall be with the review and approval of the public works director. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


3.4.500 Sidewalks.

A. Requirement. Sidewalks shall be constructed on all public streets in the city by the owners of property next adjacent thereto. As such, sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications hereinafter provided. All development for which land use applications are required must include sidewalks adjacent to public streets. This requirement also applies to new single-family houses and duplexes if they are located on arterial or collector streets or on curbed local streets if there is an existing sidewalk within 500 feet on the same side of the street.

In the case of arterial or collector streets, sidewalks shall be built during their construction and considered during their reconstruction. This provision shall also apply to local streets that serve commercial and multifamily development. Sidewalks are required on both sides of all streets except in hillside developments and mini-subdivisions. If an interim street standard is being constructed which does not include bike lanes or sidewalks, interim bikeways or walkways for pedestrians shall be provided through construction of paved roadway shoulders at least eight feet in width on arterials and six feet on other streets.

B. Specifications for Construction. Specifications for the construction of the various kinds of walks provided for have been made by the city engineer and filed in the office of the city recorder, which specifications are hereby especially referred to and by reference are made a part hereof; provided, however, that changes may be made in such specifications by the city council at any time, and when so made and approved and filed in the office of the city recorder, such changed or amended specifications shall become a part hereof the same as though such specifications were now on file in the office of the city recorder.

C. Mid-Block Requirements. In the case of blocks greater than 500 feet in length, the review body shall require mid-block pedestrian walks and/or bikeways on a right-of-way at least 20 feet in width with a minimum eight-foot-wide paved surface. All walkways or bikeways between streets shall be subject to the requirements of the public works director.

D. Design, Width, and Location. All sidewalks must be constructed, replaced or repaired in accordance with the Silverton transportation system plan and the Standard Construction Specifications. The required width and location of sidewalks is as follows:

1. The required width for a sidewalk on an arterial or collector street is six feet. This width may be reduced to five feet if the sidewalk is separated from the curb by a landscaped planter strip at least five feet wide. In those instances where there is inadequate right-of-way for additional width and no additional right-of-way can be obtained as a condition of development approval, the sidewalk width may be reduced to five feet. In all cases, any right-of-way remaining outside the sidewalk is to be landscaped and maintained by the adjoining property owner.

2. Sidewalks along residential and other local streets must be a minimum of five feet in width. Street trees shall be selected from the list of approved street trees established by the city. Other tree species may be approved if they have similar qualities as those on the list. The planter strip shall be of permeable materials.

3. In the downtown area sidewalks shall be provided consistent with the Silverton downtown master plan.

4. Regardless of other provisions contained in this section, any sidewalk project that is less than 200 feet in length and connects on either end to an existing sidewalk may be designed to match the existing pattern with the approval of the city public works director.

5. Where obstructions exist or are proposed (including but not limited to mail boxes, utility poles, trees, planters, fire hydrants, signs, benches, bus stops, etc.), provisions must be made to maintain a minimum of four feet of unobstructed sidewalk width on local streets, five feet on collector and arterial streets, and five feet in the downtown commercial district.

6. Maintenance of sidewalks and planter strips shall be the continuing obligation of the adjacent property owner. Planter strips shall be landscaped and maintained in like manner to the front yard setback requirements of Article 3, Community Design Standards.

7. Sidewalks shall be designed to parallel streets in line and grade and shall avoid unnecessary meandering from the curb line and elevation changes except as necessary to avoid significant trees or traverse topographic barriers. All sidewalks shall be constructed to the official city specifications grade and at such lateral grade or slope as has been or may be specified in the general specification therefor by the city engineer. Grades shall be furnished without charge to property owners, when applied for, for the purpose of constructing sidewalks.

8. Pedestrian/bike access ways not adjacent to a public street shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide and dedicated to the public. The access way improvement shall be a minimum eight-foot-wide paved surface and shall be provided with pedestrian-scaled lighting along the access way. Lighting shall not shine into adjacent residences. Trees shall be provided within the dedicated access way in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 3.2 SDC.

E. Conformance to Street Grades. All sidewalks constructed adjacent to a street must be placed upon the street grade as established at the time of sidewalk construction. If a space is left between the property line and the sidewalk and/or between the sidewalk and the curb, the space shall be filled and surfaced with earth or other approved material level with the sidewalk. Grade shall be furnished without charge to property owners, when applied for, for the purpose of constructing sidewalks.

F. Timing of Sidewalk Construction. Sidewalk construction may be deferred until the proposed improvement on the property is completed. No occupancy permit shall be issued by the building official for a development until the provisions of this title are satisfied. The public works director shall require a future improvement assurance (as described in SDC 3.4.700) when, in his opinion, the construction of the sidewalk is impractical for one or more of the following reasons:

1. In the case of all property other than industrial:

a. The street is not improved with curbs.

b. Forthcoming installation of public utilities or street paving would be likely to cause severe damage to the new sidewalk.

c. Street right-of-way is insufficient to accommodate a sidewalk on one or both sides of the street.

d. Topography or elevation of the sidewalk base area makes construction of a sidewalk impractical or economically infeasible.

e. The location is not on a designated collector or arterial street.

f. Less than 70 percent of the property frontage is developed with sidewalks along that side of the block, except in the case of a new or developing subdivision, in which case, sidewalks shall not be deferred.

2. In the case of industrial property:

a. The frontage considered for the deferral is not on a major pedestrian route to a school, shopping center, park, church, or other pedestrian traffic generator, as determined by the public works director.

3. The deferral of the sidewalk construction does not pose a threat to the welfare and safety of the public based upon a review of the pedestrian/vehicular traffic, the width and condition of the street, and of the on-street parking.

4. Whenever the construction of a sidewalk has been deferred, the property owner shall, unless otherwise allowed by the public works director or his/her designee:

a. Grade and slope the area to the future sidewalk grade;

b. Avoid planting trees in the sidewalk area, or building fences, retaining walls, steps, or other impediments to the future sidewalk; and

c. Note on the plans for the development that a deferment has been granted but that sidewalk construction may be ordered by the city council at any time.

5. Sidewalk construction which has been deferred pursuant to this section may be initiated by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


3.4.600 Utilities.

A. Underground Utilities.

1. Generally. All new utility lines including, but not limited to, those required for electric, communication, lighting, and cable television services and similar facilities shall be placed underground, except for surface-mounted transformers, surface-mounted connection boxes and meter cabinets which may be placed above ground, temporary utility service facilities during construction, and high-capacity electric lines operating at 50,000 volts or above, subject to review and approval by the public works director.

2. New Development. The following additional standards apply to all new development, in order to facilitate underground placement of utilities:

a. The developer shall make all necessary arrangements with the serving utility to provide the underground services. Care shall be taken to ensure that all aboveground equipment does not obstruct required vision clearance areas;

b. The city reserves the right to approve the location of all surface-mounted facilities;

c. All underground utilities, including sanitary sewers and storm drains installed in streets by the developer, shall be constructed prior to the surfacing of the streets; and

d. Stubs for service connections shall be sufficient in length to avoid disturbing the street improvements when service connections are made.

3. Exception to Undergrounding Requirement. Exceptions to the undergrounding requirement may be granted by the public works director due to physical constraints, such as steep topography, sensitive lands or existing development conditions that make undergrounding impractical. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


3.4.700 Construction plan approval and assurances.

A. Plan Approval and Permit. No public improvements, including sanitary sewers, storm sewers, streets, sidewalks, curbs, lighting, parks, or other requirements, shall be undertaken except after the plans have been approved by the city, permit fee paid, and permit issued. The permit fee is required to defray the cost and expenses incurred by the city for construction and other services in connection with the improvement. The permit fee shall be set by the city council.

B. Performance Guarantee. The city may require the developer or subdivider to provide assurance, bonding or other performance guarantees to ensure completion of required public improvements. See Chapter 4.2 SDC, Land Use Review and Design Review, and Chapter 4.3 SDC, Land Divisions and Property Line Adjustments.

1. The assurance shall contain the time within which the obligation is to be met. It may take the form of a surety or performance bond, cash, a negotiable security deposit, a mutual improvement agreement, a monetary contribution to a fund for future improvements if established by a separate city ordinance or other guarantees approved by the city attorney sufficient to cover the cost of the work as estimated by the city. The bond shall be conditioned upon the developer’s carrying out the obligation and fulfilling the other requirements of this title that bear on the approval of the development. The deposit or bond shall be forfeited to the city if the developer does not fulfill the requirements. The bond or deposit shall remain in the custody of the city until the obligation is completed or the bond or deposit is forfeited, or shall be placed in an escrow account subject to city control.

2. If the public works director finds that a developer is not fulfilling an obligation, the director shall, in written notice to the developer and the developer’s surety, specify the details of noncompliance. Unless the public works director allows more time for compliance because of circumstances beyond the developer’s control, within 30 days after receiving the notice, the developer or the developer’s surety shall commence the compliance and proceed diligently to complete fulfillment of the obligation.

a. If the developer or the developer’s surety does not commence the compliance within the 30 days or the additional time allowed by the public works director, or has so commenced but fails diligently to complete the compliance, or the compliance is otherwise not completed within the time specified in granting the development approval, the city may take the following action:

i. Enter upon the site of the development and carry out the obligation in accordance with the provisions agreed upon under the acknowledgement.

ii. Notify the developer and the developer’s surety of the developer’s failure to perform as required by this code.

iii. Demand payment from the developer for the unfulfilled obligation.

iv. If the security for the obligation is a bond, notify the surety that has furnished the bond that reimbursement for the expense for fulfillment of the obligation is due and payable to the city or, if the security is a deposit of cash or other assets, appropriate as much of the deposit as is necessary to recoup the expense.

v. Void all approvals granted in reliance on the improvement assurance.

b. If a bond or other required security is not sufficient to compensate the city for expenses necessary to fulfill the obligation, the amount due to the city for the obligation is a lien in favor of the city and upon the entire contiguous real property of the owner of the land subject to the obligation.

c. The lien attaches upon the filing with the city recorder of notice of the claim for the amount due for the fulfillment of the obligation. The notice shall demand the amount due, allege the insufficiency of the bond or other security to compensate the city fully for the expense of the fulfillment of the obligation, and allege the developer’s failure to do the required obligation.

d. The lien may be foreclosed in the manner prescribed by law for foreclosing other liens on real property.

e. The remedies set forth for noncompliance are cumulative. In addition to the remedies set forth above, noncompliance by the developer or his surety with any term of a performance guarantee shall entitle the city to pursue any civil remedy permitted by law.

C. Petition for Improvement/Waiver of Remonstrance. Existing single-family residential lots of record and lots created by a land partition may be developed, provided the lots are subject to a petition for improvement/waiver of remonstrance for a future assessment district for the lacking public facilities as determined and approved by the public works director in consultation with the Silverton fire district. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


3.4.800 Installation.

A. Conformance Required. Improvements installed by the developer, either as a requirement of these regulations or at his/her own option, shall conform to the requirements of this chapter, approved construction plans, and to improvement standards and specifications adopted by the city.

B. Adopted Installation Standards. The Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, Oregon Chapter A.P.W.A., are hereby incorporated by reference; other standards may also be required upon recommendation of the public works director.

C. City Inspection. Improvements shall be constructed under the inspection and to the satisfaction of the city. The city may require minor changes in typical sections and details if unusual conditions arising during construction warrant such changes in the public interest. Modifications to the approved design requested by the developer may be subject to review under Chapter 4.6 SDC, Modifications to Approved Plans and Conditions of Approval. Any monuments that are disturbed before all improvements are completed by the subdivider shall be replaced prior to final acceptance of the improvements.

D. Engineer’s Certification and As-Built Plans. A registered civil engineer shall provide written certification in a form required by the city that all improvements, workmanship, and materials are in accordance with current and standard engineering and construction practices, conform to approved plans and conditions of approval, and are of high grade, prior to city acceptance of the public improvements, or any portion thereof, for operation and maintenance. The developer’s engineer shall also provide one set of record drawings in photo Mylar (three-mil. minimum); and a CD containing the digital record drawings in both AutoCAD (check with public works department to determine release format) and Portable Document Format (.pdf) format, in conformance with design standards specifications, for permanent filing with the city. (Ord. 14-01 § 1 (Exh. A), 2014; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


3.4.900 Easements.

A. Provision. The developer is responsible for making arrangements with the city, the applicable district, and each utility franchise for the provision and dedication of utility easements necessary to provide full services to the development. Public main line utility easements shall conform to city specification. See the design standards.

B. Recordation. As determined by the public works director, all easement facilities required under this chapter shall be recorded after final acceptance of public improvements. See also Chapter 4.3 SDC, Land Divisions and Property Line Adjustments. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


Chapter 3.5 HISTORIC LANDMARKS

Sections:

3.5.100    Purpose.

3.5.200    Historic landmark commission.

3.5.300    Historic resources inventory.

3.5.400    Local historic districts.

3.5.500    Designated landmarks register.

3.5.600    Historic design review.

3.5.700    Historic relocations and demolitions.

3.5.800    Exclusions.

3.5.900    Appeals.


3.5.100 Purpose.

The city recognizes that certain significant historic resources located within its boundaries contribute to the unique character of the community and are irreplaceable, and as such, merit preservation. This chapter establishes an historic landmark commission; a program for the identification, evaluation, and designation of historic resources as landmarks; and a process for assisting in the perpetuation of these resources through review of alteration, moving or demolition of designated historic landmarks which have statewide or national significance. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


3.5.200 Historic landmark commission.

A. The mayor and city council shall appoint a five-member historic landmark commission (“commission”) with a demonstrated interest, competence, or knowledge in historic preservation to carry out the provisions of this chapter. The membership criteria, term of service, election of officers, number of frequency of meetings, staff support for the commission, and roles and responsibilities of the commission are as provided in the ordinance codified in this title.

B. A simple majority of the seated members of the commission shall constitute a quorum to conduct official business.

C. In the event that the historic landmark commission is unable to reach a quorum due to the lack of interested or qualified members, the historic landmark commission shall make recommendations regarding the alteration, moving or demolition of designated historic landmarks and the Silverton planning commission shall make the decision following the Type III process.

D. Employing the procedures and criteria in SDC 3.5.300, the commission shall periodically identify, evaluate, and re-evaluate the historic resources of the city and maintain an accurate Historic Resources Inventory.

E. Employing the procedures and criteria in SDC 3.5.500, the commission shall periodically revise the designated landmarks register of the city by adding or deleting properties.

F. Employing the procedures and criteria in SDC 3.5.500 and 3.5.700, the commission shall review and act upon applications for the alteration, relocation, or demolition of properties listed on the Designated Landmarks Register.

G. The commission shall advise and make policy recommendations to the Silverton city council on matters relating to historic preservation.

H. Nothing in the above section shall conflict or supersede with the duties and responsibilities assigned to the Silverton planning commission. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


3.5.300 Historic resources inventory.

A. The commission shall determine and periodically revise priorities for the identification and evaluation of historic resources.

B. The commission shall use State Historic Preservation Office standards for evaluating historic resources. The system shall rank surveyed historic resources as historic contributing or nonhistoric contributing, and eligible, potentially eligible, or ineligible for listing on the National Registry of Historic Places. Owners of surveyed properties will be notified of these findings.

C. Documentation of properties in the Historic Resources Inventory shall be on forms compatible with property survey standards established by the State Historic Preservation Office.

D. Documentation of properties in the Historic Resources Inventory is an administrative function of the community development department that does not require a land use decision.

E. Alterations or new construction proposed for a property listed on the Historic Resources Inventory are not subject to the regulations of SDC 3.5.600 and 3.5.700 unless the property is also listed on the National Register of Historic Places. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


3.5.400 Local historic districts.

A. Any individual or group, including the commission acting on its own initiative, may nominate a defined geographical area as a local historic district by submitting a complete application to the commission.

B. The historic landmarks commission shall review a request for the creation of a local historic district and make a recommendation to city council for the approval or denial of the proposed district. City council shall establish or abolish a local historic district by the enactment of an ordinance.

C. Documentation of properties within a proposed local historic district shall be on forms compatible with property survey standards established by the State Historic Preservation Office.

D. At least 55 percent of properties within a proposed local historic district shall be identified as historic contributing properties using State Historic Preservation standards.

E. Properties identified as historic contributing within approved local historic districts shall be listed on the Historic Resources Inventory.

F. The alteration, moving, or demolition of a property located within a designated local historic district is not subject to the regulations of SDC 3.5.600 and 3.5.700 unless that property is also listed on the National Registry of Historic Places. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010)


3.5.500 Designated landmarks register.

A. Properties listed on the National Register of Historic Places, including all properties within National Register Historic District boundaries, shall be automatically listed on the Designated Landmarks Register. As Historic Resources of Statewide or National Significance, all such properties shall be subject to the regulations in SDC 3.5.600 and 3.5.700. Only properties listed on the Designated Landmarks Register shall be eligible for tax incentives and grants administered by the State Historic Preservation Office.

B. Any individual or group, including the commission acting on its own initiative, may nominate a historic resource for inclusion on or removal from the Designated Landmarks Register by submitting a complete application to the commission. The burden of proof lies with the applicant. No individual property shall be so designated without the written consent of the owner. In the case of multiple ownership, no property shall be so designated if a majority of the owners oppose the designation.

C. The commission shall establish standards for a complete application. Upon acceptance of a complete application, the commission shall review the application using a Type III procedure under SDC 4.1.400.

D. In order to be included or maintained on the Designated Landmarks Register, the commission must find that the historic resource is over 50 years of age or of extraordinary historic importance, and possess sufficient historic integrity, and:

1. Is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of local, state, or national history; or

2. Is associated with the lives of persons, or groups of people, significant in local, state, or national history; or

3. Embodies the distinctive characteristics of an architectural type, style, period, or method of construction or that represents the work of a master, or that possesses high artistic values, or that represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction; or

4. Has yielded or is likely to yield information which is important in local, state, or national history.

E. The commission shall develop findings to support its decisions. These findings shall indicate those elements of a property, including interior landscape, architecture, and archaeological features, that are included in the designation. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008. Formerly 3.5.400)


3.5.600 Historic design review.

A. Alterations or new construction located on a property listed on the designated landmarks register are subject to historic design review unless exempted by subsection (B) of this section.

B. Exempt from Historic Design Review. The following activities shall be exempt from historic design review:

1. Normal repair and maintenance other than change of facade color where exterior material or color is specifically listed in the National Register nomination as an attribute that contributes to the resource’s historic value;

2. Changes that do not require a building permit, design review permit, sign permit, or other permit from the city and that will not alter the exterior material of a historic resource;

3. Changes of exterior paint color unless the exterior color was specifically listed in the National Register of Historic Places nomination as an attribute that contributes to the resource’s historic value; or

4. Changes in landscaping unless the landscaping is identified in the National Register of Historic Places nomination as an attribute that contributes to the resource’s historic value;

5. Parking lot landscaping that meets the standards of Chapter 3.2 SDC and does not involve the installation of a wall or fence;

C. The following activities shall require staff-level historic design review through a Type I (subsections (C)(1) through (4) of this section) or Type II (subsections (C)(5) through (7) of this section) procedure (SDC 4.1.200 and 4.1.300), as applicable:

1. Exterior alterations or renovations to elevation(s) facing an interior or rear property line or that are not otherwise visible from the adjacent public right(s)-of-way.

2. Additions to the building that are not visible from the public right(s)-of-way and do not change the building footprint, height, volume or massing as seen from the adjacent public right(s)-of-way.

3. Restoration of historic features using materials and techniques that are similar to those used in the original construction or that will substantially replicate the original when such materials or techniques are not available.

4. In-kind replacement of doors, windows, siding and other architectural features that are visible from the adjacent public right(s)-of-way.

5. Uncovered or covered rear deck additions not visible from the adjacent public right(s)-of-way.

6. Construction of a detached accessory structure with 460 square feet or less of floor area when the accessory structure is at least 40 feet from a front property line.

7. Installation of new or replacement awnings.

D. The following activities shall require historic design review through a Type III procedure (SDC 4.1.400). A public hearing before the historic landmark commission is required for:

1. Exterior alterations, renovations, or additions to elevation(s) facing a public right(s)-of-way or that are visible from the public right(s)-of-way that result in an increase in building footprint, height, volume, or massing.

2. Construction of a new building(s) or placement of a relocated structure(s) on an historic site.

3. Restoration of historic features using materials and techniques that are dissimilar to those used in the original construction or that will substantially deviate from the original construction in terms of style, design, or character.

4. Changes of exterior paint color from a paint color that was specifically listed in the National Register nomination as an attribute that contributes to the resource’s historic value.

5. Relocation of a historic building.

6. Public art.

7. Covered or uncovered rear deck additions that are visible from the adjacent public right(s)-of-way.

8. Construction of a detached accessory structure with greater than 460 square feet of area or when the accessory structure is less than 40 feet from a front property line.

E. At a minimum an application for historic design review shall include:

1. Materials as required for design review under Chapter 4.2 SDC.

2. Documentation from the historic resources inventory.

3. Narrative description of proposed alteration to the historic resource.

4. Other materials as deemed necessary by the community development director to assist in historic design review.

F. Upon acceptance of a complete application staff shall process the request through a Type I or Type II procedure (SDC 4.1.200 or 4.1.300) or schedule a public hearing before the landmark commission pursuant to SDC 4.1.400.

G. Where an application requires design review under Chapter 4.2 SDC (e.g., modification to a nonhistoric parking lot) and historic design review by the landmark commission (e.g., modification to an historic structure), the commission may serve as the reviewing body for both requests. Alternatively, separate hearings before the planning commission and landmark commission may be required, with the landmark commission’s review limited to historic elements of the project. The community development director shall have discretion in determining the applicable reviewing body based on the size and scope of the project, and consistent with the criteria in Chapters 3.5 and 4.2 SDC.

H. The burden of proof lies with the applicant. Applications for historic design review may be approved, approved with conditions, or denied. Conditions imposed by the landmarks commission are binding on all permits issued pursuant to city codes.

I. In general, a proposed alteration or new construction shall either:

1. Cause the property listed on the designated landmarks register to more closely approximate the original historic design or style, appearance, or material composition of the historic resource; or

2. Be compatible with the historic characteristics of the property listed on the designated landmarks register based on a consideration of the historic design or style, appearance, or material composition of the historic resource.

J. In order to approve historic design review applications, the reviewing body shall consider the following criteria:

1. Facades. Characteristic architectural features, such as balconies, porches, bay windows, dormers, or trim details on main facades shall be retained, restored, or designed to complement the primary structure and any existing surrounding comparable historic resources. Particular attention should be paid to those facades facing street rights-of-way. Architectural elements inconsistent with the property’s existing building design or style shall be avoided.

2. Building Materials. Building materials shall be reflective of, and complementary to, those found on the existing Designated Landmarks Register property and existing surrounding comparable historic resources. Siding materials of vertical board, plywood, cement stucco, aluminum, exposed concrete block, and vinyl shall be avoided unless documented as being consistent with the original design or style of the property.

3. Architectural Details. Retention and repair of existing character-defining elements of a structure, such as molding or trim, brackets, columns, cladding, ornamentation, and other finishing details and their design or style, materials, and dimensions, shall be considered by the property owner prior to replacement. Replacements for existing architectural elements or proposed new architectural elements shall be consistent with the resource’s design or style. If any previously existing architectural elements are restored, such features shall be consistent with the documented building design or style. Conjectural architectural details shall not be applied.

4. Scale and Proportion. The size and proportions of the alteration or new construction shall be compatible with existing structures on the site, if proposed to remain, and with any surrounding comparable structures. Additions or new construction shall generally be smaller than the impacted designated historic resource, if proposed to remain. In rare instances where an addition or new construction is proposed to be larger than the original historic resource, it shall be designed such that no single element is visually larger than the original resource, if proposed to remain, or any existing surrounding comparable historic resources.

5. Height. To the extent possible, the height of the alteration or new construction shall not exceed that of the existing historic resource, if proposed to remain, and any existing surrounding comparable historic resources. However, second story additions are allowed, provided they are consistent with the height standards of the underlying zoning designation and other chapters of this code, and provided they are consistent with the other review criteria contained herein.

6. Roof Shape. New roofs shall match the pitch and shape of the original historic structure if proposed to remain, or any existing surrounding compatible historic resources.

7. Pattern of Window and Door Openings. To the extent possible window and door openings shall be compatible with the original features of the existing historic resource, if proposed to remain, in form (size, proportion, detailing), materials, type, pattern, and placement of openings.

8. Building Orientation. Building orientation shall be compatible with existing development patterns on the Designated Landmarks Register property, if proposed to remain, and any existing surrounding comparable historic properties. In general, alteration or new construction shall be sited so that the impact to primary facade(s) of the historic structure proposed to remain is minimized.

9. Site Development. To the extent practicable, given other applicable development standards, such as standards in this code for building coverage, setbacks, landscaping, sidewalk and street tree locations, the alteration or new construction shall maintain existing site development patterns, if proposed to remain.

10. Accessory Development/Structures. Accessory structures development such as exterior lighting, walls, fences, awnings, and landscaping that are associated with an alteration or new construction shall be visually compatible with the architectural design or style of the existing Designated Landmarks Register property, if proposed to remain, and any surrounding comparable historic properties.

11. Garages. Garages, including doors, shall be compatible with the site’s primary structure, if proposed to remain, based on factors that include design or style, roof pitch and shape, architectural details, location and orientation, and building materials. The design or style of alteration or new construction involving an existing or new garage, visible from public rights-of-way or private street rights-of-way, shall also be compatible with the design or style of other surrounding comparable historic properties.

12. Chemical or Physical Treatments. Chemical or physical treatments, if appropriate, shall be undertaken using the gentlest means possible. Treatments that cause damage to historic materials shall not be used.

13. Differentiation. An alteration or new construction shall be differentiated from the portions of the site’s existing historic resource. However, it shall also be compatible with the historic resource’s significant materials, design or style elements, features, size, scale, proportion, and massing. Therefore, the differentiation may be subtle and may be accomplished with variations in wall or roof alignment, offsets, roof pitch, or roof height. Alternatively, differentiation may be accomplished by a visual change in surface, such as a molding strip or other element that acts as an interface between the original resource and the alteration or new construction. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008. Formerly 3.5.500)


3.5.700 Historic relocations and demolitions.

A. Applications for the relocation or demolition of a designated landmark or historic resource of statewide significance shall be considered in a public hearing by the landmark commission following a Type III procedure (SDC 4.1.400). In order for the commission to approve the relocation or demolition, it must find that:

1. No prudent and feasible alternative exists; or

2. The designated property is deteriorated beyond repair; or

3. The value to the community of the proposed use of the property outweighs the value of retaining the designated landmark or historic resource of statewide significance.

B. At the hearing for an application to relocate or demolish a designated landmark or historic resource of statewide significance, the commission may, in the interest of exploring reasonable alternatives, delay issuance of a demolition permit for up to 90 days from the date of the hearing. If, 10 days prior to the expiration of the delay period, the commission finds that there are still reasonable alternatives to explore, it may apply to the Silverton city council for permission to continue the delay for an additional period of up to 90 days.

C. In approving an application for the demolition of a designated landmark or historic resource of statewide significance, the commission may impose the following conditions:

1. Photographic, video, or drawn recordation of the property to be demolished; and/or

2. Salvage and creation of significant elements; and/or

3. Other reasonable mitigation measures. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008. Formerly 3.5.600)


3.5.800 Exclusions.

A. No provision of this title shall be construed to prevent the ordinary or emergency repair or maintenance of a designated landmark or historic resource of statewide significance, when such action does not involve a change in design, materials, or appearance.

B. No provision in this title shall be construed to prevent the alteration, demolition, or relocation of a designated landmark or historic resource of statewide significance, when the building official certifies that such action is required for public safety. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008. Formerly 3.5.700)


3.5.900 Appeals.

A. Appeals of historic design review decisions by staff are referred to the landmark commission for a public hearing under SDC 4.1.300(G).

B. Decisions of the landmark commission can be appealed to the Silverton city council, as provided under SDC 4.1.300(G). Decisions of the Silverton city council can be appealed to the Land Use Board of Appeals. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008. Formerly 3.5.800)


Chapter 4.1 TYPES OF REVIEW PROCEDURES

Sections:

4.1.100    Purpose and applicability of review procedures.

4.1.170    Neighborhood contact for private development projects.

4.1.190    Citizen involvement procedures for developing and amending city master plans.

4.1.195    Citizen involvement procedures for the implementation of master plans.

4.1.200    Type I procedure (ministerial).

4.1.300    Type II procedure (limited land use decisions).

4.1.400    Type III procedure (quasi-judicial).

4.1.500    Type IV procedure (legislative).

4.1.600    General provisions applicable to all reviews – 120-day rule – Time computation – Pre-application conferences – Acceptance and review – Community development director’s duties – Amended applications – Resubmittal – Appeals.

4.1.700    Reserved.

4.1.800    Neighborhood contact.

4.1.900    Traffic impact studies.


4.1.100 Purpose and applicability of review procedures.

A. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to establish standard decision-making procedures that will enable the city, the applicant, and the public to reasonably review applications and participate in the local decision-making process in a timely and effective way. Table 4.1.100 provides a key for determining the review procedure and the decision-making body for particular approvals.

B. Applicability of Review Procedures. All land use and development permit applications and approvals, except building permits, shall be decided by using the procedures contained in this chapter. The procedure “type” assigned to each application governs the decision-making process for that permit or approval. There are four types of permit/approval procedures: Types I, II, III, and IV. These procedures are described in subsections (B)(1) through (4) of this section. Table 4.1.100 lists all of the city’s land use and development approvals and their required review procedure(s).

1. Type I Procedure (Ministerial). Type I decisions are made by the community development director, or someone he or she officially designates, without public notice and without a public hearing. The Type I procedure is used when there are clear and objective review criteria, and applying city standards and criteria requires no use of discretion;

2. Type II Procedure (Limited Land Use Decision). Type II decisions are made by the community development director or designee with public notice, and an opportunity for a planning commission public hearing if requested. The appeal of a Type II decision made by the planning commission is heard by the city council;

3. Type III Procedure (Quasi-Judicial). Type III decisions are made by the planning commission after a public hearing, with appeals made to the city council. Type III decisions generally use discretionary review criteria;

4. Type IV Procedure (Legislative). Type IV procedures apply to legislative matters. Legislative matters involve the creation, revision, or large-scale implementation of public policy (e.g., adoption of land use regulations, zone changes, and comprehensive plan amendments that apply to entire districts, not just one property). Type IV matters are considered initially by the planning commission with final decisions made by the city council. A Type IV hearing may be conducted in a joint meeting of the city council and planning commission.

C. Number of Days. All “days” referenced by this code are calendar days, unless noted otherwise.

Table 4.1.100 – Summary of Approvals by Type of Review Procedure 

	Approvals*	Review Procedures	Applicable Regulations

	Access permit (public street)	Type I	Chapters 3.1, 4.2, 4.3 SDC; Engineering standards

	Appeal of a land use decision	Type III	SDC 4.1.300 and 4.1.400

	Building permit	N/A	Building code

	Code interpretation	Type II	Chapter 4.8 SDC

	Code amendment	Type IV	Chapter 4.7 SDC

	Comprehensive plan amendment	Type IV	Comprehensive plan, Chapter 4.12 SDC

	Conditional use	Type III	Chapter 4.4 SDC

	Floodplain development permit	Type I/II/III	Chapter 2.5 SDC

	Planned development	Type III	Chapter 4.5 SDC

	Modification to approval	Type II/III (minor or major)	Chapter 4.6 SDC

	Zoning map change	 	 

	- Quasi-judicial	Type III	Chapter 4.7 SDC

	(no plan amendment required)	 	 

	- Legislative (plan amendment)	Type IV	Chapter 4.7 SDC

	Property line adjustments and lot consolidations	Type II	Chapter 4.3 SDC

	Lot-of-record determination	Type I/II	Chapter 5.3 SDC

	Nonconforming use or development confirmation	Type I/II	Chapter 5.2 SDC

	Partition	Type II	Chapter 4.3 SDC

	Land use review	Type I/II	Chapter 4.2 SDC, building code

	Design review	Type II/III	Chapter 4.2 SDC

	Subdivision	 	Chapter 4.3 SDC

	- Preliminary plan	Type III	 

	- Final plat	Type I	 

	Temporary use permit	Type I/II/III	Chapter 4.9 SDC

	Annexation 	Type IV	Chapter 4.10 SDC

	Urban growth boundary	Type IV	Chapter 4.11 SDC

	Vacations	Type IV	Chapter 4.13 SDC

	Variance	Type III	Chapter 5.1 SDC

	Adjustment	Type II	Chapter 5.1 SDC

	* Approvals or permits from other agencies, such as a road authority or state or federal natural resource agency, may be required for some actions. The city notifies agencies of requests (Type II, III, and IV applications) that may affect their facilities or services.

(Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.1.170 Neighborhood contact for private development projects.

A. Good Neighbor Agreement. Applicants are highly encouraged to use a good neighbor agreement as a way of involving the community during the development of their land use application. Good neighbor agreements are founded in the belief that, in part, a successful neighborhood depends on the businesses within their borders and that a successful business depends, in part, on the support of the surrounding community. The purpose of a good neighbor agreement is to proactively address livability concerns associated with the proposed use. City staff may be contacted to offer suggestions on how to establish a good neighbor agreement.

Typical elements of a GNA include, but are not limited to:

1. Noise management;

2. Hours of operation;

3. Litter management;

4. Traffic issues;

5. Lighting;

6. Communications, including a process for receiving, recording, and responding to community comments;

7. Security;

8. Safety;

9. Parking;

10. Screening of operations;

11. Maintenance of a neighborhood advisory committee;

12. Enforcement of the good neighbor agreement;

13. Exceptions to the good neighbor agreement;

14. Process and requirements for updating, amending, or terminating the good neighbor agreement; and

15. Effective date, term of the agreement, and date of expiration. (Ord. 14-01 § 1 (Exh. A), 2014)


4.1.190 Citizen involvement procedures for developing and amending city master plans.

A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish guidelines for encouraging citizen involvement during all phases of the master planning process. By adequately engaging the public during the development and amendment of city master plans, it is more likely that citizens will be aware of their existence, understand their purpose, and be knowledgeable about the issues they are addressing. Most importantly, by encouraging citizens to be involved early in the master planning process, community members will have the opportunity to influence what is contained in adopted master plans. The following is intended to aid the master planning process but does not bind the city to perform every listed involvement method.

B. Citizen Involvement During the Master Plan Scoping Process. Citizens who have suggestions to improve public facilities, services, or outdated master plans are encouraged to present their ideas to city council and/or city staff in writing and/or verbally at regular council meetings. Suggestions submitted to city staff will be provided to the council during the council goal setting process for their consideration.

When city council directs staff to develop a master plan, a kickoff meeting for the project should be scheduled and advertised. The goal of the project kickoff/town hall meeting should be to inform citizens that a master plan has been initiated, what a master plan is, why it is important, future implications the plan could have on the community, and to highlight ways citizens can be involved in the process. After the project kickoff meeting, a citizen involvement plan should be developed for the project.

C. Citizen Involvement During the Development and Amendment of Draft Master Plans. The following list of citizen involvement methods is not comprehensive and may be used for the development and amendment of master plans. Failure to conduct any or all of the listed methods or other methods does not constitute an appealable issue.

1. Stakeholder Interviews. Stakeholders are community members which are not serving on the project advisory committee, but have a vested interest in the outcome of the master plan. Interviews of stakeholders could be conducted by phone or in person.

2. Surveys. Questionnaires could be distributed by mail, distributed at public meetings, or be set up online.

3. Public Meetings at Key Milestones. Over the planning process, city staff should host public meetings at key project milestones. Because each project will have unique information to communicate and different types of citizen input required, the public meeting formats will vary. Formats may include workshops, town hall meetings, open houses, presentations, and discussion groups. Public meetings should be interactive whenever possible. To ensure equal access to all community members, the city of Silverton should reasonably modify policies/procedures and provide auxiliary aids/services to persons with disabilities. Staff can also provide materials in other languages when requested.

4. Private Organization Meetings and Events. When requested, city staff should present master plan project information, solicit input, and participate in neighborhood/HOA meetings, community association meetings, and community events and festivals.

5. Website. The city’s website should host a specific web page for each master plan under development or amendment. The site will include an overview of the planning project, meeting calendar, project updates, meeting agendas, notes, technical project documents, frequently asked questions and answers, and a summary of public comments received.

6. Updates for Planning Commission and City Council. Staff should provide regular updates regarding the plan and the citizen involvement process to gain planning commission and city council input.

7. Community development department staff should provide regular updates to all individuals that participated in the planning process. Care should be taken to obtain contact information from everyone that provides comments or input on a master plan so that city staff can keep them updated with newsletters, fact sheets, and schedule changes. The project advisory committee and other interested citizens should be sent status updates at the completion of each project milestone. An ongoing record of citizen input shall be maintained and available to the public at City Hall.

8. Upon development or amendment of a draft master plan, city staff should send a notice of public hearing before the planning commission and city council to all individuals who have participated in the planning process, at least 20 days before each hearing. Staff should make a hard copy of the draft plan available for public viewing in the community development department. Notice of the hearings should also be sent to specifically affected areas. This notice should contain general information about the master plan and capital projects. (Ord. 14-01 § 1 (Exh. A), 2014)


4.1.195 Citizen involvement procedures for the implementation of master plans.*

A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish procedures for encouraging citizen involvement during the implementation of capital projects identified in city master plans. By adequately engaging the public during the implementation of public projects, citizens will be able to understand the purpose of a project and the issues it will be addressing.

B. Citizen Involvement Procedures. Utilizing city master plans developed with citizen input, city council should approve a capital improvement plan that prioritizes projects listed in the master plan. Council could then identify projects during the budget process to allocate funds to construct the project. Projects that replace aging infrastructure, provide a necessary increase in utility capacity, address a health and safety issue, provide routine maintenance, and similar projects may provide an informational notice to residents near the project area in advance of construction. When a decision has been made to move forward with a public project that affects the public interest (such as a park or streetscape improvement project), an open house type meeting should be publicly advertised to discuss the project with the community and citizens in the affected area.

The open house should inform citizens of specific project details and provide community members with the opportunity to publicly ask questions and provide comments on the project. Notice of the open house should also be sent to all individuals who have participated in the master planning process, including members of the master plan’s project advisory committee. City staff should present a summary of the open house public comments to city council so that they may consider refinement of the project scope or design. Once city council determines the final scope and design of a project, city staff can be directed to construct the project. (Ord. 14-01 § 1 (Exh. A), 2014)

*    Code reviser’s note: Ord. 14-01 adds this section as 4.1.200. It has been editorially renumbered to avoid duplication of numbering.


4.1.200 Type I procedure (ministerial).

A. Application Requirements.

1. Application Forms. Type I applications shall be made on forms provided by the community development director or designee.

2. Application Requirements. Type I decisions are generally made within 30 days of the city receiving a complete application. Type I applications shall:

a. Include the information requested on the application form;

b. Address the criteria in sufficient detail for review and action; and

c. Be filed with the required, nonrefundable fee.

d. Applications which are not filled out completely and include all information required by the application form will not be processed by the city.

B. Administrative Decision Requirements. The community development director’s or designee’s decision shall address all of the review criteria, including applicable requirements of any road authority. Based on the criteria and the facts contained within the record, the community development director shall approve or deny the requested permit or action. A written record of the decision shall be provided to the applicant and kept on file at City Hall.

C. Final Decision. A Type I decision is the final decision of the city. It cannot be appealed to city officials.

D. Effective Date. A Type I decision is final on the date it is made. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.1.300 Type II procedure (limited land use decisions).

A. Pre-Application Conference. A pre-application conference is required for Type II reviews unless waived by the community development director. Pre-application conference procedures are in SDC 4.1.600.

B. Application Requirements.

1. Application Forms. Type II applications shall be made on forms provided by the community development director or designee.

2. Submittal Information. Applications to be reviewed by the planning commission must be submitted and complete at least 45 days before the requested planning commission meeting date. For staff reviews, a total of five copies of the application shall be submitted. For planning commission reviews, an additional seven copies shall be submitted after the community development director has deemed the application complete.

a. Include the information requested on the application form;

b. Be filed with a narrative statement that explains how the application satisfies each and all of the relevant criteria and standards in sufficient detail for review and decision-making. Note: additional information may be required under the specific application requirements for each approval, e.g., Chapter 4.2 SDC, Land Use Review and Design Review, Chapter 4.3 SDC, Land Divisions and Property Line Adjustments, Chapter 4.6 SDC, Modifications to Approved Plans and Conditions of Approval, Chapter 4.8 SDC, Code Interpretations, and Chapter 4.9 SDC, Miscellaneous Permits;

c. Be accompanied by the required, nonrefundable fee;

d. Plans, studies, exhibits, and/or other information as may be required by the community development director, to assist the city in making findings under the applicable review criteria; and

e. A certified list prepared by a title company or certified by the Marion County tax assessor’s office with the names and addresses of all property owners within 500 feet of the subject site.

f. Applications which are not filled out completely and include all information required by the application form will not be processed by the city.

C. Notice of Application for Type II (Limited Land Use) Decision.

1. Before making a Type II limited land use decision, the community development director or designee shall mail notice to:

a. All owners of record of real property and residents within a minimum of 500 feet of the subject site;

b. All city-recognized neighborhood groups or associations whose boundaries include the site;

c. Any person who submits a written request to receive a notice; and

d. Any governmental agency that is entitled to notice under an intergovernmental agreement entered into with the city. The city may notify other affected agencies. The city shall notify the road authority when there is a proposed development abutting or affecting their transportation facility and allow the agency to review, comment on, and suggest conditions of approval for the application.

2. The purpose of the notice is to give nearby property owners and other interested people the opportunity to submit written comments about the application before the Type II decision is made. The goal of this notice is to invite people to participate early in the decision-making process.

3. Notice of a pending Type II limited land use decision shall:

a. Provide a 14-day period for submitting written comments before a decision is made on the permit;

b. List the relevant review criteria by name and number of code sections;

c. State the place, date and time the comments are due, and the person to whom the comments should be addressed;

d. Include the name and telephone number of a contact person regarding the decision;

e. Describe the proposal and identify the specific permits or approvals requested;

f. Describe the street address or other easily understandable reference to the location of the site;

g. State that if any person fails to address the relevant review criteria with enough detail, they may not be able to appeal to the land use board of appeals or circuit court on that issue. Only comments on the relevant review criteria are considered relevant evidence;

h. State that all evidence relied upon by the community development director or designee to make this decision is in the public record, available for public review. Copies of this evidence can be obtained at a reasonable cost from the city;

i. State that after the comment period closes, the community development director or designee shall issue a Type II limited land use decision, and that the decision shall be mailed to the applicant and to anyone else who submitted written comments or who is otherwise legally entitled to notice;

j. Contain the following notice:

Notice to mortgagee, lien holder, vendor, or seller: The City of Silverton Development Code requires that if you receive this notice it shall be promptly forwarded to the purchaser.

4. Posting Notice. The site shall be posted with a notice that contains a brief description of the project, the file number assigned to the project by the city and the address of City Hall and the phone number for the community development department 14 days prior to a decision being made. The notice shall be clearly visible to pedestrians and motorists and must be able to withstand adverse weather.

D. Type II Decision Requirements. The community development director or designee shall make a Type II written decision addressing all of the relevant review criteria and standards. Based upon the criteria and standards, and the facts contained within the record, the community development director or designee shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the requested permit or action. Alternatively, the community development director, and/or the applicant, may refer the application to the planning commission for review in a public hearing, in which case the review shall follow the Type III procedures in SDC 4.1.400. If the applicant refers the application to a Type III hearing, he or she shall pay the fee for a Type III review.

E. Notice of Decision.

1. Within five business days after the community development director or designee signs the decision, a notice of decision shall be sent by mail to:

a. The applicant and all owners or contract purchasers of record of the site that is the subject of the application;

b. Any person who submits a written request to receive notice, or provides comments during the application-review period;

c. Any city-recognized neighborhood group or association whose boundaries include the site; and

d. Any governmental agency that is entitled to notice under an intergovernmental agreement entered into with the city, and other agencies that were notified or provided comments during the application review period.

2. The community development director or designee shall cause an affidavit of mailing the notice to be prepared and made a part of the file. The affidavit shall show the date the notice was mailed and shall demonstrate that the notice was mailed to the parties above and was mailed within the time required by law.

3. The Type II notice of decision shall contain:

a. A description of the applicant’s proposal and the city’s decision on the proposal (i.e., may be a summary);

b. The address or other geographic description of the property proposed for development, including a map of the property in relation to the surrounding area, where applicable;

c. A statement of where the city’s decision can be obtained;

d. The date the decision shall become final, unless appealed;

e. A statement that all persons entitled to notice may appeal the decision; and

f. A statement briefly explaining how to file an appeal, the deadline for filing an appeal, and where to obtain further information concerning the appeal process.

F. Final Decision and Effective Date. A Type II administrative decision is final for purposes of appeal, when it is mailed by the city. A Type II decision is effective on the day after the 10-day appeal period expires. If an appeal is filed, the decision is effective when the appeal is decided. (See also subsection (G) of this section.)

G. Appeal. Appeals of Type II decisions are heard by the planning commission or the historic landmarks commission, as applicable, and follow the procedures below:

1. Who May Appeal. The following people have legal standing to appeal a Type II decision:

a. The applicant or owner of the subject property;

b. Any other person who participated in the proceeding by submitting oral or written comments.

2. Appeal Filing Procedure.

a. Notice of Appeal. Any person with standing to appeal, as provided in subsection (G)(1) of this section, may appeal a Type II decision by filing a notice of appeal according to the following procedures;

b. Time for Filing. A notice of appeal shall be filed with the community development director or designee within 10 days of the date the notice of Type II decision was mailed;

c. Content of Notice of Appeal. The notice of appeal shall contain:

i. An identification of the decision being appealed, including the date of the decision;

ii. A statement demonstrating the person filing the notice of appeal has standing to appeal;

iii. A statement explaining the specific issues being raised on appeal;

iv. If the appellant is not the applicant, a statement demonstrating that the appeal issues were raised during the comment period;

v. Filing fee.

vi. Appeal applications which are not filled out completely and include all information required by the application form will not be processed by the city.

3. Scope of Appeal. The appeal of a Type II decision by a person with standing shall be limited to the project proposal; new evidence and arguments may be presented, but the specific issues raised in the prior proceedings must also be addressed by the appellant. The review body may allow additional evidence, testimony or argument concerning any relevant standard, criterion, condition, or issue raised in the notice of appeal.

4. Appeal Procedures. Type III notice, hearing procedures and decision process shall also be used for appeals of Type II decisions, as provided in SDC 4.1.400.

5. Further Appeal to LUBA. The decision of the review body regarding an appeal of a Type II decision is the final decision of the city. The decision of the review body on an appeal is final and effective on the date it is mailed by the city. The review body’s decision may be appealed to the State Land Use Board of Appeals pursuant to ORS 197.805 through 197.860. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.1.400 Type III procedure (quasi-judicial).

A. Pre-Application Conference. A pre-application conference is required for all Type III applications. The procedures for a pre-application conference are described in SDC 4.1.600(C).

B. Application Requirements.

1. Application Forms. Type III applications shall be made on forms provided by the community development director or designee; if a Type II application is referred to a Type III hearing, either voluntarily by the applicant or staff or upon appeal, no new application is required.

2. Submittal Information. Type III applications must be submitted and complete at least 45 days before the requested planning commission hearing date. For the initial staff review, a total of five copies of the application shall be submitted. An additional seven copies shall be submitted after the community development director has deemed the application complete. All Type III applications shall:

a. Include the information requested on the application form;

b. Contain plans, exhibits, studies, and/or other information as required by the community development director, in order to assist the city in making findings under the applicable review criteria;

c. Be filed with a narrative statement that explains how the application satisfies each and all of the relevant criteria and standards in sufficient detail for review and decision-making. Note: additional information may be required under the specific application requirements for each approval, e.g., Chapter 4.2 SDC, Land Use Review and Design Review, Chapter 4.3 SDC, Land Divisions and Property Line Adjustments, Chapter 4.6 SDC, Modifications to Approved Plans and Conditions of Approval, Chapter 4.8 SDC, Code Interpretations, and Chapter 4.9 SDC, Miscellaneous Permits;

d. Be accompanied by the required nonrefundable fee;

e. A certified list prepared by a title company or certified by the Marion County tax assessor’s office with the names and addresses of all property owners within 500 feet of the subject site; and

f. Applications which are not filled out completely and include all information required by the application form will not be processed by the city.

C. Notice of Hearing.

1. Mailed Notice. The city shall mail the notice of the Type III hearing. The records of the county assessor’s office are the official records for determining ownership. Notice of a Type III application hearing or Type II appeal hearing shall be given by the community development director or designee in the following manner:

a. At least 20 days before the hearing date, notice shall be mailed to:

i. The applicant and all owners or contract purchasers of record of the property that is the subject of the application;

ii. All property owners of record and residents within 700 feet of the site;

iii. Any governmental agency that is entitled to notice under an intergovernmental agreement entered into with the city. The city may notify other affected agencies. The city shall notify the road authority when there is a proposed development abutting or affecting their transportation facility and allow the agency to review, comment on, and suggest conditions of approval for the application;

iv. Owners of airports in the vicinity shall be notified of a proposed zone change in accordance with ORS 227.175;

v. Any neighborhood or community organization recognized by the city council and whose boundaries include the property proposed for development;

vi. Any person who submits a written request to receive notice;

vii. For appeals, the appellant and all persons who provided testimony in the original decision; and

viii. For a zone change affecting a manufactured home or mobile home park, all mailing addresses within the park, in accordance with ORS 227.175.

b. The community development director or designee shall have an affidavit of notice be prepared and made a part of the file. The affidavit shall state the date that the notice was mailed to the persons who must receive notice.

c. At least 10 business days before the hearing, notice of the hearing shall be printed in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The newspaper’s affidavit of publication of the notice shall be made part of the administrative record.

2. Content of Notice. Notice of appeal of a Type II administrative decision or notice of a Type III hearing to be mailed and published per subsection (C)(1) of this section shall contain the following information:

a. The nature of the application and the proposed land use or uses that could be authorized for the property;

b. The applicable criteria and standards from the development code(s) that apply to the application;

c. The street address or other easily understood geographical reference to the subject property;

d. The date, time, and location of the public hearing;

e. A statement that the failure to raise an issue in person, or by letter at the hearing, or failure to provide statements or evidence sufficient to afford the decision-maker an opportunity to respond to the issue, means that an appeal based on that issue cannot be filed with the State Land Use Board of Appeals;

f. The name of a city representative to contact and the telephone number where additional information on the application may be obtained;

g. A statement that a copy of the application, all documents and evidence submitted by or for the applicant, and the applicable criteria and standards can be reviewed at Silverton City Hall at no cost and that copies shall be provided at a reasonable cost;

h. A statement that a copy of the city’s staff report and recommendation to the hearings body shall be available for review at no cost at least seven days before the hearing, and that a copy shall be provided on request at a reasonable cost;

i. A general explanation of the requirements to submit testimony, and the procedure for conducting public hearings; and

j. The following notice: “Notice to mortgagee, lien holder, vendor, or seller: The city of Silverton development code requires that if you receive this notice it shall be promptly forwarded to the purchaser.”

3. Posting Notice. The site shall be posted with a notice that contains a brief description of the project, the file number assigned to the project by the city and the address of City Hall and the phone number for the community development department. The notice shall be clearly visible to pedestrians and motorists and must be able to withstand adverse weather.

D. Conduct of the Public Hearing.

1. At the commencement of the hearing, the hearings body shall state to those in attendance:

a. The applicable review criteria and standards that apply to the application or appeal;

b. A statement that testimony and evidence shall concern the review criteria described in the staff report, or other criteria in the comprehensive plan or land use regulations that the person testifying believes to apply to the decision;

c. A statement that failure to raise an issue with sufficient detail to give the hearings body and the parties an opportunity to respond to the issue, means that no appeal may be made to the State Land Use Board of Appeals on that issue;

d. Before the conclusion of the initial evidentiary hearing, any participant may ask the planning commission for an opportunity to present additional relevant evidence or testimony that is within the scope of the hearing. The hearings body shall grant the request by scheduling a date to finish the hearing (a “continuance”) per subsection (D)(2) of this section, or by leaving the record open for additional written evidence or testimony per subsection (D)(3) of this section.

2. If the planning commission grants a continuance, the completion of the hearing shall be continued to a date, time, and place at least seven days after the date of the first evidentiary hearing. An opportunity shall be provided at the second hearing for persons to present and respond to new written evidence and oral testimony. If new written evidence is submitted at the second hearing, any person may request, before the conclusion of the second hearing, that the record be left open for at least seven days, so that they can submit additional written evidence or testimony in response to the new written evidence.

3. If the planning commission leaves the record open for additional written evidence or testimony, the record shall be left open for at least seven days after the hearing. Any participant may ask the city in writing for an opportunity to respond to new evidence submitted during the period that the record was left open. If such a request is filed, the planning commission shall reopen the record.

a. When the planning commission reopens the record to admit new evidence or testimony, any person may raise new issues that relate to that new evidence or testimony;

b. An extension of the hearing or record granted pursuant to subsection (D) of this section is subject to the limitations of ORS 227.178 (“120-day rule”), unless the continuance or extension is requested or agreed to by the applicant;

c. If requested by the applicant, the city shall allow the applicant at least seven days after the record is closed to all other persons to submit final written arguments in support of the application, unless the applicant expressly waives this right. The applicant’s final submittal shall be part of the record but shall not include any new evidence;

d. The record shall contain all testimony and evidence that is submitted to the city and that the hearings body has not rejected;

e. In making its decision, the hearings body may take notice of facts not in the hearing record (e.g., local, state, or federal regulations; previous city decisions; case law; staff reports). The review authority must announce its intention to take notice of such facts in its deliberations, and allow persons who previously participated in the hearing to request the hearing record be reopened, if necessary, to present evidence concerning the noticed facts;

f. The review authority shall retain custody of the record until the city issues a final decision.

4. Participants in the appeal of a Type II administrative decision or participants in a Type III hearing are entitled to an impartial review authority as free from potential conflicts of interest and pre-hearing ex parte contacts (see subsection (D)(5) of this section) as reasonably possible. However, the public has a countervailing right of free access to public officials. Therefore:

a. At the beginning of the public hearing, hearings body members shall disclose the substance of any pre-hearing ex parte contacts (as defined in subsection (D)(5) of this section) concerning the application or appeal. He or she shall state whether the contact has impaired their impartiality or their ability to vote on the matter and shall participate or abstain accordingly;

b. A member of the hearings body shall not participate in any proceeding in which they, or any of the following, have a direct or substantial financial interest: their spouse, brother, sister, child, parent, father-in-law, mother-in-law, partner, any business in which they are then serving or have served within the previous two years, or any business with which they are negotiating for or have an arrangement or understanding concerning prospective partnership or employment. Any actual or potential interest shall be disclosed at the hearing where the action is being taken;

c. Disqualification of a member of the hearings body due to contacts or conflict may be ordered by a majority of the members present and voting. The person who is the subject of the motion may not vote on the motion to disqualify;

d. If a member of the hearings body abstains or is disqualified, the city may provide a substitute in a timely manner subject to the impartiality rules in subsections (D)(4) and (5) of this section. In this case, a member of the city council appointed by a majority vote of the city council may substitute for a member of the planning commission;

e. If all members of the planning commission abstain or are disqualified, the city council shall be the hearing body. If all members of the city council abstain or are disqualified, a quorum of those members present who declare their reasons for abstention or disqualification shall be requalified to make a decision;

f. Any member of the public may raise conflict of interest issues prior to or during the hearing, to which the member of the hearings body shall reply in accordance with this section.

5. Ex Parte Communications.

a. Members of the hearings body shall not:

i. Communicate directly or indirectly with any applicant, appellant, other party to the proceedings, or representative of a party about any issue involved in a hearing without giving notice per subsection (D)(4) of this section;

ii. Take official notice of any communication, report, or other materials outside the record prepared by the proponents or opponents in connection with the particular case, unless all participants are given the opportunity to respond to the noticed materials.

b. No decision or action of the hearings body shall be invalid due to ex parte contacts or bias resulting from ex parte contacts, if the person receiving contact:

i. Places in the record the substance of any written or oral ex parte communications concerning the decision or action; and

ii. Makes a public announcement of the content of the communication and of all participants’ right to dispute the substance of the communication made. This announcement shall be made at the first hearing following the communication during which action shall be considered or taken on the subject of the communication.

c. A communication between city staff and the hearings body is not considered an ex parte contact.

6. Presenting and Receiving Evidence.

a. The hearings body may set reasonable time limits for oral presentations and may limit or exclude cumulative, repetitious, irrelevant or personally derogatory testimony or evidence;

b. There may be a presentation of a staff report, a presentation by the applicant or those representing the applicant, a presentation by those who oppose the proposed application, by those in favor of the proposed application and by those who do not necessarily support or oppose the proposed application;

c. A rebuttal by the applicant shall be limited to issues raised during the presentation of evidence in opposition or neutral. A surrebuttal shall be limited to issues raised during the rebuttal of the evidence;

d. No oral testimony shall be accepted after the close of the public hearing. Written testimony may be received after the close of the public hearing, only as provided in subsection (D) of this section;

e. Members of the hearings body may visit the property and the surrounding area, and may use information obtained during the site visit to support their decision, if the information relied upon is disclosed at the beginning of the hearing and an opportunity is provided to dispute the evidence.

E. The Decision Process.

1. Basis for Decision. Approval or denial of an appeal of a Type II administrative decision or of a Type III application shall be based on standards and criteria in the development code. The standards and criteria shall relate approval or denial of a discretionary development permit application to the development regulations and, when appropriate, to the comprehensive plan for the area in which the development would occur and to the development regulations and comprehensive plan for the city as a whole;

2. Findings and Conclusions. Approval or denial shall be based upon the criteria and standards considered relevant to the decision. The written decision shall explain the relevant criteria and standards, state the facts relied upon in rendering the decision, and justify the decision according to the criteria, standards, and facts;

3. Form of Decision. The planning commission shall issue a final written order containing the findings and conclusions stated in subsection (E)(2) of this section, which either approves, denies, or approves with specific conditions. The planning commission may also issue appropriate intermediate rulings when more than one permit or decision is required;

4. Decision-Making Time Limits. A final order for any Type II administrative appeal or Type III action shall be filed with the community development director or designee within 10 business days after the close of the deliberation;

5. Notice of Decision. Written notice of a Type II administration appeal decision or a Type III decision shall be mailed to the applicant and to all participants of record within 10 business days after the hearings body decision. Failure of any person to receive mailed notice shall not invalidate the decision; provided, that a good faith attempt was made to mail the notice;

6. Final Decision and Effective Date. The decision of the hearings body on any Type II appeal or any Type III application is final for purposes of appeal on the date it is mailed by the city. The decision is effective on the day after the 10-day appeal period expires. If an appeal for a Type III application is filed, the decision becomes effective on the day after the appeal is decided by the city council. The notification and hearings procedures for Type III applications on appeal to the city council shall be the same as for the initial hearing. An appeal of a Type II appeal decision to the State Land Use Board of Appeals must be filed within 21 days of the review body’s written decision. An appeal of a land use decision to the State Land Use Board of Appeals must be filed within 21 days of the city council’s written decision;

7. Appeals. Appeals of Type III decisions are heard by the city council, as applicable, and follow the procedures below:

a. Who May Appeal. The following people have legal standing to appeal a Type III decision:

i. The applicant or owner of the subject property;

ii. Any other person who participated in the proceeding by submitting oral or written comments.

b. Appeal Filing Procedure.

i. Notice of Appeal. Any person with standing to appeal, as provided in subsection (E)(1) of this section may appeal a Type III decision by filing a notice of appeal according to the following procedures;

ii. Time for Filing. A notice of appeal shall be filed with the community development director or designee within 10 days of the date the notice of Type III decision was mailed;

iii. Content of Notice of Appeal. The notice of appeal shall contain:

(A) An identification of the decision being appealed, including the date of the decision;

(B) A statement demonstrating the person filing the notice of appeal has standing to appeal;

(C) A statement explaining the specific issues being raised on appeal;

(D) If the appellant is not the applicant, a statement demonstrating that the appeal issues were raised during the comment period;

(E) If de novo review is requested, a statement summarizing the new evidence which will be offered and the criteria to which it will relate. The decision to grant a de novo hearing rests solely upon the discretion of the city council;

(F) Filing fee.

c. Scope of Appeal. The review body shall determine the scope of review on appeal to one of the following:

i. Restricted to the record made on the decision being appealed. The record shall include a factual report prepared by the community development director, all exhibits, materials, pleadings, memoranda, stipulations, and motions submitted by any party and received or considered in reaching the decision under review, and the minutes of the hearing. The reviewing body may make its decision based only upon the record or may grant the right of oral argument to all affected parties, but not the introduction of additional evidence.

ii. Limited to such issues as the reviewing body determines necessary for a proper resolution of the matter.

iii. A de novo hearing on the merits. “De novo hearing” shall mean a hearing by the review body as if the request had not been previously heard and as if no decision had been rendered, except that all testimony, evidence, and other material from the record of the previous consideration may be included in the record of the review. The presiding officer may establish a time limit for presentation of information at the public hearing.

d. Appeal Procedures. A Type III notice, hearing procedures and decision process shall also be used for appeals of Type III decisions, as provided in SDC 4.1.400. Appeal applications which are not filled out completely and include all information required by the application form will not be processed by the city.

e. Further Appeal to LUBA. The decision of the review body regarding an appeal of a Type III decision is the final decision of the city. The decision of the review body on an appeal is final and effective on the date it is mailed by the city. The review body’s decision may be appealed to the State Land Use Board of Appeals within 21 days of the written notice of decision pursuant to ORS 197.805 through 197.860.

8. City Council Call-Up of Planning Commission Decision. The city council may call up any planning action for a decision upon motion and majority vote, provided such vote takes place in the required appeal period. Unless the planning action is appealed and a public hearing is required, the council review of the planning action is limited to the record and public testimony is not allowed. The council may affirm, modify, or reverse the decision of the planning commission, or may remand the decision to the commission for additional consideration if sufficient time is permitted for making a final decision of the city. The council shall make findings and conclusions and cause copies of a final order to be sent to all parties of the planning action. (Ord. 15-12 § 1 (Exh. A), 2015; Ord. 14-01 § 1 (Exh. A), 2014; Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.1.500 Type IV procedure (legislative).

A. Pre-Application Conference. A pre-application conference is required for all Type IV applications initiated by a party other than the city of Silverton. The requirements and procedures for a pre-application conference are described in SDC 4.1.600(C).

B. Timing of Requests. The city council may establish a calendar for the purpose of accepting Type IV requests only at designated time(s). At a minimum, Type IV requests shall be filed not less than 60 days prior to the requested initial hearing date. The city council may initiate its own legislative proposals at any time.

C. Application Requirements.

1. Application Forms. Type IV applications shall be made on forms provided by the community development director or designee.

2. Submittal Information. A total of five copies of the application shall be submitted. An additional seven copies shall be submitted after the community development director has deemed the application complete, and additional copies may be required after the planning commission has completed its review and has forwarded a recommendation to city council. The application shall contain:

a. The information requested on the application form;

b. Plans, exhibits, studies, and/or other information, as required by the community development director, to assist the city in addressing the applicable criteria and standards in sufficient detail for review and decision;

c. The required, nonrefundable fee;

d. A letter or narrative statement that explains how the application satisfies each and all of the relevant review criteria and standards; and

e. A certified list prepared by a title company or certified by the Marion County tax assessor’s office with the names and addresses of all property owners within 500 feet of the subject site.

f. Applications which are not filled out completely and include all information required by the application form will not be processed by the city.

D. Notice of Hearing.

1. Required Hearings. A minimum of two hearings, one before the planning commission and one before the city council, are required for all Type IV applications (e.g., rezonings and comprehensive plan amendments).

2. Notification Requirements. Notice of public hearings for the request shall be given by the community development director or designee in the following manner:

a. At least 20 days, but not more than 40 days, before the date of the first hearing on an ordinance that proposes to amend the comprehensive plan or any element thereof, or to adopt an ordinance that proposes to rezone property, a notice shall be prepared in conformance with ORS 227.186 and mailed to:

i. Each owner whose property would be rezoned in order to implement the ordinance (including owners of property subject to a comprehensive plan amendment) shall be notified if a zone change would be required to implement the proposed comprehensive plan amendment;

ii. All property owners and residents within 700 feet of the subject site;

iii. Any affected governmental agency;

iv. Any person who requests notice in writing;

v. For a zone change affecting a manufactured home or mobile home park, all mailing addresses within the park, in accordance with ORS 227.175;

vi. Owners of airports shall be notified of a proposed zone change in accordance with ORS 227.175.

b. At least 10 days before the scheduled planning commission public hearing date, and 14 days before the city council hearing date, public notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.

c. The community development director or designee shall:

i. For each mailing of notice, file an affidavit of mailing in the record as provided by subsection (D)(2)(a) of this section; and

ii. For each published notice, file in the record the affidavit of publication in a newspaper that is required in subsection (D)(2)(b) of this section.

d. The Oregon Department of Land Conservation and Development (DLCD) shall be notified in writing of proposed comprehensive plan and development code amendments at least 45 days before the first public hearing at which public testimony or new evidence will be received. The notice to DLCD shall include a DLCD certificate of mailing.

e. Notifications for annexation shall follow the provisions of this chapter.

3. Content of Notices. The mailed and published notices shall include the following information:

a. The number and title of the file containing the application, and the address and telephone number of the community development director or designee’s office where additional information about the application can be obtained;

b. The proposed site location;

c. A description of the proposed site and the proposal in enough detail for people to determine what change is proposed, and the place where all relevant materials and information may be obtained or reviewed;

d. The time(s), place(s), and date(s) of the public hearing(s); a statement that public oral or written testimony is invited; and a statement that the hearing will be held under this title and rules of procedure adopted by the council and available at City Hall (see subsection (E) of this section); and

e. Each mailed notice required by subsection (D) of this section shall contain the following statement: “Notice to mortgagee, lien holder, vendor, or seller: The city of Silverton development code requires that if you receive this notice it shall be promptly forwarded to the purchaser.”

4. Posting Notice. The site shall be posted with a notice that contains a brief description of the project, the file number assigned to the project by the city and the address of City Hall and the phone number for the community development department 10 days prior to the first public hearing. The notice shall be clearly visible to pedestrians and motorists and must be able to withstand adverse weather.

5. Failure to Receive Notice. The failure of any person to receive notice shall not invalidate the action, providing:

a. Personal notice is deemed given where the notice is deposited with the United States Postal Service;

b. Published notice is deemed given on the date it is published.

E. Hearing Process and Procedure.

1. Unless otherwise provided in the rules of procedure adopted by the city council:

a. The presiding officer of the planning commission and of the city council shall have the authority to:

i. Regulate the course, sequence, and decorum of the hearing;

ii. Direct procedural requirements or similar matters; and

iii. Impose reasonable time limits for oral presentations.

b. No person shall address the commission or the council without:

i. Receiving recognition from the presiding officer; and

ii. Stating their full name and address.

c. Disruptive conduct such as applause, cheering, or display of signs shall be cause for expulsion of a person or persons from the hearing, termination or continuation of the hearing, or other appropriate action determined by the presiding officer.

2. Unless otherwise provided in the rules of procedures adopted by the council, the presiding officer of the commission and of the council shall conduct the hearing as follows:

a. The presiding officer shall begin the hearing with a statement of the nature of the matter before the body, a general summary of the procedures, a summary of the standards for decision-making, and whether the decision that will be made is a recommendation to the city council or the final decision of the council;

b. The community development director or designee’s report and other applicable staff reports shall be presented;



c. The public shall be invited to testify;

d. The public hearing may be continued to allow additional testimony or it may be closed; and

e. The hearing body’s deliberation may include questions to the staff, comments from the staff, and inquiries directed to any person present.

F. Continuation of the Public Hearing. The planning commission or the city council may continue any hearing, and no additional notice of hearing shall be required if the matter is continued to a specified place, date, and time.

G. Decision-Making Criteria. The recommendation by the planning commission and the decision by the city council shall be based on the following factors:

1. Approval of the request is consistent with the statewide planning goals;

2. Approval of the request is consistent with the comprehensive plan; and

3. The property and affected area is presently provided with adequate public facilities, services and transportation networks to support the use, or such facilities, services and transportation networks are planned to be provided concurrently with the development of the property.

H. Approval Process and Authority.

1. The planning commission shall:

a. After notice and a public hearing, vote on and prepare a recommendation to the city council to approve, approve with modifications, approve with conditions, deny the proposed change, or adopt an alternative; and

b. Within 14 business days of determining a recommendation, the presiding officer shall sign the written recommendation, and it shall be filed with the community development director or designee;

2. Any member of the planning commission who votes in opposition to the planning commission’s majority recommendation may file a written statement of opposition with the community development director or designee before the council public hearing on the proposal. The community development director or designee shall send a copy to each council member and place a copy in the record;

3. If the planning commission fails to adopt a recommendation to approve, approve with modifications, approve with conditions, deny the proposed change, or adopt an alternative proposal within 60 days of its first public hearing on the proposed change, the community development director or designee shall:

a. Report the failure together with the proposed change to the city council; and

b. Provide notice and put the matter on the city council’s agenda for the city council to hold a public hearing and make a decision. No further action shall be taken by the commission;

4. The city council shall:

a. Approve, approve with modifications, approve with conditions, deny, or adopt an alternative to an application for legislative change, or remand the application to the planning commission for rehearing and reconsideration on all or part of the application;

b. Consider the recommendation of the planning commission; however, the city council is not bound by the commission’s recommendation; and

c. Act by ordinance, which shall be signed by the mayor after the council’s adoption of the ordinance.

I. Vote Required for a Legislative Change.

1. A vote by a majority of the qualified voting members of the planning commission present is required for a recommendation for approval, approval with modifications, approval with conditions, denial or adoption of an alternative.

2. A vote by a majority of the qualified members of the city council present is required to decide any motion made on the proposal.

J. Notice of Decision. Notice of a Type IV decision shall be mailed to the applicant, all participants of record, and the Department of Land Conservation and Development, within five business days after the city council decision is filed with the community development director or designee. The city shall also provide notice to all persons as required by other applicable laws. Failure of any person to receive mailed notice shall not invalidate the decision; provided, that a good faith attempt was made to mail the notice.

K. Final Decision and Effective Date. A Type IV decision, if approved, shall take effect and shall become final as specified in the enacting ordinance, or if not approved, upon mailing of the notice of decision to the applicant.

L. Appeal. The decision of the review body regarding an appeal of a Type IV decision is the final decision of the city. A legislative decision may be appealed to the State Land Use Board of Appeals by a person with standing within 21 days of the written notice of decision.

M. Record of the Public Hearing.

1. A verbatim record of the proceeding shall be made by stenographic, mechanical, or electronic means. It is not necessary to transcribe an electronic record. The minutes and other evidence presented as a part of the hearing shall be part of the record;

2. All exhibits received and displayed shall be marked to provide identification and shall be part of the record;

3. The official record shall include:

a. All materials considered by the hearings body;

b. All materials submitted by the community development director or designee to the hearings body regarding the application;

c. The verbatim record made by the stenographic, mechanical, or electronic means; the minutes of the hearing; and other documents considered;

d. The final ordinance;

e. All correspondence; and

f. A copy of the notices that were given as required by this chapter. (Ord. 14-01 § 1 (Exh. A), 2014; Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.1.600 General provisions applicable to all reviews – 120-day rule – Time computation – Pre-application conferences – Acceptance and review – Community development director’s duties – Amended applications – Resubmittal – Appeals.

A. One-Hundred-Twenty-Day Rule. The city shall take final action on Type I, II, and III permit applications that are subject to this chapter, including resolution of all appeals, within 120 days from the date the application is deemed as complete, unless the applicant requests an extension in writing. Any exceptions to this rule shall conform to the provisions of ORS 227.178. (The 120-day rule does not apply to Type IV legislative decisions or plan and code amendments under ORS 227.178.)

B. Time Computation. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this chapter, the day of the act or event from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period so computed shall be included, unless it is a Saturday or legal holiday, including Sunday, in which event, the period runs until the end of the next day that is not a Saturday or legal holiday.

C. Pre-Application Conferences.

1. Applicant’s Responsibility. When a pre-application conference is required or requested, the applicant shall submit a summary of the proposal to the community development director with a nonrefundable fee at least seven days beforehand, then meet with the community development director or his/her designee(s) and other parties as appropriate at the scheduled time;

2. Information Provided. At such conference, the community development director or designee shall:

a. Cite the comprehensive plan policies and map designations applicable to the proposal;

b. Cite the ordinance provisions, including substantive and procedural requirements applicable to the proposal;

c. Provide available technical data and assistance that will aid the applicant;

d. Identify other governmental policies and regulations that relate to the application; and

e. Reasonably identify other opportunities or constraints concerning the application;

3. Disclaimer. Failure of the community development director or his/her designee to provide any of the information required by this subsection (C) shall not constitute a waiver of any of the standards, criteria or requirements for the application;

4. Changes in the Law. Due to possible changes in federal, state, regional, and local law, the applicant is responsible for ensuring that the application complies with all applicable laws on the day the application is deemed complete.

D. Acceptance and Review of Applications.

1. Initiation of Applications.

a. Applications for approval under this chapter may be initiated by:

i. Order of city council;

ii. Resolution of the planning commission;

iii. The community development director or designee;

iv. A record owner of property (person(s) whose name is on the most recently recorded deed), or contract purchaser with written permission from the record owner.

b. Any person authorized to submit an application for approval may be represented by an agent authorized in writing to make the application on their behalf.

2. Consolidation of Proceedings. When an applicant applies for more than one type of land use or development permit (e.g., Type II and III) for the same one or more parcels of land, the proceedings shall be consolidated for review and decision.

a. If more than one approval authority would be required to decide on the applications if submitted separately, then the decision shall be made by the approval authority having original jurisdiction over one of the applications, in the following order of preference: the council, the commission, or the community development director or designee.

b. When proceedings are consolidated:

i. The notice shall identify each application to be decided;



ii. The decision on a plan map amendment shall precede the decision on a proposed zone change and other decisions on a proposed development. Similarly, the decision on a zone map amendment shall precede the decision on a proposed development and other actions; and

iii. Separate findings and decisions shall be made on each application.

3. Check for Acceptance and Completeness. In reviewing an application for completeness, the following procedure shall be used:

a. Acceptance. When an application is received by the city, the community development director or designee shall immediately determine whether the following essential items are present. If the following items are not present, the application shall not be accepted and shall be immediately returned to the applicant:

i. The required forms;

ii. The required, nonrefundable fee;

iii. The signature of the applicant on the required form and signed written authorization of the property owner of record if the applicant is not the owner.

b. Completeness.

i. Review and Notification. After the application is accepted, the community development director or designee shall review the application for completeness. If the application is incomplete, the community development director or designee shall notify the applicant in writing of exactly what information is missing within 30 days of receipt of the application and allow the applicant 180 days to submit the missing information, or 14 days to submit a refusal statement;

ii. Application Deemed Complete for Review. In accordance with the application submittal requirements of this chapter, the application shall be deemed complete upon the receipt by the community development director or designee of all required information. The applicant shall have the option of withdrawing the application, or refusing to submit information requested by the community development director or designee in this subsection (D)(3)(b). For the refusal to be valid, the refusal shall be made in writing and received by the community development director or designee no later than 14 days after the date on the community development director or designee’s letter of incompleteness. If the applicant refuses in writing to submit the missing information, the application shall be deemed complete for processing on the thirty-first day after the community development director or designee first accepted the application.

iii. Standards and Criteria That Apply to the Application. Approval or denial of the application shall be based upon the standards and criteria that were applicable at the time it was first accepted.

iv. Coordinated Review. The city shall also submit the application for review and comment to the city engineer, road authority, and other applicable county, state, and federal review agencies.

4. Changes or Additions to the Application During the Review Period. Once an application is deemed complete:

a. All documents and other evidence relied upon by the applicant shall be submitted to the community development director or designee at least seven days before the notice of action or hearing is mailed, if possible. Documents or other evidence submitted after that date shall be received by the community development director or designee, and transmitted to the hearings body, but may be too late to include with the staff report and evaluation;

b. When documents or other evidence are submitted by the applicant during the review period but after the application is deemed complete, the assigned review person or body shall determine whether or not the new documents or other evidence submitted by the applicant significantly change the application;

c. If the assigned reviewer determines that the new documents or other evidence significantly change the application, the reviewer shall include a written determination that a significant change in the application has occurred as part of the decision. In the alternative, the reviewer may inform the applicant, either in writing or orally at a public hearing, that such changes may constitute a significant change (see subsection (D)(4)(d) of this section), and allow the applicant to withdraw the new materials submitted, in order to avoid a determination of significant change;

d. If the applicant’s new materials are determined to constitute a significant change in an application that was previously deemed complete, the city shall take one of the following actions, at the choice of the applicant:

i. Continue to process the existing application and allow the applicant to submit a new second application with the proposed significant changes. Both the old and the new applications will proceed, but each will be deemed complete on different dates and may therefore be subject to different criteria and standards and different decision dates;

ii. Suspend the existing application and allow the applicant to submit a new application with the proposed significant changes. Before the existing application can be suspended, the applicant must consent in writing to waive the 120-day rule (SDC 4.1.600(A)) on the existing application. If the applicant does not consent, the city shall not select this option;

iii. Reject the new documents or other evidence that has been determined to constitute a significant change, and continue to process the existing application without considering the materials that would constitute a significant change. The city will complete its decision-making process without considering the new evidence;

e. If a new application is submitted by the applicant, that application shall be subject to a separate check for acceptance and completeness and will be subject to the standards and criteria in effect at the time the new application is accepted.

E. Community Development Director’s Duties. The community development director or designee shall:

1. Prepare application forms based on the criteria and standards in applicable state law, the city’s comprehensive plan, and implementing ordinance provisions;

2. Accept all development applications that comply with this section;

3. Prepare a staff report that summarizes the application(s) and applicable decision criteria, and provides findings of conformance and/or nonconformance with the criteria. The staff report and findings may also provide a recommended decision of: approval, denial, or approval with specific conditions that ensure conformance with the review criteria;

4. Prepare a notice of the proposal decision:

a. In the case of an application subject to a Type I or II review process, the community development director or designee shall make the staff report and all case-file materials available at the time that the notice of the decision is issued;

b. In the case of an application subject to a hearing (Type III or IV process), the community development director or designee shall make the staff report available to the public at least seven days prior to the scheduled hearing date, and make the case-file materials available when notice of the hearing is mailed, as provided by SDC 4.1.300(C) (Type II), 4.1.400(C) (Type III), or 4.1.500(D) (Type IV);

5. Administer the hearings process;

6. File notice of the final decision in the city’s records and mail a copy of the notice of the final decision to the applicant; all persons who provided comments or testimony; persons who requested copies of the notice; and any other persons entitled to notice by law;

7. Maintain and preserve the file for each application for the time period required by law. The file shall include, as applicable, a list of persons required to be given notice and a copy of the notice given; the affidavits of notice; the application and all supporting information; the staff report; the final decision including the findings, conclusions and conditions, if any; all correspondence; minutes of any meeting at which the application was considered; and any other exhibit, information or documentation that was considered by the decision-maker(s) on the application; and

8. Administer the appeals and review process.

F. Amended Decision Process.

1. The purpose of an amended decision process is to allow the community development director or designee to correct typographical errors, rectify inadvertent omissions and/or make other minor changes that do not materially alter the decision.

2. The community development director or designee may issue an amended decision after the notice of final decision has been issued but before the appeal period has expired. If such a decision is amended, the decision shall be issued within 14 business days after the original decision would have become final, but in no event beyond the 120-day period required by state law. A new 10-day appeal period shall begin on the day the amended decision is issued.

3. Notice of an amended decision shall be given using the same mailing and distribution list as for the original decision notice.

4. Modifications to approved plans or conditions of approval requested by the applicant shall follow the procedures in Chapter 4.6 SDC. All other changes to decisions that are not modifications under Chapter 4.6 SDC follow the appeal process.

G. Resubmittal of Application Following Denial. An application that has been denied, or an application that was denied and on appeal or review has not been reversed by a higher authority, including the Land Use Board of Appeals, the land conservation and development commission or the courts, may not be resubmitted as the same or a substantially similar proposal for the same land for a period of at least 12 months from the date the final city action is made denying the application, unless there is substantial change in the facts or a change in city policy that would change the outcome, as determined by the community development director or designee. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.1.700 Reserved.

(Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.1.800 Neighborhood contact.

Applicants are encouraged to meet with adjacent property owners and neighborhood representatives prior to submitting their application to the city in order to solicit input and exchange information about the proposed development. An applicant is encouraged to hold a neighborhood meeting with a city-recognized neighborhood or community organization and adjacent property owners before submitting the application to the city. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.1.900 Traffic impact studies.

The purpose of this section is to assist in determining which road authorities participate in land use decisions, and to implement Section 660-012-0045(2)(e) of the State Transportation Planning Rule that requires the city to adopt a process to apply conditions to development proposals in order to minimize impacts and protect transportation facilities. This chapter establishes the standards for when a proposal must be reviewed for potential traffic impacts; when a traffic impact study must be submitted with a development application in order to determine whether conditions are needed to minimize impacts to and protect transportation facilities; what must be in a traffic impact study; and who is qualified to prepare the study.

A. When a Traffic Impact Study Is Required. The city or other road authority with jurisdiction may require a traffic impact study (TIS) as part of an application for development, a change in use, or a change in access. A TIS shall be required when a land use application involves one or more of the following actions:

1. A change in zoning or a plan amendment designation if required by the public works director;

2. Any proposed development or land use action resulting in an increase of 20 single-family dwellings or 200 average daily trips, whichever is less, per the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation Manual;

3. Where a road authority states that it has operational or safety concerns with its facility(ies);

4. A change in land use that may cause an increase in use of adjacent streets by vehicles exceeding the 20,000 pound gross vehicle weights by 20 peak hour trips or more per day;

5. The location of the access driveway does not meet minimum sight distance requirements, or is located where vehicles entering or leaving the property are restricted, or such vehicles queue or hesitate on the state highway, creating a safety hazard;

6. A change in internal traffic patterns that may cause safety problems, such as backup onto a street or greater potential for traffic accidents.

B. Traffic Impact Study Preparation. A traffic impact study shall be prepared and certified by a professional engineer in accordance with the requirements of the road authority and public works design standards, with the specific scope of work to be determined by the public works director. If the road authority is the Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT), consult ODOT’s regional development review planner and OAR 734-051-180. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


Chapter 4.2 LAND USE REVIEW AND DESIGN REVIEW

Sections:

4.2.100    Purpose.

4.2.200    Applicability.

4.2.300    Land use review procedure and review criteria.

4.2.400    Design review – Application review procedure.

4.2.500    Design review – Application submission requirements.

4.2.510    Design review – Adjustments (performance option).

4.2.600    Review criteria – Design review.

4.2.700    Bonding and assurances.

4.2.800    Development in accordance with permit approval – Modifications – Permit expiration.


4.2.100 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to:

A. Provide rules, regulations and standards for efficient and effective administration of land use and design review;

B. Carry out the development pattern and plan of the city and its comprehensive plan policies;

C. Promote the public health, safety and general welfare;

D. Provide adequate light and air, prevent overcrowding of land, and provide for adequate transportation, water supply, sewage, fire protection, pollution control, surface water management, and protection against natural hazards;

E. Encourage the conservation of energy resources; and

F. Encourage efficient use of land resources, full utilization of urban services, mixed uses, transportation options, and detailed, human-scaled design. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.2.200 Applicability.

Land use review or design review shall be required for all new developments and modifications of existing developments described below, except existing single-family dwellings undergoing a remodel or minor addition (i.e., lot coverage increase by less than 50 percent over existing lot coverage). Regular maintenance, repair and replacement of materials (e.g., roof, siding, awnings, etc.), parking resurfacing and similar maintenance and repair shall be exempt from review.

A. Land Use Review. Land use review is a review conducted by the community development director or designee without a public hearing (Type I or II). See Chapter 4.1 SDC for review procedure. It is for changes in land use and developments that do not require a conditional use or design review approval. Land use review ensures compliance with the basic land use and development standards of the zone, such as lot area, building setbacks and orientation, lot coverage, maximum building height, and other provisions of Article 2. If the community development director decides to issue a formal written decision regarding the proposed activity, the decision will follow Type I or II procedures. Land use review is required for all of the types of land uses and development listed below. Land uses and developments exceeding the thresholds below require design review.

1. Change in occupancy from one type of land use to a different land use where any change in floor area or on-site parking is limited to 10 percent or less;

2. Single-family detached dwelling (including manufactured home on its own lot);

3. A single duplex, or up to two single-family attached (townhome) units not requiring a land division;

4. Minor modifications to development approvals as defined by Chapter 4.6;

5. Accessory structures (not exceeding 800 square feet of floor area) and parking facilities when accessory to a primary permitted use;

6. Public improvements required by a condition of approval (e.g., transportation facilities and improvements, parks, trails, and similar improvements, as determined by the community development director).

B. Design Review. Design review ensures compliance with the land use and development standards in Article 2 and the design standards and public improvement requirements in Article 3. All of the following actions are subject to design review:

1. Development for a new multifamily, attached single-family, commercial, industrial or institutional use, including land divisions, site preparation and construction of buildings, parking, landscaping, signage, and other site improvements for the same;

2. Change in occupancy from a less intensive land use to a more intensive land use resulting in development or exterior improvements, as evidenced by an increase in floor area, dwelling density, parking, trip generation, or similar factor(s), by more than 10 percent;

3. Building addition exceeding 1,000 square feet, or 10 percent of an existing structure, whichever is greater, where there is no change in occupancy or use;

4. Major modifications to development approvals as defined by Chapter 4.6 SDC;

5. Temporary uses, if required under Chapter 4.9 SDC;

6. Parking facilities when not accessory to a primary permitted use;

7. Public improvements, including but not limited to transportation facilities and improvements, buildings, modular buildings, parks, trails, and similar improvements, as determined by the community development director, if not subject to a prior land use approval. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.2.300 Land use review procedure and review criteria.

When land use review is required, it shall be conducted prior to issuance of building permits, occupancy permits, business licenses, or public improvement permits, as determined by the community development director. The city shall conduct land use reviews using either a Type I or Type II procedure, as described in SDC 4.1.200 and 4.1.300. A Type I procedure shall be used when the community development director finds that the applicable standards are clear and objective and do not require the exercise of discretion. A Type II procedure shall be used when the decision is discretionary in nature, but it does not involve any requested adjustments under SDC 4.2.510. The community development director shall be responsible for determining the required review procedure. An application for land use review shall be approved only upon meeting all of the following criteria; the applicant shall bear the burden of proof.

A. The proposed land use and development are permitted by the underlying zone (Article 2);

B. The applicable development and design standards of the underlying zone and any applicable overlay district(s) are met (Article 2); and

C. The applicable access, parking, landscaping, signage and other requirements of Article 3 are met.

Building permits must be obtained subsequent to land use review. Land use reviews do not address a project’s compliance with applicable building, fire and life safety regulations. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.2.400 Design review – Application review procedure.

Design reviews are classified as limited land use decisions (Type II), except as provided by subsections (A) and (B) of this section:

A. Applications involving one or more adjustments, as provided in SDC 4.2.510, are reviewed through a quasi-judicial (Type III) process and require a public hearing.

B. If the property is subject to an overlay zone, a quasi-judicial (Type III) public hearing may be required for design review approval. See the applicable overlay zone provisions under Chapters 2.5 through 2.8 SDC.

C. If the subject design review application is part of a larger request involving a conditional use or other quasi-judicial (Type III) action, the applications shall be combined and reviewed concurrently using the Type III procedure.

D. Land use decisions meeting the criteria under SDC 4.2.300 are subject to land use review and do not require design review, except as may be required by subsections (A) through (C) of this section. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.2.500 Design review – Application submission requirements.

All of the following information is required for design review application submittal:

A. General Submission Requirements. An application for design review shall contain all of the information required for a Type III review under SDC 4.1.400, and provide:

1. Traffic Estimate. The application shall describe the proposed access to and from the site and estimate potential vehicle traffic increases resulting from the project. The community development director may require a traffic impact study, in accordance with SDC 4.1.900; and

2. In situations where this code requires the dedication of property to the city, the city shall either, (1) include in the written decision evidence that shows that the required property dedication is directly related to and roughly proportional to the projected impacts of the development on public facilities and services, or (2) not require the dedication as a condition of approval; this does not preclude the city from accepting voluntary dedications.

B. Design Review Information. In addition to the general submission requirements and number of required copies for a Type III review (SDC 4.1.400), an applicant for design review shall provide the following information, as deemed applicable by the community development director. The community development director may deem applicable any information that he or she needs to review the request and prepare a complete staff report and recommendation to the review body.

1. Site Analysis Map. At a minimum the site analysis map shall contain the following:

a. The applicant’s entire property and the surrounding property to a distance sufficient to determine the location of the development in the city, and the relationship between the proposed development site and adjacent property and development. The property boundaries, dimensions and gross area shall be identified;

b. Topographic contour lines at two-foot intervals or less for slopes of less than 10 percent, and five-foot intervals for steeper slopes;

c. Identification of slopes greater than 12 percent, consistent with the method of measurement and contour intervals required by the city engineer;

d. The location and width of all public and private streets, drives, sidewalks, pathways, rights-of-way, and easements on the site and adjoining the site;

e. Potential natural hazard areas, including any flood areas subject to Chapter 2.5 SDC, areas subject to high water table, and areas mapped by the city, county, or state as having a potential for geologic hazards.

f. Resource areas, including marsh and wetland areas, streams, and wildlife habitat identified by the city or any natural resource regulatory agencies as requiring protection.

g. Site features, including existing structures, pavement, large rock outcroppings, areas having unique views, and drainage ways, canals and ditches.

h. Locally or federally designated historic and cultural resources on the site and adjacent parcels or lots;

i. The location, size and species of trees and other vegetation having a caliper (diameter) of six inches or greater at four feet above grade;

j. North arrow, scale, names and addresses of all persons listed as owners of the subject property on the most recently recorded deed;

k. Name and address of project designer, engineer, surveyor, and/or planner, if applicable.

2. Proposed Site Plan. The site plan shall contain the following information:

a. The proposed development site, including boundaries, dimensions, and gross area;

b. Features identified on the existing site analysis maps that are proposed to remain on the site;

c. Features identified on the existing site map, if any, which are proposed to be removed or modified by the development;

d. The location and dimensions of all proposed public and private streets, drives, rights-of-way, and easements;

e. The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed structures, utilities, pavement and other improvements on the site. Setback dimensions for all existing and proposed buildings shall be provided on the site plan;

f. The location and dimensions of entrances and exits to the site for vehicular, pedestrian, and bicycle access;

g. The location and dimensions of all parking and vehicle circulation areas (show striping for parking stalls and wheel stops);

h. Pedestrian and bicycle circulation areas, including sidewalks, internal pathways, pathway connections to adjacent properties, and any bicycle lanes or trails;

i. Loading and service areas for waste disposal, loading and delivery;

j. Outdoor recreation spaces, common areas, plazas, outdoor seating, street furniture, and similar improvements;

k. Location, type, and height of outdoor lighting;

l. Location of existing and proposed mailboxes;

m. Name and address of project designer, if applicable;

n. Locations of bus stops and other public or private transportation facilities;

o. Sign concept plan (e.g., locations, general size, style and materials of signs). (Signs are subject to review and approval under Chapter 15.16 SMC.)

3. Architectural Drawings. Architectural drawings showing one or all of the following shall be required for new buildings and major remodels:

a. Building elevations with building height and widths dimensioned, and materials labeled;

b. Building Materials, Colors and Type. A materials sample board may be required;

c. The name of the architect or designer.

4. Preliminary Grading Plan. A preliminary grading plan prepared by a registered engineer shall be required for development sites one-half acre or larger. The preliminary grading plan shall show the location and extent to which grading will take place, indicating general changes to contour lines, slope ratios, slope stabilization proposals, and location and height of retaining walls, if proposed. Surface water detention and treatment plans may also be required, in accordance with SDC 3.4.400.

5. Landscape Plan. A landscape plan may be required and at the direction of the community development director shall show the following:

a. The location and height of existing and proposed fences, buffering or screening materials;

b. The location of existing and proposed terraces, retaining walls, decks, patios, shelters, and play areas;

c. The location, size, and species of the existing and proposed plant materials (at time of planting);

d. Existing and proposed building and pavement outlines;

e. Specifications for soil at time of planting, irrigation if plantings are not drought-tolerant (may be automatic-underground or other approved method of irrigation) and anticipated planting schedule;

f. Other information as deemed appropriate by the community development director. An arborist’s report may be required for sites with mature trees that are protected under Chapter 3.2 SDC, Landscaping, Street Trees, Fences and Walls;

6. Deed Restrictions. Copies of all existing and proposed restrictions or covenants, including those for access control;

7. Narrative. Letter or narrative report documenting compliance with the applicable review criteria contained in SDC 4.2.600, Review criteria – Design review;

8. Traffic impact study, when required, shall be prepared in accordance with the road authority’s requirements. See SDC 4.1.900 for relevant standards.

9. Other information determined by the community development director. The city may require studies or exhibits prepared by qualified professionals to address specific site features or project impacts (e.g., traffic, noise, environmental features, natural hazards, etc.), in conformance with this code. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.2.510 Design review – Adjustments (performance option).

A. Adjustments. The intent of this section is to allow reasonable flexibility and to promote creativity in project designs. An “adjustment” is a modification to a code standard (decrease, increase, waiver, or material substitution) resulting in a design that is as good or better than what would likely result under the standard with respect to the code’s intent; the adjustments may be approved only when the proposal is consistent with the stated purpose of the code. An application for design review may include, and the decision body may approve, a request for adjustment(s) to one or more of the site/building design standards in the following code sections:

	SDC 2.2.180: 	Residential districts – Building orientation;

	SDC 2.2.190: 	Residential districts – Architectural design standards;

	SDC 2.3.150: 	Commercial districts – Building orientation and commercial block layout;

	SDC 2.3.170: 	Commercial districts – Pedestrian amenities;

	SDC 2.3.180: 	General commercial district design standards;

	SDC 2.3.200: 	Downtown commercial district design standards;

	SDC 2.3.210: 	Downtown commercial fringe district design standards;

	Chapter 3.2 SDC:	Landscaping, Street Trees, Fences and Walls;

	Chapter 3.3 SDC:	Parking and Loading.

B. Limitation. Allowable adjustments under this section are limited to the code provisions listed in subsection (A) of this section. Land use, density, structure height, lot coverage, setbacks, and other provisions not listed above are not to be adjusted or modified under this section.

C. Procedure. An adjustment request made under this section must be made in writing and submitted with a design review application. Design review applications involving adjustment(s) are reviewed by the planning commission through a Type III (quasi-judicial) public hearing procedure, which is outlined in SDC 4.1.400. In acting on an adjustment request, the commission shall approve, deny, or approve with conditions the request concurrently with the subject design review application. The decision body shall approve an adjustment only upon finding that it conforms to the criteria in subsection (D) of this section.

D. Review Criteria. The city shall consider the following review criteria and may approve, approve with conditions, or deny a design review adjustment based on the following; the applicant shall bear the burden of proof.

1. Adjusting the subject code standard(s), i.e., decreasing, increasing, waiving, or making a material substitution, will result in a design that is as good or better than what would likely result under the base standard;

2. The adjustment is consistent with the code’s stated intent and is in the public interest; and

3. In interpreting the public interest, consideration shall be given to intended public benefits or protections such as compatibility with surrounding uses; pedestrian safety and comfort; complementary development scale, materials, and detailing; street visibility; and/or aesthetic concerns. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.2.600 Review criteria – Design review.

The city shall consider the following review criteria and may approve, approve with conditions, or deny a design review based on the following; the applicant shall bear the burden of proof.

A. Complete. The application is complete, as determined in accordance with Chapter 4.1 SDC, Types of Review Procedures, and SDC 4.2.500;

B. Zoning District. The application complies with all of the applicable provisions of the underlying zoning district (Article 2), including: building and yard setbacks, lot area and dimensions, density and floor area, lot coverage, building height, building orientation, architecture, and other special standards as may be required for certain land uses;

C. Conformance. The applicant shall be required to upgrade any existing development that does not comply with the applicable zoning district standards, in conformance with Chapter 5.2 SDC, Nonconforming Uses and Development;

D. Design Standards. The application complies with all of the design standards in Article 3:

1. Article 2, design standards and special use standards of the applicable district;

2. Chapter 3.1 SDC, Access and Circulation;

3. Chapter 3.2 SDC, Landscaping, Street Trees, Fences and Walls;

4. Chapter 3.3 SDC, Parking and Loading;

5. Chapter 3.4 SDC, Public Facilities;

E. Conditions of Approval. Existing conditions of approval required as part of a prior land division (Chapter 4.3 SDC), conditional use (Chapter 4.4 SDC), planned development (Chapter 4.5 SDC) or other approval shall be met. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.2.700 Bonding and assurances.

A. Performance Bonds for Public Improvements. On all projects where public improvements are required, the city shall require the developer to provide bonding or other performance guarantees acceptable to the public works director to ensure completion of required public improvements. The bond or other assurance (e.g., letter of irrevocable credit) shall be equal to 110 percent of the total construction cost estimate for all public infrastructure to be provided, as approved by the public works director, or designee. In addition, the construction cost estimate must either be an engineer’s estimate, in writing, or a copy of the contractor’s price agreement having sufficient detail for the public works director, or designee, to verify reasonable unit pricing.

B. Release of Performance Bonds. The bond or other assurance shall be released when the public works director, or designee, finds the public improvements are complete and conform to the site development approval, including all conditions of approval. Upon acceptance of the completed public improvements, a one-year warranty bond, deposit or other assurances approved by the public works director, or designee, shall be required and shall cover a minimum of 20 percent of the public improvements construction cost for the project.

C. Completion of Landscape Installation. Landscaping shall be installed prior to issuance of occupancy permits, unless security equal to the cost of the landscaping as determined by the community development director or a qualified landscape architect is filed with the community development director assuring such installation within six months after occupancy. If the installation of the landscaping is not completed within the six-month period, the security may be used by the city to complete the installation.

D. Termination of Performance Guarantee. The developer shall not cause termination of nor allow expiration of the guarantee without having first secured written authorization from the city. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.2.800 Development in accordance with permit approval – Modifications – Permit expiration.

Development shall not commence until the applicant has received all of the appropriate land use and development approvals (i.e., design review approval) and building permits. Construction of public improvements shall not commence until the city has approved all required public improvement plans (e.g., utilities, streets, public land dedication, etc.). The city may require the applicant to enter into a development agreement (e.g., for phased developments and developments with required off-site public improvements), and may require bonding or other assurances for improvements, in accordance with SDC 4.2.700. Annexation agreements, where applicable, must also be met. Development review and design review approvals shall be subject to all of the following standards and limitations:

A. Modifications to Approved Plans and Developments. Minor modifications of an approved plan or existing development, as defined in Chapter 4.6 SDC, shall be processed as a Type I procedure and require only land use review. Major modifications, as defined in Chapter 4.6 SDC, shall be processed as a Type II or Type III procedure and shall require design review. For information on Type I, Type II and Type III procedures, please refer to Chapter 4.1 SDC. For modifications review criteria, please refer to Chapter 4.6 SDC.

B. Approval Period. Development review and design review approvals shall be effective for a period of one year from the date of approval. The approval shall lapse if:

1. A public improvement plan or building permit application for the project has not been submitted within one year of land use approval;

2. For projects requiring a land division, a public improvement plan or building permit application for the project has not been submitted within one year of final plat approval;

3. Construction on the site is in violation of the approved plan.

C. Extension. The planning commission may, upon written request by the applicant, grant a written extension of the approval period not to exceed one year; provided, that:

1. No changes are made on the original approved design review plan;

2. The applicant can show intent of initiating construction on the site within the one-year extension period;

3. There have been no changes to the applicable code provisions on which the approval was based. If there have been changes to the applicable code provisions and the expired plan does not comply with those changes, then the extension shall not be granted; in this case, a new design review shall be required; and

4. The applicant demonstrates that failure to obtain building permits and substantially begin construction within one year of site design approval was beyond the applicant’s control.

D. Phased Development. Phasing of development may be approved with the design review application, subject to the following standards and procedures:

1. A phasing plan shall be submitted with the design review application.

2. The planning commission shall approve a time schedule for developing a site in phases, but in no case shall the total time period for all phases be greater than two years without reapplying for design review.

3. Approval of a phased design review proposal requires satisfaction of all of the following criteria:

a. The public facilities required to serve each phase are constructed in conjunction with or prior to each phase;

b. The development and occupancy of any phase dependent on the use of temporary public facilities shall require city council approval. Temporary facilities shall be approved only upon city receipt of bonding or other assurances to cover the cost of required public improvements, in accordance with SDC 4.2.700. A “temporary public facility” is any facility not constructed to the applicable city or district standard, subject to review by the city engineer;

c. The phased development shall not result in requiring the city or other property owners to construct public facilities that were required as part of the approved development proposal; and

d. An application for phasing may be approved after design review approval as a modification to the approved plan, in accordance with the procedures for minor modifications (Chapter 4.6 SDC).

4. All public improvements serving a particular phase must be complete and approved by the city engineer prior to on-site building permits being issued. Temporary facilities will not be allowed. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


Chapter 4.3 LAND DIVISIONS AND PROPERTY LINE ADJUSTMENTS

Sections:

4.3.100    Purpose.

4.3.110    General requirements.

4.3.112    Preplanning for large sites.

4.3.115    Flexible lot size – Lots without street frontage – Flag lots – Minisubdivisions.

4.3.120    Preliminary plat approval process.

4.3.130    Preliminary plat submission requirements.

4.3.140    Review criteria – Preliminary plat.

4.3.150    Variances authorized.

4.3.160    Final plat submission requirements and review criteria.

4.3.170    Public improvements required.

4.3.180    Performance guarantee.

4.3.190    Filing and recording.

4.3.200    Re-platting and vacation of plats and easements.

4.3.210    Property line adjustments.

4.3.220    Lot consolidations.


4.3.100 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to:

A. Provide rules, regulations and standards governing the approval of subdivisions, partitions and lot line adjustments:

1. Subdivisions are the creation of four or more lots from one parent lot, parcel or tract, within one calendar year;

2. Partitions are the creation of three or fewer lots within one calendar year;

3. Lot line adjustments are modifications to lot lines or parcel boundaries that do not result in the creation of new lots (includes consolidation of lots);

B. Carry out the city’s development pattern, as envisioned by the comprehensive plan;

C. Encourage efficient use of land resources, full utilization of urban services, and transportation options;

D. Promote the public health, safety and general welfare through orderly and efficient urbanization;

E. Provide adequate light and air, prevent overcrowding of land, and provide for adequate transportation, water supply, sewage, fire protection, pollution control, surface water management, and protection against natural hazards; and

F. Encourage the conservation of energy resources. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.3.110 General requirements.

A. Subdivision and Partition Approval Through Two-Step Process. Applications for subdivision or partition approval shall be processed by means of a preliminary plat evaluation and a final plat evaluation, according to the following two steps:

1. The preliminary plat must be approved before the final plat can be submitted for approval consideration; and

2. The final plat must include all conditions of approval of the preliminary plat and construction plans must be approved before the final plat may be considered for approval.

B. Compliance with ORS Chapter 92. All subdivision and partition proposals shall conform to state regulations in ORS Chapter 92, Subdivisions and Partitions.

C. Future Redivision Plan. When subdividing or partitioning tracts into large lots (i.e., greater than two times or 200 percent the minimum lot size allowed by the land use district), the city shall require that the lots be of such size, shape, and orientation as to facilitate future re-division in accordance with the requirements of the land use district and this code. A re-division plan shall be submitted for large lots identifying:

1. Potential future lot division(s), consistent with the densities and lot sizes in Article 2;

2. Potential street right-of-way alignments to serve future development of the property and connect to adjacent properties, including existing or planned rights-of-way;

3. A disclaimer that the plan is a conceptual plan intended to show potential future development. It shall not be binding on the city or property owners, except as may be required through conditions of land division approval. For example, dedication and improvement of rights-of-way within the future plan area may be required to provide needed secondary access and circulation.

D. Lot Size Averaging. Lot size may be averaged to allow lots less than the minimum lot size, as provided in SDC 4.3.115, or when approved through a planned development under Chapter 4.5 SDC.

E. Temporary Sales Office. A temporary sales office in conjunction with a subdivision may be approved as set forth in SDC 4.9.100, Temporary uses.

F. Minimize Flood Damage. All subdivisions and partitions shall be designed based on the need to minimize the risk of flood damage. See also Chapter 2.5 SDC, Floodplain Overlay District.

G. Determination of Base Flood Elevation. See Chapter 2.5 SDC, Floodplain Overlay District.

H. Need for Adequate Utilities. All lots created through land division shall have adequate public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems. These systems shall be located and constructed to prevent or minimize flood damage, and to avoid impairment of the system and contamination from them during flooding.

I. Need for Adequate Drainage. All subdivision and partition proposals shall have adequate surface water drainage facilities that reduce exposure to flood damage and improve water quality. Water quality or quantity control improvements may be required.

J. Floodplain, Park, and Open Space Dedication.

1. Where land filling and/or development is allowed within or adjacent to a regulatory floodplain in accordance with Chapter 2.5 SDC, and the comprehensive plan designates the subject floodplain for park, open space, or trail use, the city may require the dedication of sufficient open land area to accommodate planned improvements in accordance with its facility plans.

2. The city may require a greenway and/or trail adjoining or within the floodplain for transportation, storm drainage/water quality, or park purposes, consistent with facility plans.

3. When practicable, such areas shall include portions at a suitable elevation for the construction of a multi-use pathway in accordance with applicable facility plans. The city shall evaluate individual development proposals and determine whether the dedication of land is justified based on the development’s impact to the park and/or trail system, or stormwater management requirements, consistent with SDC 3.4.200 and 3.4.400, and may assist in obtaining any floodplain permit that may be required.

4. Where the city determines that required open space areas are not to be dedicated to the public, such areas shall be protected and maintenance assured through a conservation easement or other legal instrument approved by the city council. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.3.112 Preplanning for large sites.

A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to require preplanning of large sites (i.e., in conjunction with annexations, planned development approvals, and subdivision approvals) and ensure the development of fully integrated, mixed-use pedestrian-oriented neighborhoods. The intent is to minimize traffic congestion, suburban sprawl, infrastructure costs, and environmental degradation, particularly as new development takes place on large parcels of land.

B. Applicability. This section applies to parcels, and development sites with more than one parcel in residential district(s) that are 20 acres or larger.

C. Area Plan Required. When an annexation or land division site contains 20 acres or more, prior to annexation and land division approval, the applicant shall prepare a specific area plan meeting the criteria in subsection (D) of this section. For the purposes of this section, the “site” shall be considered the area subject to an annexation request or land use application and any contiguous land under common ownership, except for land under common ownership that is located outside the urban growth boundary.

D. Land Use and Design Standards. The specific area plan required under subsection (C) of this section shall accommodate planned housing needs, employment uses, and public facilities, as applicable. Land needed for public use (e.g., schools, parks, fire stations, and other facilities) shall be designated on the master plan, in accordance with the city’s facility plans.

E. Implementation. Upon approval of a plan under the provisions of this section, the processing of development proposals shall follow the land division procedures in this chapter, and the land use review and/or design review procedures in Chapter 4.2 SDC, as applicable. Any modifications to the approved master plan shall be subject to the standards and procedures in Chapter 4.6 SDC, Modifications to Approved Plans and Conditions of Approval. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.3.115 Flexible lot size – Lots without street frontage – Flag lots – Minisubdivisions.

A. Flexible Lot Size. To allow creativity and flexibility in subdivision design and to address physical constraints, such as areas subject to the hillside protection overlay, jurisdictional wetlands, floodplain, unusual parcel configuration, or similar constraint, the review body may grant a 10 percent adjustment to the lot area and/or lot dimension (width/depth) standards in SDC 2.2.130 without the need for a variance under Chapter 5.1 SDC; provided, that the overall density of the subdivision does not exceed the allowable density of the district based on the developable area exclusive of right-of-way areas and the review body finds that granting the modification allows for a greater variety of housing types or it improves development compatibility with natural features or adjacent land uses. The review body may require that standard size lots be placed at the perimeter of the development where the abutting lots are standard size or larger; except that this provision shall not apply where the abutting lots are larger than 15,000 square feet.

B. Individual Lots without Street Frontage. Individual lots may be developed without frontage onto a public street when lot access is provided by an access easement approved by the city. Such access easements may be approved through the partitioning process when the review body finds that no other practicable alternative exists for accessing the lot and no new public street is required to meet the block length and street connectivity standards in Chapter 3.1 SDC. Access easements may be allowed as an alternative to requiring through streets where block lengths do not necessitate a through street. Such driveways and easements shall meet the driveway standards in Chapter 3.1 SDC. See also subsection (C) of this section, Flag Lots.

C. Flag Lots. Flag lots are discouraged and allowed only when absolutely necessary to provide adequate access to buildable sites in infill situations where the dedication and improvement of a public street cannot be provided or the lots take access from an access-restricted roadway. Flag lots are generally not allowed in new subdivisions. A single flag lot may be allowed in a subdivision, provided the variance process is undertaken and all review criteria are met. The review body may approve a flag lot in conjunction with a partition approval only where all lots in the partition meet all of the following criteria. Where the following criteria conflict with requirements of the applicable land use district, the following criteria shall apply:

1. The minimum lot area standards for the district must be met for all lots in the partition;

2. Not more than three parcels may receive vehicle access from the flag “pole” portion of the flag lot partition, provided one of the lots has adequate street frontage;

3. An irrevocable reciprocal access and maintenance easement, subject to review and approval of the community development director, shall be recorded on the plat;

4. The flag pole access must have a minimum width of 20 feet, except the city engineer may require a minimum width of 25 feet where the pole provides access to two or more lots;

5. A minimum building setback of five feet from the flag pole access shall be maintained;

6. The maximum length of any flag pole access shall be 150 feet, unless a turnaround has been approved by the Silverton fire marshal and such turnaround shall be included with the reciprocal access easement recorded on the final plat;

7. Driveway widths and paved sections shall conform to the standards in Chapter 3.1 SDC;

8. The review body may require landscape or fence screening along property lines to promote compatibility with abutting uses;

9. Design and locations of buildings on flag lots shall be such that normal traffic will have sufficient area to turn around, rather than necessitating backing motions down the flag pole or onto a public street. The review body may require special setback requirements at the time of approving the flag lot partition for this purpose.

D. Minisubdivisions. The standards listed in this subsection are intended for use in subdividing residential infill parcels.

1. The review body may approve variations to the street standards contained in the city of Silverton public works design standards when the following criteria are met:

a. The property to be subdivided is less than two acres in size and no more than eight lots will be created or served by the subject street;

b. The proposed subdivision meets the standards for lot size and configuration for the land use district;

c. Surrounding parcels are developed or are so physically incapable of being subdivided that combining the proposed subdivision with adjoining properties in a conventional subdivision is not feasible; and

d. The property is not needed for a continuation of the adjacent public street pattern, except that pedestrian connections may be required for the continuation of the pedestrian circulation system.

2. Upon meeting the criteria in subsection (D)(1) of this section, the review body may modify the applicable street standards as follows:

 

	Dedication and Maintenance	Paved Width Street/Cul-de-sac (b)	On-Street	Right-of-Way (c)

	Curbs	Parking	Sidewalk	Street/Cul-de-sac

	Public (a)	28 ft./30 ft.	Yes	One side	5 ft. one side	35 ft./35 ft. radius (c)

	(a) A 10-foot public utility easement will be required on each side of the right-of-way.

	(b) Maximum street length is 400 feet.

	(c) A combination hammerhead/cul-de-sac may be required to promote neighborhood livability as well as satisfy fire district turnaround requirements. 

(Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.3.120 Preliminary plat approval process.

A. Review of Final Plat. Review of a final plat for a subdivision or partition shall be processed as a Type I procedure under SDC 4.1.200, using the review criteria in SDC 4.3.160; the applicant shall bear the burden of proof.

B. Preliminary Plat Approval Period. Preliminary plat approval shall be effective for a period of three years from the date of approval. The preliminary plat shall lapse if a final plat has not been submitted within this period. The planning commission may approve phased projects, including planned developments, provided the time period between phases does not exceed three years.

C. Modifications and Extensions. The applicant may request changes to the approved preliminary plat or conditions of approval following the procedures and criteria provided in Chapter 4.6 SDC, Modifications to Approved Plans and Conditions of Approval. The community development director shall, upon written request by the applicant and payment of the required fee, grant one written extension of the approval period not to exceed one year; provided, that:

1. Any changes to the preliminary plat follow the procedures in Chapter 4.6 SDC;

2. The applicant has submitted written intent to file a final plat within the one-year extension period;

3. An extension of time will not prevent the lawful development of abutting properties;

4. There have been no changes to the applicable code provisions on which the approval was based. If such changes have occurred, a new preliminary plat application shall be required; and

5. The extension request is made before expiration of the original approved plan.

D. Phased Development.

1. The city may approve a time schedule for developing a subdivision in phases, but in no case shall the actual construction time period (i.e., for required public improvements, utilities, streets) for any partition or subdivision phase be more than three years without reapplying for preliminary plat approval on those remaining unrecorded phases;

2. The criteria for approving a phased land division proposal are:

a. Public facilities shall be constructed in conjunction with or prior to each phase;

b. The development and occupancy of any phase dependent on the use of temporary public facilities shall require city council approval. Temporary facilities shall be approved only upon city receipt of bonding or other assurances to cover the cost of required permanent public improvements, in accordance with SDC 4.3.180. A “temporary public facility” is any facility not constructed to the applicable city or district standard;

c. The phased development shall not result in requiring the city or a third party (e.g., owners of lots) to construct public facilities that were required as part of the approved development proposal; and

d. The proposed time schedule for phased development approval shall be reviewed concurrently with the preliminary plat application, and the decision may be appealed in the same manner as the preliminary plat;

3. All public improvements serving a particular phase must be complete and approved by the city engineer prior to on-site building permits being issued. Temporary facilities will not be allowed. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.3.130 Preliminary plat submission requirements.

A. General Submission Requirements. For all partitions (three or fewer parcels) the application shall contain all of the information required for a Type II procedure under SDC 4.1.300. For subdivisions, the Type III procedures under SDC 4.1.400 shall be followed. Preliminary plats shall also provide the information in subsections (A)(1) and (2) of this section:

1. Traffic Estimate. The application shall describe the proposed access to and from the site and estimate potential vehicle traffic increases resulting from the project. The community development director may require a traffic impact study, in accordance with SDC 4.1.900; and

2. In situations where this code requires the dedication of property to the city, the city shall either (a) include in the written decision evidence that shows that the required property dedication is directly related to and roughly proportional to the projected impacts of the development on public facilities and services, or (b) delete the dedication as a condition of approval.

B. Preliminary Plat Information. In addition to the general information and number of required copies described in subsection (A) of this section, the preliminary plat application shall consist of drawings and supplementary written material (i.e., on forms and/or in a written narrative) adequate to provide the following information:

1. General Information.

a. Name of subdivision (not required for partitions). This name must not duplicate the name of another subdivision in the county (please check with county surveyor);

b. Date, north arrow, and scale of drawing;

c. Location of the development sufficient to define its location in the city, boundaries, and a legal description of the site;

d. A title block including the names, addresses and telephone numbers of the owners of the subject property and, as applicable, the designer, engineer and surveyor if any, and the date of the survey if submitted; and

e. Identification of the drawing as a “preliminary plat.”

2. Site Analysis.

a. Streets: location, name, present width of all streets, alleys and rights-of-way on and abutting the site;

b. Easements: width, location and purpose of all existing easements of record on and abutting the site;

c. Utilities: location and identity of all utilities on and abutting the site. If water mains and sewers are not on or abutting the site, indicate the direction and distance to the nearest one and show how utilities will be brought to standards;

d. Ground elevations shown by contour lines at five-foot vertical intervals for ground slopes exceeding 10 percent and at two-foot intervals, or less, for ground slopes of less than 10 percent or as required by the city engineer. Such ground elevations shall be related to some established benchmark or other datum approved by the county surveyor. Where the site is within a hillside protection overlay, contours shall be shown at intervals and using grade measurement methods as specified by the city engineer;

e. The location and elevation of the closest benchmark(s) within or adjacent to the site (i.e., for surveying purposes);

f. Potential natural hazard areas, including any floodplains, areas subject to high water table, landslide areas, and areas having a high erosion potential;

g. Wetland areas, streams, wildlife habitat, and other areas identified by the city or natural resource regulatory agencies as requiring protection. (See also relevant portions of the comprehensive plan);

h. Site features, including existing structures, pavement, large rock outcroppings, areas having unique views, and drainage ways, canals and ditches;

i. Designated historic and cultural resources on the site and adjacent parcels or lots;

j. The location, size and species of trees having a caliper (diameter) of six inches or greater at four feet above grade in conformance with Chapter 3.2 SDC;

k. North arrow and scale;

l. Name and address of project designer, if applicable; and

m. Other information, as deemed appropriate by the community development director. The city may require studies or exhibits prepared by qualified professionals to address specific site features and code requirements.

3. Proposed Improvements.

a. Public streets, tracts, driveways, open space and parkland; location, names, right-of-way dimensions, and approximate radius of street curves; and approximate finished street center line grades. All areas and tracts that are being held for private use and all reservations and restrictions relating to such private tracts shall be identified;

b. Easements: location, width and purpose of all proposed easements;

c. Lots and private tracts (e.g., private open space, common area, or street): approximate dimensions, area calculation (i.e., in square feet), and identification numbers for all proposed lots and tracts;

d. Proposed uses of the property, including all areas proposed to be dedicated to the public or reserved as open space for the purpose of surface water management, recreation, or other use; potential location of future buildings;

e. Proposed improvements, as required by Article 3, Community Design Standards, and timing of improvements (e.g., in the case of streets, sidewalks, street trees, utilities, etc.);

f. The proposed source of domestic water;

g. The proposed method of sewage disposal;

h. Proposed method of surface water drainage and treatment if required;

i. The approximate location and identity of other utilities, including the locations of street lighting fixtures;

j. Changes to navigable streams, or other watercourses. Status of public access to these areas shall be shown on the preliminary plat, as applicable;

k. Identification of the base flood elevation in accordance with Chapter 2.5 SDC;

l. Evidence of contact with the road authority for any development requiring access to its facility(ies); and

m. Evidence of written notice to the applicable natural resource regulatory agency(ies) for any development within or adjacent to jurisdictional wetlands, and other areas requiring protection or conservation. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.3.140 Review criteria – Preliminary plat.

A. General Review Criteria. The city shall consider the following review criteria and may approve, approve with conditions, or deny a preliminary plat based on the following; the applicant shall bear the burden of proof.

1. The proposed preliminary plat complies with the applicable development code sections and all other applicable ordinances and regulations. At a minimum, the provisions of this article, and the applicable chapters and sections of Article 2, Land Use (Zoning) Districts, and Article 3, Community Design Standards shall apply. Where a variance is necessary to receive preliminary plat approval, the application shall also comply with the relevant sections of Article 5;

2. The proposed streets, roads, sidewalks, bicycle lanes, pathways, utilities, and surface water management facilities are laid out so as to conform or transition to the plats of subdivisions already approved for adjoining property or to provide for logical extension to future properties as to width, general direction and in all other respects. All proposed public improvements and dedications are identified on the preliminary plat;

3. If any part of the site is located within an overlay zone, or previously approved planned development, it shall conform to the applicable regulations and/or conditions;

4. Evidence that any required state and federal permits have been obtained, or shall be obtained before approval of the final plat;

5. Evidence that improvements or conditions required by the city, road authority, county, special districts, utilities, and/or other service providers, as applicable to the project, have been or can be met; and

6. If applicable, all proposed private common areas and improvements (e.g., homeowner association property) are identified on the preliminary plat, and appropriate covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs) are provided.

B. Layout and Design of Streets, Blocks and Lots. All proposed blocks (i.e., one or more lots bound by public streets), lots and parcels conform to the specific requirements below:

1. All lots shall comply with the lot area, setback, and dimensional requirements of the applicable land use district (Article 2), and the standards of SDC 3.4.100(G), Subdivision Street Connectivity.

2. Setbacks shall be as required by the applicable land use district (Article 2).

3. Each lot shall conform to the standards of Chapter 3.1 SDC, Access and Circulation.

4. Landscaping or other screening may be required to maintain privacy for abutting uses. See Article 2, Land Use (Zoning) Districts, and Chapter 3.2 SDC, Landscaping, Street Trees, Fences and Walls.

5. In conformance with the International Fire Code, a 12-foot-wide paved fire apparatus access drive within a 20-foot fire apparatus lane shall be provided to serve all portions of a building that are located more than 150 feet from a public right-of-way or other approved access drive. See also Chapter 3.1 SDC, Access and Circulation.

6. Where a common drive is to be provided to serve more than one lot, a reciprocal easement that will ensure access and maintenance rights shall be recorded with the approved subdivision or partition plat.

7. All applicable engineering design standards for streets, utilities, surface water management, and easements shall be met.

C. Open Space and Park Dedication. Requirements for open space and/or park dedication, as provided in SDC 3.4.200, Public use areas, and SDC 4.3.110(J), Floodplain, Park, and Open Space Dedication, are met.

D. Conditions of Approval. The city may attach such conditions as are necessary to carry out provisions of this code, and other applicable ordinances and regulations, and may require reserve strips be granted to the city for the purpose of controlling access to adjoining undeveloped properties. See Chapter 3.4 SDC, Public Facilities. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.3.150 Variances authorized.

Variances to the standards of this chapter shall be processed in accordance with Chapter 5.1 SDC, Adjustments and Variances. Applications for variances shall be submitted at the same time an application for land division or lot line adjustment is submitted, and the applications shall be reviewed together. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.3.160 Final plat submission requirements and review criteria.

A. Submission Requirements. Final plats shall require review and approval by the city prior to recording with the county. The applicant shall submit the final plat within three years of the approval of the preliminary plat as provided by SDC 4.3.120. Specific information about the format and size of the plat, number of copies and other detailed information can be obtained from the community development director. Extensions may be granted pursuant to SDC 4.3.120(C).

B. Approval Process and Review Criteria. By means of a Type I procedure, the community development director and city engineer, or the planning commission, shall review the final plat and shall approve or deny it based on findings regarding compliance with the following criteria:

1. The final plat is consistent in design (e.g., number, area, dimensions of lots, easements, tracts, right-of-way) with the approved preliminary plat, and all conditions of approval have been satisfied;

2. All permit fees and deposits have been paid;

3. All public improvements required by the preliminary plat have been installed and approved by the city engineer or appropriate service provider (e.g., road authority). Alternatively, the developer has provided a performance guarantee in accordance with SDC 4.3.180;

4. The streets and roads for public use are dedicated without reservation or restriction other than reversionary rights upon vacation of any such street or road and easements for public utilities;

5. The areas and tracts held for private uses have been approved by the city as conforming to the preliminary plat;

6. The plat and deed contain a dedication to the public of all public use areas, public improvements, and associated easements, including but not limited to streets, public pathways and trails, access reserve strips, parks, open space, sewage disposal, storm drainage and water supply systems;

7. The applicant has provided copies of all recorded homeowners’ association covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs); deed restrictions; private easements and agreements (e.g., for access, common areas, parking, etc.); and other recorded documents pertaining to common improvements recorded and referenced on the plat;

8. The plat complies with the applicable sections of this code (i.e., there have been no changes in land use or development resulting in a code violation since preliminary plat approval);

9. Certification by the city or service district, as applicable, that water and sanitary sewer service is available to every lot depicted on the plat; or bond, contract or other assurance has been provided by the subdivider/partitioner to the city that such services will be installed in accordance with Chapter 3.4 SDC, Public Facilities, and the bond requirements of SDC 4.3.180. The amount of the bond, contract or other assurance by the subdivider/partitioner shall be determined by a registered professional engineer, subject to review and approval by the city;

10. The plat contains an affidavit by the surveyor who surveyed the land, represented on the plat to the effect that the land was correctly surveyed and marked with proper monuments as provided by ORS Chapter 92, indicating the initial point of the survey, and giving the dimensions and kind of such monument and its reference to some corner approved by the county surveyor for purposes of identifying its location. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.3.170 Public improvements required.

Before city approval is certified on the final plat, all required public improvements shall be installed, inspected, and approved. Alternatively, the subdivider/partitioner shall provide a performance guarantee, in accordance with SDC 4.3.180. Temporary public facilities will not be allowed. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.3.180 Performance guarantee.

A. Performance Bonds for Public Improvements. On all projects where public improvements are required, the city shall require the developer or subdivider to provide bonding or other performance guarantees acceptable to the public works director to ensure completion of required public improvements. The bond or other assurance (e.g., letter of irrevocable credit) shall be equal to 110 percent of the total construction cost estimate for all public infrastructure to be provided, as approved by the public works director, or designee. In addition, the construction cost estimate must either be an engineer’s estimate, in writing, or a copy of the contractor’s price agreement having sufficient detail for the public works director, or designee, to verify reasonable unit pricing.

B. Release of Performance Bonds. The bond or other assurance shall be released when the public works director, or designee, finds the public improvements are complete and conform to the site development approval, including all conditions of approval. Upon acceptance of the completed public improvements, a one-year warranty bond, deposit or other assurances approved by the public works director, or designee, shall be required and shall cover a minimum of 20 percent of the public improvements construction cost for the project.

C. Completion of Landscape Installation. Landscaping shall be installed prior to issuance of occupancy permits, unless security equal to the cost of the landscaping as determined by a qualified landscape architect is filed with the community development director assuring such installation within six months after occupancy. If the installation of the landscaping is not completed within the six-month period, the security may be used by the city to complete the installation.

D. When Subdivider Fails to Perform. In the event the developer fails to carry out all provisions of the agreement and the city has unreimbursed costs or expenses resulting from such failure, the city shall call on the bond, cash deposit or letter of credit for reimbursement.

E. Termination of Performance Guarantee. The developer shall not cause termination of nor allow expiration of the guarantee without having first secured written authorization from the city. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.3.190 Filing and recording.

A. Filing Plat with County. Within 60 days of the city approval of the final plat, the applicant shall submit the final plat to the county for signatures of county officials as required by ORS Chapter 92.

B. Proof of Recording. Upon final recording with the county, the applicant shall submit to the city a mylar copy and five paper copies of all sheets of the recorded final plat. This shall occur prior to the issuance of building permits for the newly created lots.

C. Prerequisites to Recording the Plat.

1. No plat shall be recorded unless all ad valorem taxes and all special assessments, fees, or other charges required by law to be placed on the tax roll have been paid in the manner provided by ORS Chapter 92;

2. No plat shall be recorded until it is approved by the county surveyor in the manner provided by ORS Chapter 92. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.3.200 Re-platting and vacation of plats and easements.

A. Re-platting and Vacations. Any plat or portion thereof or easement may be re-platted or vacated upon receiving an application signed by all of the owners as appearing on the deed.

B. Procedure. All applications for a re-plat or vacation shall be processed in accordance with the procedures and standards for a subdivision or partition (i.e., the same process used to create the plat shall be used to re-plat or vacate the plat). The same appeal rights provided through the subdivision and partition process shall be afforded to the plat vacation process. (See Chapter 4.1 SDC, Types of Review Procedures.) The road authority(ies) shall be notified of all applications for re-plats and street vacations. All street vacations shall also conform to ORS Chapter 271.

C. Basis for Denial. A re-plat or vacation application may be denied if it abridges or destroys any public right in any of its public uses, improvements, streets or alleys; or if it fails to meet any applicable criteria.

D. Recording of Vacations. All approved plat vacations shall be recorded in accordance with SDC 4.3.190 and the following procedures:

1. Once recorded, a re-plat or vacation shall operate to eliminate the force and effect of the plat prior to vacation; and

2. Vacations shall also divest all public rights in the streets, alleys and public grounds, and all dedications described on the plat.

E. After Sale of Lots. When lots have been sold, the plat may be vacated only in the manner herein; and provided, that all of the owners of lots within the platted area consent in writing to the plat vacation.

F. Street Requirement. Except as prohibited by law (e.g., ORS 92.837, Manufactured Home Park), in approving a right-of-way vacation or re-plat, the city may require dedication of access ways, paths or trails as a condition of the vacation of any public easement or right-of-way, in order to establish or maintain a safe, convenient and direct pedestrian and bicycle circulation system. Such requirements shall be coordinated with the applicable road authority. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.3.210 Property line adjustments.

A “property line adjustment” is the modification of lot boundaries, when no lot is created or removed. The application submission and approval process is as follows:

A. Submission Requirements. All applications for property line adjustment shall be made on forms provided by the city and shall include information required for a Type II application, as governed by SDC 4.1.300. The application shall include a preliminary lot line map drawn to scale identifying all existing and proposed lot lines and dimensions; footprints and dimensions of existing structures (including accessory structures); location and dimensions of driveways and public and private streets within or abutting the subject lots; wetlands; floodplain; existing fences and walls; and any other information deemed necessary by the community development director or designee for ensuring compliance with city codes.

B. Approval Process.

1. Decision-Making Process. Property line adjustments shall be reviewed by means of a Type II procedure, as governed by SDC 4.1.300, using review criteria contained in subsection (C) of this section. The road authority(ies) shall be notified of lot line adjustments that may affect property access or traffic volumes or operations on their facilities.

2. Time Limit on Approval. The property line adjustment approval shall be effective for a period of one year from the date of approval, during which time it must be recorded.

3. Lapsing of Approval. The property line adjustment approval shall lapse if:

a. The property line adjustment is not recorded within the time limit in subsection (B)(2) of this section;

b. The property line adjustment has been improperly recorded with the county without the satisfactory completion of all conditions attached to the approval; or

c. The final recording is a departure from the approved plan.

C. Review Criteria. The community development director or designee shall consider the following review criteria and may approve, approve with conditions or deny a request for a property line adjustment in writing based on all of the following:

1. Parcel Creation. No additional parcel or lot is created or removed by the lot line adjustment;

2. Lot Standards. All lots and parcels conform to the applicable lot standards of the land use district (Article 2) including lot area, dimensions, setbacks, and coverage, and no resulting lot is wholly comprised of a flood hazard area or jurisdictional wetland;

3. Access and Road Authority Standards. All lots and parcels conform to the standards or requirements of Chapter 3.1 SDC, Access and Circulation, and all applicable road authority requirements are met. If a lot is nonconforming to any city or road authority standard, it shall not be made even less conforming by the property line adjustment.

D. Recording Property Line Adjustments.

1. Recording. Upon the city’s approval of the proposed property line adjustment, the applicant shall record the property line adjustment with the county within one year of approval (or the decision expires), and submit a copy of the recorded survey map to the city, to be filed with the approved application.

2. Time Limit. The applicant shall submit a copy of the recorded property line adjustment survey map to the city within 15 days of recording and prior to the issuance of any building permits on the reconfigured lots.

E. Extension. The community development director shall, upon written request by the applicant and payment of the required fee, grant a written extension of the approval period not to exceed one year; provided, that:

1. No changes are made to the original property line adjustment as approved by the city;

2. The applicant can show intent of recording the approved plan within the one-year extension period;

3. There have been no changes in the applicable code or plan provisions on which the approval was based. In the case where the property line adjustment conflicts with a code change, the extension shall be denied; and

4. The extension request is made before expiration of the original approved plan. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.3.220 Lot consolidations.

A lot consolidation is the removal of a lot line(s) within a site to create one lot. The application submission and approval process is as follows:

A. Submission Requirements. All applications for lot consolidations shall be made on forms provided by the city and shall include information required for a Type I application, as governed by SDC 4.1.200. The application shall include a preliminary map drawn to scale identifying all existing and proposed lot lines and dimensions; footprints and dimensions of existing structures (including accessory structures); location and dimensions of driveways and public and private streets within or abutting the subject lots; wetlands; flood plain; existing fences and walls; easements, required fee, and any other information deemed necessary by the community development director or designee for ensuring compliance with city codes.

B. Approval Process.

1. Decision-Making Process. Property line adjustments shall be reviewed by means of a Type I procedure, as governed by SDC 4.1.200, using review criteria contained in subsection (C) of this section.

2. Time Limit on Approval. The property line adjustment approval shall be effective for a period of one year from the date of approval, during which time it must be recorded.

C. Review Criteria. The community development director or designee shall consider the following review criteria and may approve, approve with conditions or deny a request for a lot consolidation in writing based on all of the following, and the applicant shall bear the burden of proof:

1. One Lot Created. The application results in lot lines being removed within a site to create one lot.

2. Allowed Land Uses. The application is consistent with the allowed land uses of the zoning district.

3. Zoning. The lots involved in the application are designated the same zoning district. A zone change application may be filed concurrently with a lot consolidation application if the lots involved do not have the same zoning designation. Approval of the lot consolidation will be dependent on approval of the zone change and all applicable review criteria.

D. Recording Lot Consolidations.

1. Recording. Upon the city’s approval of the proposed lot consolidation, the applicant shall record the lot consolidation with the county within one year of approval (or the decision expires), and submit a copy of the recorded survey map to the city, to be filed with the approved application.

2. For the consolidation of lots or parcels of a recorded plat, the lot consolidation shall be finalized by a replat of the subdivision or partition.

3. The county assessor may consolidate parcels or tracts of land that are not within a recorded plat.

E. Extension. The community development director shall, upon written request by the applicant and payment of the required fee, grant a written extension of the approval period not to exceed one year; provided, that:

1. No changes are made to the original lot consolidation as approved by the city;

2. The applicant can show intent of recording the approved plan within the one-year extension period;

3. There have been no changes in the applicable code or plan provisions on which the approval was based. In the case where the lot consolidation conflicts with a code change, the extension shall be denied; and

4. The extension request is made before expiration of the original approved plan. (Ord. 14-01 § 1 (Exh. A), 2014)


Chapter 4.4 CONDITIONAL USES

Sections:

4.4.100    Conditional uses – Purpose.

4.4.200    Conditional uses – Approval process.

4.4.300    Conditional uses – Application submission requirements.

4.4.400    Conditional uses – Criteria, standards and conditions of approval.

4.4.500    Conditional uses – Additional development standards.


4.4.100 Conditional uses – Purpose.

There are certain uses which, due to the nature of their impacts on surrounding land uses and public facilities, require a case-by-case review and analysis. These are identified as “conditional uses” in Article 2, Land Use (Zoning) Districts. The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards and procedures under which a conditional use may be permitted, enlarged or altered if the site is appropriate and if other appropriate conditions of approval can be met. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.4.200 Conditional uses – Approval process.

A. Initial Application. An application for a new conditional use shall be processed as a Type III procedure (SDC 4.1.400). The application shall meet submission requirements in SDC 4.4.300 and the review criteria contained in SDC 4.4.400.

B. Modification of Approved or Existing Conditional Use. Modifications to approved or existing conditional uses shall be processed in accordance with Chapter 4.6 SDC, Modifications to Approved Plans and Conditions of Approval.

C. New Application for Conditional Use. When activities requiring conditional use approval have ceased for more than one year, the conditional use is no longer valid. Reestablishment of the conditional use must be approved through the Type III procedure process. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.4.300 Conditional uses – Application submission requirements.

An application for conditional use approval must include the following information (subsections (A) through (H) of this section), as applicable. For a description of each item, please refer to SDC 4.2.500, Design review – Application submission requirements. Five copies of the application shall be submitted for the initial review by city staff. An additional seven copies of the complete application shall be submitted by a date the community development director requires (i.e., for the planning commission hearing):

A. Existing site conditions;

B. Site plan;

C. Preliminary grading plan;

D. A landscape plan;

E. Architectural drawings of all structures;

F. Sign concept plan (e.g., locations, general size, style and materials of signs);

G. A copy of all existing and proposed restrictions or covenants;

H. Narrative report or letter documenting compliance with all applicable review criteria in SDC 4.4.400. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.4.400 Conditional uses – Criteria, standards and conditions of approval.

The review body shall consider the following review criteria and may approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for a conditional use or to enlarge or alter a conditional use based on findings of fact with respect to each of the standards and review criteria in subsections (A) through (C) of this section; the applicant shall bear the burden of proof.

A. Review Criteria.

1. The proposal satisfies the conditional use application submittal and content requirements;

2. The proposed use is listed as a conditional use in the zoning district, or the review body has determined it is similar to a use listed as such;

3. The proposed use will be compatible with existing and reasonable anticipated uses in the district in terms of size and intensity of use; building scale, style, materials, and detailing; setbacks and lot coverage; landscaping; and other relevant code considerations; or the proposal provides for mitigation of difference in appearance, scale or intensity through such means as setbacks, screening, landscaping, or other design features that achieve the intended compatibility;

4. The proposed use will not have adverse noise, vibration, exhaust/emissions, light, glare, erosion, odor, dust, visibility, safety, aesthetic or other similar impacts that would be out of character for permitted uses in the district;

5. The negative impacts of the proposed use on adjacent properties and on the public can be mitigated through application of other code standards, or other conditions of approval;

6. The transportation system is capable of supporting the proposed use, in addition to the existing uses in the subject area. Evaluation factors include, but are not limited to, street capacity and level of service, on-street parking impacts, access requirements, and pedestrian safety and comfort;

7. Public services for water, sanitary and storm sewer, water management, and fire and police protection are capable of servicing the proposed use;

8. The proposal will not have significant adverse impacts on the livability of nearby residentially zoned lands due to noise, glare, litter, hours of operation, privacy and safety; and

9. Any special features of the site such as topography, floodplain, wetlands, vegetation, historic resources, and any other similar features, have been adequately considered and safeguarded, and the characteristics of the site are suitable for the proposed use considering size, shape, location, topography and location of improvements and natural features.

B. Site Design Standards. Conditional use applications must conform to the design review criteria in SDC 4.2.600.

C. Conditions of Approval. The review body may impose conditions that are found necessary to ensure that the use is compatible with other uses in the vicinity, and that the negative impact of the proposed use on the surrounding uses and public facilities is minimized. These conditions include, but are not limited to, the following:

1. Limiting the hours, days, place and/or manner of operation;

2. Requiring site or architectural design features that minimize environmental impacts such as noise, vibration, exhaust/emissions, light, glare, erosion, odor and/or dust;

3. Requiring larger setback areas, lot area, and/or lot depth or width;

4. Limiting the building or structure height, size or lot coverage, and/or location on the site;

5. Designating the size, number, location and/or design of vehicle access points or parking areas;

6. Requiring street right-of-way to be dedicated and street(s), sidewalks, curbs, planting strips, pathways, or trails to be improved;

7. Requiring landscaping, screening, drainage, water quality facilities, and/or improvement of parking and loading areas;

8. Limiting the number, size, location, height and/or lighting of buildings, signs, or other physical improvements;

9. Limiting or setting standards for the location, design, and/or intensity of outdoor lighting;

10. Requiring berms, screening or landscaping and the establishment of standards for their installation and maintenance;

11. Requiring and designating the size, height, location and/or materials for fences;

12. Requiring the protection and preservation of existing trees, soils, vegetation, wetlands, watercourses, habitat areas, drainage areas, historic resources, and/or cultural resources;

13. Requiring the dedication of sufficient land to the public, and/or construction of pedestrian/bicycle pathways in accordance with the adopted plans, or requiring the recording of a local improvement district nonremonstrance agreement for the same. Dedication of land and construction shall conform to the provisions of Chapter 3.1 SDC, and SDC 3.1.300 in particular;

14. Requiring financial security (bonds, petitions, etc.) to ensure completion of the proposed development and/or removal of the improvements at the cessation of the development; and/or

15. Establishing a timetable for periodic review and renewal, or expiration, of the conditional use subject to approval by the community development director through a Type II administrative review.

D. Extension. The community development director shall, upon written request by the applicant and payment of the required fee, grant a written extension of the approval period not to exceed one year; provided, that:

1. No changes are made to the original property line adjustment as approved by the city;

2. The applicant can show intent of recording the approved plan within the one-year extension period;

3. There have been no changes in the applicable code or plan provisions on which the approval was based. In the case where the property line adjustment conflicts with a code change, the extension shall be denied; and

4. The extension request is made before expiration of the original approved plan. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.4.500 Conditional uses – Additional development standards.

A. Concurrent Variance Application(s). A conditional use shall not grant variances to regulations otherwise prescribed by the development code. Variance application(s) may be filed in conjunction with the conditional use application, and both applications may be reviewed at the same hearing.

B. Additional Development Standards. Development standards for specific uses are contained in Article 2, Land Use (Zoning) Districts. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)




Chapter 4.5 PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS

Sections:

4.5.100    Planned development – Purpose.

4.5.110    Planned development – Applicability.

4.5.120    Planned development – Review and approvals process.

4.5.130    Planned development – Modification of district standards (Article 2) and design standards (Article 3).

4.5.140    Planned development – Concept plan submission.

4.5.150    Planned development – Concept plan review criteria.

4.5.160    Planned development – Administrative procedures.

4.5.170    Planned development – Detailed development plan submission requirements.

4.5.180    Planned development – Detailed development plan review criteria.

4.5.190    Planned development – Land use review, design review, final plat, and building permit approvals.

4.5.200    Nullification of an approved planned development.


4.5.100 Planned development – Purpose.

The purposes of this section are to:

A. Implement the comprehensive plan and applicable land use district(s) by providing a means for master planning large development sites, or sites with unique physical or ecological attributes;

B. Encourage innovative planning that results in projects that benefit the community (i.e., through compatible mixed-use development, affordable housing, improved protection of open spaces, transportation options and consistent application of standards in phased developments);

C. Encourage developments that recognize the relationship between buildings, their use, open space, and transportation options, providing varied opportunities for innovative and diversified employment environments;

D. Facilitate the efficient use of land;

E. Promote an economic arrangement of land use, buildings, circulation systems, open space, and utilities;

F. Preserve to the greatest extent possible the existing landscape features and amenities that may not otherwise be protected through conventional development;

G. Encourage energy conservation and improved air and water quality; and

H. Assist the city in planning infrastructure improvements. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.5.110 Planned development – Applicability.

The planned development designation is a development process that may be applied to any of the city’s land use districts. An applicant may elect to develop a project as a planned development in compliance with the requirements of this chapter, or the city may require a development be processed as such when a project cannot otherwise meet the applicable development code requirements, contains significant natural features, or is subject to the hillside protection overlay. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.5.120 Planned development – Review and approvals process.

A. Review Steps. There are three required steps to planned development approval, which may be reviewed individually or combined into one package for concurrent review:

1. The approval of a planned development concept plan;

2. The approval of a detailed development plan; and

3. The approval of a preliminary subdivision plat(s) and/or design review application(s).

B. Approval Process.

1. The planned development (PD) concept plan shall be reviewed together using the Type III procedure in SDC 4.1.400, the submission requirements in SDC 4.5.170, and the review criteria in SDC 4.5.150.

2. The detailed development plan shall be reviewed using the Type III procedure in SDC 4.1.400, to ensure substantial compliance with the approved concept plan.

3. Preliminary subdivision plats and design review applications for approved planned developments shall be reviewed using a Type II procedure, as governed by SDC 4.1.300.

4. Subsections (B)(1) through (3) of this section may be combined in any manner, so long as the decision-making sequence follows that in subsection (A) of this section. Notification and hearings may be combined. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.5.130 Planned development – Modification of district standards (Article 2) and design standards (Article 3).

The planning commission may approve modifications or adjustments to the standards in Article 2 and/or Article 3 through the planned development approval without the need for variances upon finding that all of the following criteria are met:

A. Comprehensive Plan. The modification or adjustment equally or better meets the intent of the comprehensive plan and development code section(s) to be modified, as compared to a project that strictly conforms to code standards.

B. Public Benefit. The modification or adjustment results in an overall net benefit to the public; e.g., clustering of smaller lots results in a greater variety of housing, greater affordability in housing, more open space or more usable open space, greater protection of natural features, avoidance of natural hazards (e.g., geological hazards or drainage ways), superior architecture, and/or improved transportation planning in new development.

C. Public improvement standards and engineering design criteria shall not be modified without variance to such standards approved by the city engineer. The city may grant such variances concurrently with the planned development;

D. Residential densities shall not exceed those allowed under the comprehensive plan and where steep slopes exist shall follow the procedures found in Chapter 2.6 SDC;

E. Commercial and mixed-use developments may be approved in a residential district planned development, provided the commercial component of the project, including building area, parking and landscape/commercial common area, does not exceed 20 percent of the subject planned development land area; and

F. Industrial uses shall not be allowed in a residential district planned development. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.5.140 Planned development – Concept plan submission.

The applicant shall submit five copies of all of the following information, subsections (A) and (B) of this section, for the initial review by city staff. An additional seven copies of the complete application shall be submitted for the planning commission hearing, by a date the community development director specifies.

A. General Submission Requirements. The applicant shall submit an application containing all of the general information required for a Type III procedure, as governed by SDC 4.1.400. In addition, the applicant shall submit all of the following:

1. A statement of planning objectives to be achieved by the planned development through the particular approach proposed by the applicant. This statement should include a description of the character of the proposed development and the rationale behind the assumptions and choices made by the applicant;

2. A development schedule indicating the approximate dates when construction of the planned development and its various phases are expected to be initiated and completed;

3. A statement of the applicant’s intentions with regard to the future selling or leasing of all or portions of the planned development;

4. Narrative report or letter documenting compliance with the applicable review criteria contained in SDC 4.5.150; and

5. Special studies prepared by qualified professionals (e.g., engineers or scientists) may be required by the community development director, planning commission or city council to determine potential traffic, geologic, stormwater, environmental, natural resource and other impacts, and required mitigation.

B. Additional Information. In addition to the general information described in subsection (A) of this section, the concept plan, data, and narrative shall include the following exhibits and information:

1. Existing conditions map, as defined in SDC 4.2.500, Design review – Application submission requirements;

2. Conceptual site plan (e.g., general land use, building envelopes, circulation, open space, utility connections, and other information necessary to convey the concept plan);

3. Grading concept (for hillside or sloping properties, or where extensive grading is anticipated), consistent with the hillside protection overlay, as applicable;

4. Landscape concept (e.g., shows retention of existing vegetation and general planting areas);

5. Architectural concept (e.g., information sufficient to describe architectural styles, building heights, and general materials);

6. Sign concept plan (e.g., locations, general size, style and materials of signs); and

7. Copy of all existing covenants and restrictions, and general description of proposed restrictions or covenants (e.g., for common areas, access, parking, etc.). (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.5.150 Planned development – Concept plan review criteria.

The city shall consider the following review criteria and may approve, approve with conditions, or deny a planned development concept plan based on the following; the applicant shall bear the burden of proof.

A. Comprehensive Plan. All relevant provisions of the comprehensive plan are met;

B. Land Division Chapter. All of the requirements for land divisions, including requirements for pre-planning large sites under SDC 4.3.112;

C. Article 2 and Article 3 Standards. All of the land use, development, and design standards contained in Articles 2 and 3 are met, except as may be modified in SDC 4.5.130.

D. Open Space. Master plans shall contain a minimum of 15 percent usable common open space. Common open space shall be integral to the master plan. Plans shall emphasize public gathering places such as plazas, neighborhood parks, trails, and other publicly accessible spaces that integrate land use and transportation and contribute toward a sense of place. Where public or common private open space is designated, the following standards apply:

1. The open space area shall be shown on and recorded with the final plat; and

2. The open space shall be conveyed in accordance with one of the following methods:

a. By dedication to the city as publicly owned and maintained open space. Open space proposed for dedication must be acceptable to the community development director with regard to the size, shape, location, improvement, environmental condition (i.e., the applicant may be required to provide a level one environmental assessment), and budgetary and maintenance abilities;

b. By leasing or conveying title (including beneficial ownership) to a corporation, home association or other legal entity, with the city retaining the development rights to the property. The terms of such lease or other conveyance must include provisions (e.g., maintenance, property tax payment, etc.) suitable to the city. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.5.160 Planned development – Administrative procedures.

A. Time Limit on Filing of Detailed Development Plan. Within three years after the date of approval of the concept plan, the applicant or his or her successor shall file with the city a detailed development plan, in conformance with SDC 4.5.170 and 4.5.180.

B. Extension. The city may, upon written request by the applicant and payment of the required fee, grant an extension of the approval not to exceed one year; provided, that:

1. No changes have been made on the original conceptual development plan as approved;

2. The applicant can show intent of applying for detailed development plan review within the one-year extension period;

3. There have been no changes to the applicable comprehensive plan policies and ordinance provisions on which the approval was based; and

4. The extension request is made before expiration of the original approval period. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.5.170 Planned development – Detailed development plan submission requirements.

The contents of the detailed development plan shall follow the requirements specified for a conceptual plan incorporating any conditions of approval for the conceptual plan as well as contain the following:

A. Location and floor area of existing and proposed structures and other improvements, including maximum heights, building types, and gross density per acre (for residential developments) and location of fire hydrants, overhead lines in the abutting right-of-way, easements and walkways;

B. Typical elevations of buildings and structures (which may be submitted on additional sheets) sufficient to indicate the architectural intent and character of the proposed development;

C. Landscape plan drawn to scale showing location of existing trees and vegetation proposed to be removed from or to be retained on the site, location and design of landscape areas, varieties and sizes of trees and plant materials to be planted, other landscape features including walls and fences, and irrigation systems required to maintain plant materials;

D. Detailed utilities plan indicating how sanitary sewer, storm sewer, drainage, and water systems will function;

E. Circulation plan showing street, driveway, parking area, service area, loading area, pedestrian way, and bikeway improvements and their dimensions;

F. Location and dimensions of all areas to be conveyed, dedicated, or reserved as common open spaces, public parks, recreational areas, school sites, and similar public and semipublic areas;

G. Exterior lighting plan indicating the location, size, height, typical design, material, color, and method and direction of illumination.

The detailed development plan may combine land division, development review, design review, and/or other applications for concurrent review and approval. The detailed development plan shall be reviewed using a Type III procedure. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.5.180 Planned development – Detailed development plan review criteria.

The city shall approve the detailed development plan upon finding that the final plan conforms to the concept plan and required conditions of approval. If the detailed plan request combines other land use and development applications, as provided in this section, those applications shall additionally be subject to the applicable review criteria in Article 4. Minor changes to the approved concept plan may be approved with the detailed plan, when the review body finds that the modification(s) is/are consistent with the criteria in subsections (A) through (H) of this section. Changes exceeding those in subsections (A) through (H) of this section must be reviewed as major modifications under Chapter 4.6 SDC.

A. Increased residential densities (overall or reallocated between development phases) by no more than 10 percent from the concept plan, provided such increase conforms to the comprehensive plan and underlying district;

B. Increase in lot coverage or impervious surface (overall or reallocated between development phases) by no more than 10 percent over that which is approved;

C. Reduction in open space or landscaping by no more than 10 percent;

D. Increase in overall automobile parking spaces by no more than 10 percent;

E. Land Use. No change in land use shall be permitted without a major modification to the concept plan;

F. Proposals to add or increase lot coverage within areas subject to a potential hazard or requiring protection under the comprehensive plan shall require a major modification to the concept plan;

G. Major changes in the location of buildings, proposed streets, parking lot configuration, utility easements, landscaping or other site improvements shall require a major modification pursuant to Chapter 4.6 SDC. “Major” in this subsection means by more than 100 feet, or 10 percent, relative to setbacks; and

H. Other substantial modifications not listed in subsections (A) through (G) of this section shall require approval of a major modification, in conformance with Chapter 4.6 SDC. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.5.190 Planned development – Land use review, design review, final plat, and building permit approvals.

A. Land Use and Design Reviews. For projects requiring land use or design review, all such approvals must be final and appeal periods expired before the city issues building permits. Chapter 4.2 SDC applies to design review.

B. Land Divisions. For projects requiring a land division, the preliminary land division plats must be final and appeal periods expired before a final plat is approved and building permits issued. Chapter 4.3 SDC applies to land divisions.

C. Streamlined Review Option. Applications for preliminary land division plats, land use reviews, and design review applications that are part of an approved planned development may be reviewed using a Type II procedure, rather than the conventional Type III procedure. This shall be the applicant’s option. The variation from the standard procedures of Chapter 4.2 SDC, Land Use Review and Design Review, and Chapter 4.3 SDC, Land Divisions and Property Line Adjustments, is intended to streamline review of projects that have received planned development approvals, since those projects have previously been subject to public review and hearings. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.5.200 Nullification of an approved planned development.

A. Property owner(s) or their authorized agents may apply to nullify an approved planned development (conceptual or detailed) by filing an application form provided by the director through a Type III procedure.

B. The burden of proof is on the applicant to justify nullification of an approved planned development (conceptual or detailed) by giving substantial evidence that:

1. Developing the property under conventional zoning standards and regulations will not create nonconforming development;

2. Special circumstances such as building relationships, drainage ways, public improvements, topography, etc., that were to be addressed through the planned development process can be dealt with as effectively through conventional standards;

3. Conditions of approval attached by the hearing authority to the approved planned development can be met or are no longer necessary; and

4. Prior commitments arising from the planned development approval involving the subject property or impacting adjacent properties or city interests (i.e., sewer, water, streets, parks, drainage or other interests) will not be adversely affected by the nullification. In the case of density transfers, phasing of public infrastructure, provisions of open space and/or recreational amenities, the nullification may not provide a greater benefit or burden than would have remained had the planned development not been approved and utilized.

C. Action. The approval body may approve or deny a planned development nullification. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


Chapter 4.6 MODIFICATIONS TO APPROVED PLANS AND CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL

Sections:

4.6.100    Modifications – Purpose.

4.6.200    Modifications – Applicability.

4.6.300    Major modifications.

4.6.400    Minor modifications.


4.6.100 Modifications – Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide an efficient process for modifying land use decisions and approved development plans, in recognition of the cost and complexity of land development and the need to conserve city resources. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.6.200 Modifications – Applicability.

A. This chapter applies to all development applications approved through the provisions of Article 4, including:

1. Land use review approvals;

2. Design review approvals;

3. Subdivisions, partitions, and property line adjustments;

4. Conditional uses;

5. Planned developments; and

6. Conditions of approval on any of the above permit types.

B. This chapter does not apply to comprehensive plan amendments, land use district changes, text amendments, annexations, temporary use permits, or other permits not listed in subsection (A) of this section. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.6.300 Major modifications.

A. Major Modification Defined. The community development director shall determine that a major modification(s) is required if one or more of the changes listed below are proposed:

1. A change in land use;

2. An increase in density by more than 10 percent, provided the resulting density does not exceed that allowed by the land use district;

3. A change in setbacks or lot coverage by more than 10 percent, provided the resulting setback or lot coverage does not exceed that allowed by the land use district;

4. A change in the type and/or location of access ways, drives or parking areas affecting off-site traffic;

5. An increase in the floor area proposed for nonresidential use by more than 15 percent where previously specified;

6. A reduction of more than 10 percent of the area reserved for common open space; or

7. Change to a condition of approval, or a change similar to subsections (A)(1) through (6) of this section, that could have a detrimental impact on adjoining properties. The community development director shall have discretion in determining detrimental impacts warranting a major modification.

B. Major Modification Applications – Review Criteria. An applicant may request a major modification using a Type II or Type III review procedure, as follows; the applicant shall bear the burden of proof.

1. Upon the community development director determining that the proposed modification is a major modification, the applicant shall submit an application form, nonrefundable filing fee and narrative, and a site plan using the same plan format as in the original approval. The community development director may require other relevant information, as necessary, to evaluate the request.

2. The application shall be subject to the same review procedure (Type II or III), decision-making body, and review criteria used for the initial project approval, except that adding a conditional use to an approved project shall be reviewed using a Type III procedure.

3. The scope of review shall be limited to the modification request. For example, a request to modify a parking lot shall require design review only for the proposed parking lot and any changes to associated access, circulation, pathways, lighting, trees, and landscaping. Notice shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 4.1 SDC.

4. Due to the interrelated nature of planned developments, modifications to approved planned developments may be reviewed in the context of the entire approved planned development allowing for adjustments, mitigation and redesign to ensure the intent of the original planned development approval is achieved as a whole or the modification is an improvement on the original approval.

5. The decision-making body shall approve, deny, or approve with conditions an application for major modification based on written findings on the criteria. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.6.400 Minor modifications.

A. Minor Modification. Any modification to a land use decision or approved development plan that is not within the description of a major modification as provided in SDC 4.6.300(A).

B. Minor Modification Review Procedure. An application for approval of a minor modification shall be reviewed by the community development director using a Type I or a Type II review procedure under SDC 4.1.200 or 4.1.300. The community development director is responsible for determining the appropriate review procedure based on the following criteria; the applicant shall bear the burden of proof.

1. Minor modifications that involve only clear and objective code standards may be reviewed using a Type I procedure;

2. Minor modifications that involve one or more discretionary standards shall be reviewed through a Type II procedure.

C. When the code is unclear on whether the application should be a Type I or Type II review, a Type II procedure shall be used.

D. Minor Modification Applications. An application for minor modification shall include an application form, filing fee and narrative, and a site plan using the same plan format as in the original approval. The community development director may require other relevant information, as necessary, to evaluate the request.

E. Minor Modification Review Criteria. The community development director shall approve, deny, or approve with conditions an application for minor modification based on written findings that the modification is in compliance with all applicable requirements of the development code and conditions of approval on the original decision, and the modification is not a major modification as described in SDC 4.6.300(A). (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


Chapter 4.7 ZONING MAP AND DEVELOPMENT CODE TEXT AMENDMENTS

Sections:

4.7.100    Amendments – Purpose.

4.7.200    Legislative amendments.

4.7.300    Quasi-judicial amendments.

4.7.400    Reserved.

4.7.500    Record of amendments.

4.7.600    Transportation planning rule compliance.


4.7.100 Amendments – Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards and procedures for legislative and quasi-judicial amendments to this code and the zoning map. These will be referred to as “map and text amendments.” Amendments may be necessary from time to time to reflect changing community conditions, needs and desires, to correct mistakes, or to address changes in the law. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.7.200 Legislative amendments.

Legislative amendments are policy decisions made by city council. They are reviewed using the Type IV procedure in SDC 4.1.500. Amendments to the comprehensive plan, and amendments to the zoning and development code or zoning map necessitating a comprehensive plan amendment, may be approved if the city council finds that the change is consistent with the following criteria:

A. The amendment is consistent with the goals and policies of the comprehensive plan, the statewide planning goals, and any relevant area plans adopted by the city council;

B. The amendment conforms to the transportation planning rule provisions as implemented through SDC 4.7.600; and

C. The amendment is in the public interest; for example, it is needed to meet changing conditions or new laws. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.7.300 Quasi-judicial amendments.

A. Applicability of Quasi-Judicial Amendments. “Quasi-judicial amendments” are those that involve the application of adopted policy to a specific development application or code revision, and not the adoption of new policy (i.e., through legislative decisions). Quasi-judicial zone map amendments shall follow the Type III procedure, as governed by SDC 4.1.400, using standards of approval in subsection (B) of this section. The approval authority for such actions shall be as follows:

1. The planning commission shall review and recommend zoning map changes that do not involve comprehensive plan map amendments;

2. The planning commission shall make a recommendation to the city council on an application for a comprehensive plan map amendment. The city council shall decide such applications; and

3. The planning commission shall make a recommendation to the city council on a zoning change application that also involves a comprehensive plan map amendment application. The city council shall decide both applications.

B. Criteria for Quasi-Judicial Amendments. The city shall consider the following review criteria and may approve, approve with conditions or deny a quasi-judicial amendment based on the following; if the application for an amendment originates from a party other than the city, the applicant shall bear the burden of proof.

1. Approval of the request is consistent with the statewide planning goals;

2. Approval of the request is consistent with the relevant comprehensive plan policies and on balance has been found to be more supportive of the comprehensive plan as a whole than the old designation;

3. The requested designation is consistent with any relevant area plans adopted by the city council;

4. The requested designation is consistent with the comprehensive plan map pattern and any negative impacts upon the area resulting from the change, if any, have been considered and deemed acceptable by the city;

5. A public need will be met by the proposed change that is not already met by other available properties, or the amendment corrects a mistake or inconsistency in the comprehensive plan or zoning map regarding the property which is the subject of the application;

6. The property and affected area are presently provided with adequate public facilities, services and transportation networks to support the use, or such facilities, services and transportation networks are planned to be provided in the planning period; and

7. The amendment conforms to other applicable provisions of this code, such as the transportation planning rule requirements incorporated into SDC 4.7.600.

8. Any amendment involving a change to the city’s urban growth boundary shall conform to applicable state planning rules for such amendments. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.7.400 Reserved.

(Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.7.500 Record of amendments.

The city recorder shall maintain a record of amendments to the text of this code and the zoning map. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.7.600 Transportation planning rule compliance.

A. Review of Applications for Effect on Transportation Facilities. When a development application includes a proposed comprehensive plan amendment or zoning change, the proposal shall be reviewed to determine whether it significantly affects a transportation facility, in accordance with OAR 660-012-0060 (the transportation planning rule (TPR)) and the traffic impact study provisions of SDC 4.1.900. “Significant” means the proposal would:

1. Change the functional classification of an existing or planned transportation facility (exclusive of correction of map errors). This would occur, for example, when a proposal causes future traffic to exceed the levels associated with a “collector” street classification, requiring a change in the classification to an “arterial” street, as identified by the city’s transportation system plan (TSP); or

2. Change the standards implementing a functional classification system; or

3. As measured at the end of the planning period identified in the road authority’s adopted TSP, allow types or levels of land use that would result in levels of travel or access that are inconsistent with the functional classification of an existing or planned transportation facility; or

4. Reduce the performance of an existing or planned transportation facility below the minimum acceptable performance standard identified in the road authority’s TSP; or

5. Worsen the performance of an existing or planned transportation facility that is otherwise projected to perform below the minimum acceptable performance standard identified in the road authority’s TSP.

B. Amendments That Affect Transportation Facilities. Except as provided in subsection (C) of this section, amendments to the comprehensive plan and land use regulations that significantly affect a transportation facility shall assure that allowed land uses are consistent with the function, capacity, and level of service of the facility identified in the TSP. This shall be accomplished by one of the following:

1. Adopting measures that demonstrate that allowed land uses are consistent with the planned function of the transportation facility; or

2. Amending the TSP to provide transportation facilities, improvements, or services adequate to support the proposed land uses; such amendments shall include a funding plan to ensure the facility, improvement, or service will be provided by the end of the planning period; or

3. Altering land use designations, densities, or design requirements to reduce demand for automobile travel and meet travel needs through other modes of transportation; or

4. Amending the planned function, capacity or performance standards of the transportation facility; or

5. Providing other measures as a condition of development or through a development agreement or similar funding method, specifying when such measures will be provided.

C. Exceptions. Amendments to the comprehensive plan or land use regulations with a significant effect on a transportation facility, where the facility is already performing below the minimum acceptable performance standard identified in the road authority’s transportation system plan (TSP), may be approved when all of the following criteria are met:

1. The amendment does not include property located in an interchange area, as defined under applicable law;

2. The currently planned facilities, improvements or services are not adequate to achieve the standard;

3. Development resulting from the amendment will, at a minimum, mitigate the impacts of the amendment in a manner that avoids further degradation to the performance of the facility by the time of the development; and

4. The road authority provides a written statement that the proposed funding and timing for the proposed development mitigation are sufficient to avoid further degradation to the facility. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


Chapter 4.8 CODE INTERPRETATIONS

Sections:

4.8.100    Interpretations – Purpose.

4.8.200    Code interpretation procedure.


4.8.100 Interpretations – Purpose.

Some terms or phrases within the code may have two or more reasonable meanings. This section provides a process for resolving differences in the interpretation of the code text. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.8.200 Code interpretation procedure.

A. Requests. A request for a code interpretation shall be made in writing to the community development director.

B. Decision to Issue Interpretation. The community development director shall have the authority to interpret the code, or refer the request to the planning commission for its interpretation. The community development director shall advise the person making the inquiry in writing within 14 days after the request is made on whether or not, and how, the city will make an interpretation.

C. Written Interpretation. If the city decides to issue an interpretation, it shall be issued in writing and shall be mailed or delivered to the person requesting the interpretation and any other person who specifically requested a copy. The written interpretation shall be issued within 14 days of the request. The decision shall become effective 14 days later, unless an appeal is filed in accordance with subsection (E) of this section.

D. Type II Procedure. Code interpretation reviews shall follow a Type II procedure under SDC 4.1.300. Alternatively, the community development director may initiate a code interpretation (i.e., without an application being filed by a property owner) and ask the planning commission to ratify the decision, in which case the city shall provide notice of the decision to affected property owner(s) with an opportunity to appeal the decision to city council. Such appeals must be filed in accordance with SDC 4.1.400.

E. Appeals. The applicant and any party who received notice or who participated in the proceedings through the submission of written or verbal evidence may appeal the decision to the planning commission for a Type III decision. The appeal must be filed within 14 days after the interpretation was mailed or delivered to the applicant. Initiating an appeal requires filing a notice of appeal with the community development director pursuant to SDC 4.1.300, Type II appeal.

F. Interpretations on File. The city shall keep on file a record of all code interpretations. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


Chapter 4.9 MISCELLANEOUS PERMITS

Sections:

4.9.100    Temporary use permits.

4.9.200    Outdoor seating areas within the public right-of-way.


4.9.100 Temporary use permits.

Temporary uses are characterized by their short-term or seasonal nature and by the fact that permanent improvements are not made to the site. Temporary uses include, but are not limited to: construction trailers, leasing offices, temporary carnivals and fairs, parking lot sales, retail warehouse sales, and seasonal sales such as Christmas tree sales and vegetable stands. Three types of temporary uses require permit approval (See subsections (A), (B) and (C) of this section):

A. Seasonal and Special Events. These types of uses occur only once in a calendar year and for no longer a period than 30 days. Using the Type II procedure under SDC 4.1.300, the city shall approve, approve with conditions or deny a temporary use permit based on findings that all of the following criteria are satisfied:

1. The use is permitted in the underlying zone and does not violate any conditions of approval for the property (e.g., prior development permit approval);

2. The applicant has proof of the property owner’s permission to place the use on his/her property;

3. No parking will be utilized by customers and employees of the temporary use that is needed by the property owner to meet their minimum parking requirement under Chapter 3.3 SDC, Parking and Loading;

4. The use provides adequate vision clearance, as required by SDC 3.1.200, and shall not obstruct pedestrian access on public streets;

5. Ingress and egress are safe and adequate when combined with the other uses of the property; as required by SDC 3.1.200, Vehicular access and circulation;

6. The use does not create adverse off-site impacts including vehicle traffic, noise, odors, vibrations, glare or lights that affect an adjoining use in a manner in which other uses allowed outright in the district do not affect the adjoining use; and

7. The use is adequately served by sewer or septic system and water, if applicable. (The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining any related permits.)

B. Temporary Sales Office or Model Home. Using a Type I procedure under SDC 4.1.200, the city may approve, approve with conditions or deny an application for the use of any real property within the city as a temporary sales office for a period not to exceed one year, or as approved by the community development director, for the purpose of facilitating the sale of real property, or as a model home in any subdivision or tract of land within the city, but for no other purpose, based on the following criteria:

1. Temporary Sales Office:

a. The temporary sales office shall be located within the boundaries of the subdivision or tract of land in which the real property is to be sold and not interfere with traffic on any street or public way;

b. The property to be used for a temporary sales office for dwellings or lots within the subject property shall not be permanently improved for that purpose, except as approved by the community development director (e.g., model home);

c. Conditions may be imposed regarding temporary utility connections, and as necessary to protect public health, safety, or welfare;

d. The subject site shall be kept clean and neat; and

e. Hours of operation for a sales office shall follow those for home occupations, except as approved by the community development director for a caretaker.

2. Model House:

a. The model house shall be located within the boundaries of the subdivision or tract of land where the real property to be sold is situated; and

b. The model house shall be designed as a permanent structure that meets all relevant requirements of this code and other applicable codes and permit requirements, including landscaping.

C. Temporary Building, Trailer, Kiosk, or Structure. Except as approved for mobile food vendors in a commercial or industrial district under SDC 2.3.160, temporary or permanent placement of a building, trailer, kiosk, or structure, including but not limited to prefabricated building(s), for use on any real commercial or industrial property within the city shall require a land use permit. Using a Type II procedure, the city may approve, approve with conditions or deny an application for a placement of a building, trailer, kiosk, or structure for temporary use, or temporary placement, such as a temporary commercial or industrial use or space associated with the primary use on the property, for a period of not more than one year, based on the following criteria:

1. The temporary trailer or building shall be located within the specified property line setbacks of the parcel of land on which it is located;

2. The primary use on the property to be used for a temporary trailer is already developed;

3. Ingress and egress are safe and adequate as demonstrated by an approach permit approved by the road authority, as applicable. See also SDC 3.1.200, Vehicular access and circulation;

4. There is adequate parking for the customers or users of the temporary use as required by Chapter 3.3 SDC, Parking and Loading;

5. The use will not result in vehicular congestion on streets;

6. The use will pose no impediment or hazard to pedestrians in the area of the use;

7. The use does not create adverse off-site impacts including vehicle traffic, noise, odors, vibrations, glare or lights that affect an adjoining use in a manner that other uses allowed outright in the district do not affect the adjoining use;

8. The building complies with applicable building codes;

9. The use can be adequately served by sewer or septic system and water, if applicable (the applicant shall be responsible for obtaining any related permits);

10. The length of time that the temporary building will be used does not exceed six months. When a temporary building exceeds this timeframe, the applicant shall be required to remove the building, or renew the temporary use permit. A temporary use permit shall be renewed no more than two times, and shall expire no later than 18 months from the first approval date; and

11. Conditions may be imposed regarding temporary utility connections, and as necessary to protect public health, safety, or welfare.

D. Garage Sales. Garage sale signs shall conform to the applicable provisions of the Silverton sign code, Chapter 15.16 SMC. Garage or yard sales shall be permitted in any residential zoning district subject to the following:

1. Limited to the sale of household goods and equipment, plants, clothing, furniture, and the like.

2. Limited to three such sales per year per individual address.

3. The duration of an individual sale shall not exceed three days.

4. The hours of operation shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.

E. Outdoor Swimming Pools. Swimming pools, spas and hot tubs (in-ground and aboveground) that contain 24 inches or more of water shall comply with the following:

1. Conform to the setback requirements of the primary structure, except that there shall be a minimum of five feet from all interior lot lines.

2. Be equipped with locking cover, fenced or equipped with electric alarm systems that will prevent entry or alarm upon entry.

3. Required fencing shall be a minimum of five feet in height and be equipped with a self-locking gate which closes automatically. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.9.200 Outdoor seating areas within the public right-of-way.

Where outdoor seating areas are desired by restaurants or other business establishments they must comply with the following procedures and criteria:

A. Submit a written request to the community development department identifying the area involved, a site plan of the area, a description of the operating characteristics of the proposed use or other pertinent information.

B. Accompanying the written request shall be a completed city of Silverton application to occupy the right-of-way and the associated review fee.

C. The community development director within 45 days of receipt will review the application and make a final decision.

D. In some cases the request may be forwarded to the city council for final approval.

E. Approval may be given provided the community development director or city council determine there will be no negative impact to the public, the right-of-way or nearby businesses or property owners.

F. Compliance with other applicable provisions of the city’s municipal code, including permits for using the public right-of-way where sidewalk cafes are allowed.

G. Design review approval where the outdoor eating area includes seating for more than eight patrons.

H. Where adjacent to or abutting a residential use and/or zoning district, the outdoor eating area shall only be allowed between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.

I. The outdoor eating area shall contain a trash receptacle within 10 feet of the use, which shall be maintained by the owner or operator of the restaurant.

J. At least five feet of open passageway is maintained on the sidewalk. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


Chapter 4.10 ANNEXATIONS

Sections:

4.10.100    Background.

4.10.110    Purpose.

4.10.120    Application and fee.

4.10.130    Filing procedure.

4.10.140    Review criteria.

4.10.150    Annexation applications involving comprehensive plan amendments.

4.10.160    Council-initiated annexation.

4.10.170    Zoning.

4.10.180    Annexation zoning matrix.

4.10.190    Action by the planning commission.

4.10.200    Action by the city council.

4.10.210    Legal advertisement of pending election.

4.10.220    Election procedures.

4.10.230    Annexation reports.

4.10.240    Effective date of annexation.


4.10.100 Background.

Oregon statewide planning goals require that each city be surrounded by a boundary which is called an urban growth boundary (UGB). The UGB defines the area which the city has identified as being eligible to be included within the city limits sometime during the 20-year planning period. Lands within the UGB may be considered for annexation consistent with the review criteria within SDC 4.10.140. Timely annexation of lands in an orderly and efficient manner avoids urban sprawl, and retains surrounding natural resources, and at the same time avoids the unnecessary development of agricultural and timber-producing lands. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.10.110 Purpose.

It is the purpose and general intent of this chapter to delineate the appropriate procedures to be followed to annex territory to the city and to undertake other major and minor boundary changes. It is recognized that annexations to the corporate limits are major land use actions affecting all aspects of city government, and that other boundary changes and extensions of services must also be regulated. Unless mandated by state law, annexation, delayed annexations, and/or extension of city services may only be approved by a majority vote among the electorate.

A. With respect to annexations, the procedures and standards established in this chapter are required for review of proposed annexations in order to:

1. Provide adequate public information and sufficient time for public review before an annexation election;

2. Maximize citizen involvement in the annexation review process;

3. Establish a system for measuring the physical, environmental, fiscal and related social effects of proposed annexations; and

4. Ensure adequate time for staff review.

B. With respect to major and minor boundary changes or extensions of services other than annexations, it is the purpose and general intent of this chapter to provide a method by which such changes or extensions may be reviewed in a rational way and in accordance with applicable comprehensive plans. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.10.120 Application and fee.

An application for annexation shall be filed with the city and accompanied by the appropriate fee. Additional land use applications may be filed concurrently with an annexation application contingent on approval of the annexation. At a minimum the application shall include:

A. A complete application signed by each property owner or a signed notarized letter of authorization from the property owner allowing the city to process an application received from a third party; and

B. Signed notarized statements by anyone leasing or renting the property stating that they have no objection to the annexation; and

C. A mailing list of all current property owners and residents within 500 feet of the subject site, as certified by a title company or by the Marion County tax assessor’s office, as accurate and complete as found on the most recent property tax assessment roll where the subject property is located; and

D. A copy of the current deed(s); and

E. A legal description of the territory to be annexed, meeting the relevant requirements of ORS Chapter 308. If such a description is not submitted, a boundary survey may be required. A lot and block description may be substituted for the metes and bounds description if the area is platted. If the legal description contains any deed or book and page references, legible copies of these shall be submitted with the legal description; and

F. Two full quarter-section county tax assessor’s maps, with the subject property(ies) outlined; and

G. A written applicant’s statement addressing each review criteria. It shall be the applicant’s responsibility to submit a complete application which addresses the review criteria listed in SDC 4.10.140. Upon determination that the application is complete, a public hearing shall be scheduled before the planning commission followed by a public hearing before the city council; and

H. Eighteen full-sized and one reduced (11 inches by 17 inches) conceptual site plan for properties to be developed with a subdivision or planned development. The scale of the full-size plan must be large enough that all dimensions and distances can easily be measured for accuracy. Make sure that the plan is prepared so that it is at least eight and one-half inches by 11 inches in size and the scale is standard: 10, 20, 30, 40 or 50, 60, or 100 feet to one inch. The plan must include all the required items. If any item listed for inclusion on the plan is not provided, please include a written explanation. The following items are required on the plan:

1. The location of existing structures (if any);

2. The location of streets, sanitary sewer, storm drainage, water, electric and other utilities, on or adjacent to the property to be annexed;

3. The location and direction of all water features on and abutting the subject property. Approximate location of areas subject to inundation, stormwater overflow or standing water. Base flood data showing elevations of all property subject to inundation in the event of 100-year flood as shown;

4. Label and show the locations of all existing structures, wells, septic tanks and drain fields, and distances between them and the existing property lines and each other. Indicate what is to be removed, moved, and/or retained;

5. Natural features, such as rock outcroppings, marshes or wetlands (as delineated by the Division of State Lands), wooded areas, isolated preservable trees (trees with trunks over six inches in diameter as measured four feet above the ground), and significant areas of vegetation;

6. Label and show existing and proposed contour (topography) lines drawn at the following intervals:

a. One-foot intervals for ground slopes less than five percent;

b. Two-foot intervals for ground slopes between five and 10 percent;

c. Five-foot intervals for ground slopes exceeding 10 percent;

7. General land use plan indicating the types and intensities of the proposed or potential development;

I. If applicable, a double-majority worksheet, certification of ownership and voters. Certification of legal description and map on forms provided by the city;

J. A narrative statement explaining the conditions surrounding the proposal and addressing the factors contained in the review criteria, as relevant, including:

1. Statement of availability, capacity and status of existing water, sewer, drainage, transportation, park and school facilities; and

2. Statement of increased demand for such facilities to be generated by the proposed development; and

3. Statement of additional facilities, if any, required to meet the increased demand and any proposed phasing of such facilities in accordance with projected demand; and

4. Statement outlining method and source of financing required to provide additional facilities, if any; and

5. Statement of overall development concept and methods by which the physical and related social environment of the site, surrounding area and community will be enhanced; and

6. Statement of potential physical, aesthetic, and related social effects of the proposed or potential development on the community as a whole and on the small subcommunity or neighborhood of which it will become a part; and proposed actions to mitigate such negative effects, if any; and

7. Statement indicating the type and nature of any comprehensive plan text or map amendments that may be required to complete the proposed development;

K. Annexation agreement. There may be instances in which an applicant may offer additional considerations in support of an annexation application. Such considerations shall be considered as part of an annexation application. These considerations shall be formalized through a development agreement;

L. The application fee for annexations and a deposit which is adequate to cover any and all costs related to the election as established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.10.130 Filing procedure.

Whenever an application for annexation is filed, it shall be reviewed in accordance with the following procedures:

A. Determination of Annexation Type. The community development director shall determine whether an application is for a major or minor annexation as follows:

1. Major Annexation. An annexation shall be considered major if one or more of the following exist:

a. More than one property is involved;

b. City services do not abut the site;

c. The land is vacant and the request involves more than one district designation;

d. The land is developed with more than one type of existing land use and more than one district designation is needed or requested; or

e. The request for annexation involves more than two acres.

However, if the community development director determines measuring the physical, environmental and related social effects of the proposal will be similar in difficulty to that of a minor annexation, a major annexation can follow the timeline for minor annexation.

2. Minor Annexation. Any annexation not meeting the description provided above for a major annexation and containing less than two acres is considered a minor annexation. In general, an annexation is considered minor if measurement of the physical, environmental and related social effects is easier than a major annexation.

B. Application Filing Deadlines. Annexation elections are scheduled for May and November. Special elections may be scheduled outside of May or November if all election costs are paid for by the applicant. Application deadlines are established to permit public hearings by both the planning commission and the city council in time to meet state requirements for submitting ballot information for these election dates. Application deadlines for major and minor annexations are as follows:

1. A major annexation must be filed with the community development department before 5:00 p.m. on the last working day in September for a ballot election in May and the last working day in March for a ballot election in November.

2. A minor annexation must be filed with the community development department before 5:00 p.m. on the last working day in October for a ballot election in May and the last working day in April for a ballot election in November.

3. Major or minor annexations can be scheduled for a special election; provided, that all costs associated with the special election are covered by the applicant. Special elections will be scheduled by the city council following the required planning commission and city council hearings on the application.

C. Exceptions. The city council may authorize an exception to any of the requirements of this chapter. An exception shall require a statement of findings that indicates the basis for the exception. Exceptions may be granted for reasons including, but not limited to: identified health hazards, parcels of land that are less than two acres in size, land that is being annexed for a public purpose, a parcel with limited potential, and for all other matters which the city council determines that the public interest would not be served by undertaking the entire annexation process. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.10.140 Review criteria.

When reviewing a proposed annexation of land, the planning commission and city council will consider the following standards and criteria; the applicant shall bear the burden of proof.

A. Adequacy of access to the site; and

B. Conformity of the proposal with the city’s comprehensive plan; and

C. Adequate public facilities, services, and transportation networks are in place or are planned to be provided concurrently with the development of the property. If extension or upgrading of any improvement is necessary to serve the area, such extension must be consistent with the city’s infrastructure plans and must be an orderly and efficient arrangement for the extension of public services; and

D. The new area will meet city standards for any public improvements which may be necessary to serve the area (including but not limited to streets, including sidewalks, sanitary sewer, water, storm drainage); and

E. The area to be annexed is contiguous to the city and represents a logical direction for city expansion; and

F. The area is within the urban growth boundary, unless a health hazard due to failing septic systems or groundwater supplies is found to exist; and

G. The proposed use of the property is consistent with the applicable comprehensive plan designation; and

H. The proposed annexation shall be consistent with all applicable goals and policies of the Silverton comprehensive plan; and

I. Shall be in compliance with applicable sections of ORS Chapter 222; and

J. Natural hazards identified by the city, such as wetlands, floodplains and steep slopes, have been addressed by applicant’s conceptual development plan; and

K. Urbanization of the subject property shall not have a significant adverse effect on areas identified or designated in the comprehensive plan as open space or as significant scenic, historic or natural resource areas; and

L. Economic impacts which are likely to result from the annexation shall be evaluated in light of the social and physical impacts. The overall impact which is likely to result from the annexation and development shall not have a significant adverse effect on the economic, social and physical environment of the community, as a whole; and

M. If the proposed area for annexation is to be residentially zoned, there must be less than a five-year supply of vacant and redevelopable land in terms of dwelling units per acre within the current city limits. “Redevelopable land” means land zoned for residential use on which development has already occurred but on which, due to present or expected market forces, there exists the likelihood that existing development will be converted to more intensive residential uses during the planning period. The five-year supply shall be determined from vacant and redevelopable land inventories and by the methodology for land need projections from the housing element of the comprehensive plan. If there is more than a five-year supply but less than an eight-year supply, the city may consider additional factors, such as the likelihood of vacant parcels being developed in the near future, to determine if the public good would be served by the annexation. Properties proposed for annexation that have a current or probable public health hazard due to lack of full city water or sanitary sewer may be exempt from this criterion; and

N. Promotes the timely, orderly and economic provision of public facilities and services; and

O. The annexation is reasonable and that the public interest, present and future, will be best served by annexing the property. (Ord. 16-17 § 1, 2016; Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.10.150 Annexation applications involving comprehensive plan amendments.

Applications for annexation involving comprehensive plan amendments submitted by property owners shall be reviewed semi-annually in April and October by the planning commission with a recommendation to the council. The city council, planning commission, or community development director may also initiate plan amendments. Such initiations are made without prejudice towards the outcome. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.10.160 Council-initiated annexation.

It is within the power and authority of the city to annex land which is surrounded by the corporate limits or boundaries of the city, with or without consent of the property owners or residents in the territory. Notice and procedures for a public hearing shall be pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 4.1 SDC. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.10.170 Zoning.

Upon annexation, the zoning of annexed property shall be compatible with the comprehensive plan designation as provided on the annexation zoning matrix. Zoning other than that shown on the matrix requires approval of a comprehensive plan map amendment and/or a zoning map amendment. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.10.180 Annexation zoning matrix.

	Plan Designation	Compatible Zoning Districts

	Industrial	Industrial Park (IP)

	Light Industrial (LI)

	Industrial (I)

	Commercial	General Commercial (GC)

	Downtown Commercial (DC)

	Downtown Commercial Fringe (DCF)

	Single-Family Residential	Single-Family Residential (R-1)

	Low Density Residential (R-5)

	Acreage Residential (AR)

	Multiple-Family Residential	Multiple-Family Residential (RM-10)

	Multiple-Family Residential (RM-20)

	Agricultural/Urban Reserve	Single-Family Residential (R-1)

	Low Density Residential (R-5)

	Acreage Residential (AR)

(Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.10.190 Action by the planning commission.

The planning commission shall conduct a public hearing to evaluate the proposed annexation and make a recommendation to the city council regarding how the proposal has or has not complied with the review criteria set forth in SDC 4.10.140. The planning commission shall provide findings in support of its recommendation. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.10.200 Action by the city council.

Upon receipt of the planning commission’s recommendation, the city council shall endeavor to review all proposals prior to the city application deadline for submitting ballot measures to the voters. The city council shall only set for an election annexations consistent with a positive balance of the annexation factors contained in SDC 4.10.140. The city council shall adopt findings in support of its decision to schedule an annexation for an election. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.10.210 Legal advertisement of pending election.

After city council review and approval, the city manager shall cause a legal advertisement describing the proposed annexation and pending election to be published in at least one newspaper of general circulation in the city in the manner provided by state election law. The advertisement shall be placed at least 14 days prior to the election. The size of the advertisement shall be determined by the city manager. The advertisement shall contain: a description of the location of the property, size of the property, its current zoning and any proposal for zone changes upon annexation, a general description of the potential land uses allowed, any required comprehensive plan text or map amendment or zoning ordinance text or map amendment, and where the city council’s evaluation of the proposed annexation may be found. Any statement regarding development of the property proposed for annexation that is dependent upon future action by the city shall be accompanied by a disclaimer to the effect that such development would not be affected by the annexation vote. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.10.220 Election procedures.

A. Pursuant to ORS 222.130(1), the ballot title for a proposal for annexation shall contain a general description of the boundaries of each territory proposed to be annexed. The description shall use streets and other generally recognized features. Notwithstanding ORS 250.035, the statement of chief purpose shall not exceed 150 words. The city attorney shall prepare the ballot title wording.

B. Pursuant to ORS 222.130(2), the notice of an annexation shall be given as provided in ORS 254.095 and 254.205, except that in addition the notice shall contain a map indicating the boundaries of each territory proposed to be annexed.

C. Pursuant to ORS 222.111(7), two or more proposals for annexation of territory may be voted upon simultaneously; however, each proposal shall be stated separately on the ballot and voted on separately. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.10.230 Annexation reports.

Upon approval by the voters of the proposed annexation, the city council, by ordinance, shall set the boundaries of the area to be annexed by a legal description, adopt findings, and proclaim the results of the election. Within 20 days of council approval of the annexation, the city shall report all changes in the boundaries or limits of the city to the county clerk and county assessor and Secretary of State’s office. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.10.240 Effective date of annexation.

The annexation shall be complete from the date of filing with the Secretary of State as provided in 

ORS 222.150, 222.160, 222.170, and 111.900. Thereafter, the annexed territory shall be and shall remain part of the city. The date of such filing shall be the effective date of annexation, provided such filing is not made later than 90 days prior to a general or primary election; otherwise the effective date of such annexation shall be the day after the primary or general election. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


Chapter 4.11 URBAN GROWTH BOUNDARY AMENDMENTS

Sections:

4.11.100    Purpose.

4.11.200    Urban growth boundary change.

4.11.300    Simultaneous urban growth boundary change with comprehensive plan change.

4.11.400    Initiation of urban growth boundary change by city council.

4.11.500    Initiation of urban growth boundary change by planning commission.

4.11.600    Initiation of urban growth boundary change by the Marion County board of commissioners.

4.11.700    Initiation of urban growth boundary change by petition.

4.11.800    Criteria to be used in considering an urban growth boundary change.


4.11.100 Purpose.

This chapter states the initiation process and criteria to be used in considering an urban growth boundary change. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.11.200 Urban growth boundary change.

An “urban growth boundary change” is an alteration of any portion of the adopted boundary line from one location to another after the proposed change has been reviewed and a recommendation made by the planning commission, and enacted by ordinance by the city council and the Marion County board of commissioners in accord with the following provisions. All boundary amendments shall be simultaneously adopted as changes to the comprehensive plan in accordance with SDC 4.11.300. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.11.300 Simultaneous urban growth boundary change with comprehensive plan change.

If urban growth boundary changes are adopted in accordance with SDC 4.11.200, the resulting comprehensive plan change can be adopted simultaneously. No additional conditions must be set for a comprehensive plan change. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.11.400 Initiation of urban growth boundary change by city council.

A. An urban growth boundary change may be initiated by the city council only when the change proposed is for some governmental, educational, religious or philanthropic purpose, or is in the public interest and of general interest.

B. Proceedings to alter the boundary initiated by the city council shall be by resolution, and the resolution shall be referred to the planning commission. The community development director shall thereupon fix a date for hearing by the planning commission, give notice of such hearing and a hearing shall be conducted as provided in Article 4 for Type IV applications.

C. After the hearing by the planning commission, the planning commission shall make a recommendation in the form of a resolution to the city council.

D. If the city council approves the boundary amendment, it shall adopt it by resolution and forward it to the Marion County board of commissioners along with all exhibits and findings thereon and a written request for the board to consider the boundary change and adopt it.

E. If the Marion County board of commissioners approves the boundary amendment, both the city council and board of commissioners shall adopt the change by ordinance. If the board of commissioners does not approve the boundary amendment, it shall convene a meeting with the city council to further consider the change.

F. If no mutual agreement is reached, the city council may appeal to the Oregon State Land Conservation and Development Commission or seek judicial remedy. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.11.500 Initiation of urban growth boundary change by planning commission.

A. An urban growth boundary change may be initiated by resolution by the planning commission only when the proposed change is in the public interest and of general interest. Proposals for boundary revisions resulting from comprehensive plan review proceedings as provided in SDC 4.12.600 may be initiated by the planning commission.

B. When the proceedings are initiated by the planning commission, the community development director shall fix a date for hearing before the planning commission, give notice of such hearing and a hearing shall be conducted as provided in Article 4 for Type IV applications.

C. After the hearing, the planning commission may refer its recommendation to the city council in the form of a resolution.

D. If the city council approves the boundary amendment, it shall adopt it by resolution and forward it to the Marion County board of commissioners along with all exhibits and findings thereon and a written request for the board to consider the boundary change and adopt it.

E. If the Marion County board of commissioners approves the boundary amendment, both the city council and board of commissioners shall adopt the change by ordinance. If the board of commissioners does not approve the boundary amendment, it shall convene a meeting with the city council to further consider the change.

F. If no mutual agreement is reached, the city council may appeal to the Oregon State Land Conservation and Development Commission or seek judicial remedy. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.11.600 Initiation of urban growth boundary change by the Marion County board of commissioners.

A. The Marion County board of commissioners may forward proposed boundary amendments to the city council along with all exhibits and findings thereof and a written request for the city council to consider the boundary change and adopt it.

B. The city council shall forward such request to the planning commission for consideration.

C. The planning commission shall automatically initiate the requested amendment and the community development director shall fix a date for hearing before the planning commission, give notice of such hearing and a hearing shall be conducted as provided in Article 4. Unless required by state law, this hearing is optional at the discretion of the planning commission if Marion County had held a hearing in Silverton with notification to potentially affected citizens within three months previous to the receipt of the request by the city council.

D. The planning commission shall refer its recommendation in the form of a resolution to the city council.

E. The city council shall either adopt the boundary amendment by ordinance or request a joint meeting with the Marion County commissioners to further consider the change. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.11.700 Initiation of urban growth boundary change by petition.

Property owners or persons purchasing property under contract, if they state in writing that they are purchasing property under contract, may file an urban growth boundary change petition. In addition to the application submittal requirements listed under Article 4 for Type IV applications, the following information shall be included:

A. An explanation of the reasons for which the boundary amendment is being sought, together with any sketches or plans the petitioner feels will illustrate the proposal, and the potential impact upon the area resulting from the proposed change shall be addressed.

B. Written findings of fact and conclusions for the review criteria listed in SDC 4.11.800.

C. Within 10 days of the petition being filed with the community development director, the application shall be checked for completeness and if the petition is sufficient, the community development director shall refer the petition to the planning commission and a hearing date shall be set. The community development director shall give notice of such hearing and a hearing shall be conducted as provided in Article 4 for Type IV applications.

D. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing and shall refer its recommendation to the city council in the form of a resolution.

E. If the city council approves the boundary amendment, it shall adopt it by resolution and forward it to the Marion County board of commissioners along with all exhibits and findings thereon and a written request for the board to consider the boundary change and adopt it.

F. If the Marion County board of commissioners approves the boundary amendment, both the city council and board of commissioners shall adopt the change by ordinance. If the board of commissioners does not approve the boundary amendment, it shall convene a meeting with the city council to further consider the change.

G. If no mutual agreement is reached, the city council may appeal to the Oregon State Land Conservation and Development Commission or seek judicial remedy. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.11.800 Criteria to be used in considering an urban growth boundary change.

A. Changes in the urban growth boundary will be limited to those cases in which the land in question is needed to provide for:

1. Accommodation of additional population;

2. Housing and employment opportunities;

3. Orderly and economical provision of public facilities and services;

4. Maximum efficiency of land uses;

5. Retention of agricultural lands;

6. Compatibility of the proposed urban use with nearby agricultural activities; and

7. Improvement of the area’s environmental, energy, economic and social well-being.

B. All urban growth boundary amendments must be in accordance with the goals, objectives and policies of the comprehensive plan.

C. If the request for an urban growth boundary change originates from a petition, the petitioner will bear the burden of proof. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


Chapter 4.12 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AMENDMENTS

Sections:

4.12.100    Purpose.

4.12.200    Frequency of plan amendments.

4.12.300    Procedure.

4.12.400    Review criteria.

4.12.500    Comprehensive plan map corrections.

4.12.600    Comprehensive plan map reviews.


4.12.100 Purpose.

The comprehensive plan is the official and controlling land use document of the city, providing guidance to both public and private activities which affect the growth, development, and livability of the community. The plan is intended to be a flexible document, reflecting changing circumstances and community attitudes through occasional amendments. This section provides a process whereby the comprehensive plan may be amended without violating the integrity of the plan or frustrating its basic purposes. This process applies to proposed changes to the comprehensive plan map designations, text and the urban growth boundary. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.12.200 Frequency of plan amendments.

Applications for comprehensive plan amendments submitted by property owners shall be reviewed semi-annually in April and October by the planning commission. The city council, planning commission, or community development director may also initiate plan amendments. Such initiations are made without prejudice towards the outcome. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.12.300 Procedure.

Requests for plan amendments determined by the community development director to be legislative in nature are reviewed through the legislative procedures stated in Article 4. Quasi-judicial requests are reviewed through the Type IV procedures of Article 4. Area-specific amendments, including map amendments outside of the city limits, are processed in accordance with the city-Marion County urban growth management agreement. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.12.400 Review criteria.

Amendments to the comprehensive plan will be approved if the council finds that the applicant has shown that the following applicable criteria are met; the applicant shall bear the burden of proof.

A. A legislative amendment is consistent with the goals and policies of the comprehensive plan, the statewide planning goals, and any relevant area plans adopted by the city council.

B.  A legislative amendment is needed to meet changing conditions or new laws.

C. The result of the legislative amendment will result in an improvement to the comprehensive plan that furthers the adopted goals, policies or needs of the community above the current comprehensive plan.

D. The requested designation for a quasi-judicial map amendment meets all of the following tests:

1. The requested designation for the site has been evaluated against relevant comprehensive plan policies and on balance has been found to be more supportive of the comprehensive plan as a whole than the old designation.

2. The requested designation is consistent with any relevant area plans adopted by the city council.

3. The requested designation is consistent with the comprehensive plan map pattern and any negative impact upon the area resulting from the change has been considered and deemed acceptable by the city.

4. An identified public need will be met by the proposed change that is not already met by other available property.

5. The requested designation is consistent with the statewide planning goals.

E. If the request for a comprehensive plan map or text amendment originates from a petition, the petitioner will bear the burden of proof. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.12.500 Comprehensive plan map corrections.

The director may initiate a review through the Type I procedure for the types of corrections to the comprehensive plan map listed below:

A. The correction may be made for mapping errors, such as:

1. A map line that was intended to follow a topographical feature does not do so. “Topographical features” include the tops and bottoms of hillsides, the banks of water bodies, and center lines of creeks or drainage ditches;

2. The line on the map does not match the legal description or map shown or references in the ordinance which applied the designation; or

3. When there is a discrepancy between maps and there is clear legislative intent for where the line should be.

B. The correction may be made when a map line is based on the location of a reference item that has since been moved. Reference items are rights-of-way, tentative rights-of-way, utility easements and similar items. Map line changes in these cases must not be more than a minor change to the map pattern and must not result in any significant impacts to abutting lots. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.12.600 Comprehensive plan map reviews.

A. Five-Year Review. The comprehensive plan shall be reviewed at a minimum of five-year intervals. These reviews will be thorough in nature and shall consider in depth the statement of goals, objectives, findings of fact and policies in each element of the plan. Special attention shall be directed toward a review of population increases and the projection of future land requirements.

B. Interim Review. Interim revisions can result from special circumstances or information that justifies the public need for a plan change or from a petition for a plan change.

C. The planning commission will coordinate these various reviews as the committee for citizen involvement in accordance with ORS Chapter 197. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


Chapter 4.13 VACATIONS

Sections:

4.13.100    Purpose.

4.13.200    Initiation.

4.13.300    Procedure.

4.13.400    Review criteria.

4.13.500    Zoning of vacated right-of-way.

4.13.600    Conditions of approval.


4.13.100 Purpose.

This section states the procedures and review criteria for the vacation of a public easement or public right-of-way. For vacations of plats or re-platting see SDC 4.3.200. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.13.200 Initiation.

A vacation proposal may be initiated by the city council or by petition of adjoining and area owners in accordance with ORS 271.080. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.13.300 Procedure.

Type IV procedures as outlined in Article 4 shall be used as supplemented by the provisions of ORS Chapter 271. State law defines the affected area and mandates notice requirements that are more stringent than the city’s Type IV procedure. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.13.400 Review criteria.

Vacation requests may be approved if the review body finds that the applicant has shown that all of the following review criteria are met; the applicant shall bear the burden of proof.

A. The requested vacation is consistent with relevant comprehensive plan policies and with any street plan, city transportation, or public facility plan.

B. The requested vacation will not have a negative effect on access between public rights-of-way or to existing properties, potential lots, public facilities or utilities.

C. The requested vacation will not have a negative effect on traffic circulation or emergency service protection.

D. The portion of the right-of-way that is to be vacated will be brought into compliance with code requirements, such as landscaping, driveway access, and reconstruction of access for fire safety.

E. The public interest, present and future, will be best served by approval of the proposed vacation. (Ord. 10-02 Exh. A § B, 2010; Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.13.500 Zoning of vacated right-of-way.

Except as otherwise provided within the vacation ordinance or where the official city zoning map is not clear as to the zoning of vacated right-of-way, the zoning of each parcel of vacated territory shall be the same as the adjoining property to which the ownership of the parcel automatically reverts. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


4.13.600 Conditions of approval.

The city may attach conditions to the approval of a vacation request to ensure that the proposal will conform to the review criteria and city policy for the vacation of public land. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


Chapter 5.1 ADJUSTMENTS AND VARIANCES

Sections:

5.1.100    Adjustment – Purpose.

5.1.200    Adjustment – Procedure.

5.1.300    Adjustment – Review criteria.

5.1.400    Variances – Purpose.

5.1.500    Variance – Procedure.

5.1.600    Regulations which may and may not be varied.

5.1.700    Variance – Review criteria.

5.1.800    Appeals of adjustment and variance decisions.


5.1.100 Adjustment – Purpose.

The adjustment review process provides a mechanism by which the director may make limited modifications to the application of regulations in the development code. Adjustment reviews provide limited flexibility for unusual situations, while continuing to provide certainty and rapid processing for land use applications. Requests for changes from a numerical development standard of 10 percent or less of the standard are processed as “adjustments.” Requests for changes to standards which are not numeric or which are for more than 10 percent of the standard are processed as “variances.” (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


5.1.200 Adjustment – Procedure.

Adjustment requests are processed through a Type II procedure using the review criteria listed in SDC 5.1.300 in addition to the applicable requirements contained in Chapter 4.1 SDC. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


5.1.300 Adjustment – Review criteria.

All adjustment requests will be approved if the director finds that the applicant has shown that the following criteria have been met:

A. The requested adjustment is for 10 percent or less of the numerical development standard;

B. The need for the requested adjustment is created by the configuration of an existing or proposed structure on the site;

C. The need for the requested adjustment is created by the configuration of the existing lot boundaries or topography of the site;

D. The design and operating characteristics of the proposed structure are reasonably compatible with the placement of surrounding development and land uses, and any negative impacts have been sufficiently minimized; or

E. If more than one adjustment is being requested, the cumulative effect of the adjustments will result in a project which is still consistent with the overall purpose of the applicable zoning district. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


5.1.400 Variances – Purpose.

This section provides standards and procedures for variances, which are modifications to land use or development standards that are not otherwise permitted elsewhere in this code as exceptions to code standards. This code cannot provide standards to fit every potential development situation. The city’s varied geography, and complexities of land development, require flexibility. This chapter provides that flexibility, while maintaining the purposes and intent of the code. The variance procedure provides relief from specific code provisions when they have the unintended effect of preventing reasonable development in conformance with all other codes. The variance procedure is intended to provide flexibility while ensuring that the purpose of each development standard is met. Variances are necessary when the applicant requests a deviation from numerical standards of more than 10 percent, or a variance from nonnumerical development standards. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


5.1.500 Variance – Procedure.

A variance is processed as a Type III procedure using the review criteria listed in SDC 5.1.700 in addition to the applicable requirements contained in Article 4. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


5.1.600 Regulations which may and may not be varied.

A. Unless listed in subsection (B) of this section, all regulations in this code may be modified using the variance process.

B. Variances are prohibited for the following items:

1. To allow a primary or accessory use that is not allowed within the zoning district.

2. As an exception to any restrictions on uses or development which contain the word “prohibited.”

3. As an exception to a threshold for a review, such as the size of accessory structures.

4. As an exception to a definition or classification.

5. As an exception to the procedural steps of a procedure or to change assigned procedures. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


5.1.700 Variance – Review criteria.

The city shall approve an application for a variance if the review body finds that the applicant has shown that all of the following criteria have been met:

A. The proposed variance will not be materially detrimental to the purposes of this code, to any other applicable policies and standards, and to other properties in the same zoning district or in the vicinity;

B. A hardship to development exists that is peculiar to the lot size or shape, topography, wetlands, floodplains, or other similar circumstances related to the property over which the applicant has no control, and that are not applicable to other properties in the vicinity;

C. The use proposed will be the same as permitted under this title and city standards will be maintained to the greatest extent that is reasonably possible while permitting reasonable economic use of the land;

D. Existing physical and natural systems, such as but not limited to traffic, drainage, natural resources, and parks will not be adversely affected any more than would occur if the development occurred as specified by the subject code standard;

E. The hardship is not self-imposed; and

F. The variance request is the minimum variance that would alleviate the hardship. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


5.1.800 Appeals of adjustment and variance decisions.

Appeals of adjustment and variance decisions shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 4.1 SDC, as applicable. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


Chapter 5.2 NONCONFORMING USES AND DEVELOPMENTS

Sections:

5.2.100    Nonconforming uses and developments purpose.

5.2.200    Nonconforming uses.

5.2.300    Nonconforming lot or development.


5.2.100 Nonconforming uses and developments purpose.

This chapter provides standards and procedures for nonconforming situations (i.e., existing uses or developments that do not comply with the code). The standards for nonconforming uses and developments are intended to allow these nonconformities to continue but not to encourage their perpetuation. In allowing these situations to continue, some relief from code requirements for uses and developments that were established prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this code and do not comply with current standards has been provided. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


5.2.200 Nonconforming uses.

Uses that were lawfully established in accordance with the code regulations in place at the time the use was established, but would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this code, may be continued as long as they remain otherwise lawful, provided:

A. Expansion Prohibited. No such nonconforming use is enlarged, increased or extended to occupy a greater area of land or space than was occupied at the effective date of adoption of the ordinance codified in or amendment of the ordinance codified in this code. No additional structure, building or sign shall be constructed on the lot in connection with such nonconforming use of land;

B. Location. No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot other than that occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance codified in this code;

C. Discontinuation or Abandonment. The nonconforming use may continue, provided it is not discontinued for any reason for a period of more than 12 continuous months. For purposes of calculating the 12-month period, a use is discontinued or abandoned upon the occurrence of the first of any of the following events:

1. On the date when the use of land is physically vacated;

2. On the date the use ceases to be actively involved in the sale of merchandise or the provision of services;

3. On the date of termination of any lease or contract under which the nonconforming use has occupied the land; or

4. On the date a request for final reading of water and power meters is made to the applicable utility districts;

D.  Application of Code Criteria and Standards. If the use is discontinued or abandoned for any reason for a period of more than 12 continuous months, any subsequent use of land shall conform to the applicable standards and criteria specified by this code for the land use district in which such land is located;

E. Loss of Nonconforming Status.

1. If the use is changed to a conforming use for any period of time, any nonconforming rights are lost and a nonconforming use may not be re-established.

2. Any nonconforming use dependent upon a building or structure which is substantially damaged or destroyed by any cause, to the extent that the cost of repair or restoration of the building or structure would exceed 70 percent of its fair market value, shall be deemed terminated. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


5.2.300 Nonconforming lot or development.

Where a development exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance codified in this code that could not be built under the terms of this code by reason of restrictions on lot area, lot coverage, height, yard, equipment, access, parking, landscaping, its location on the lot or other requirements concerning the development, and the development was lawful when constructed, the development may remain on the site so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:

A. Alterations. No such nonconforming development may be enlarged or altered in a way that increases its nonconformity by more than 20 percent cumulatively (e.g., floor area and/or lot coverage and/or height and/or amount of measurable impact as in noise, glare, vibration) as of November 5, 2008, but any development or portion thereof may be enlarged or altered in a way that satisfies the current requirements of this code or will decrease its nonconformity.

B. Destruction. Should such nonconforming development or nonconforming portion of development be destroyed by any means to an extent more than 70 percent of its current value as assessed by the county assessor, it shall be reconstructed only in conformity with this code.

C. Deterioration. Should such nonconforming development or nonconforming portion of development become deteriorated to the extent that it has been declared a “dangerous building” and ordered demolished pursuant to Silverton’s dangerous and derelict structures code (SMC 15.08.360 et seq.), the nonconforming status shall be deemed terminated upon such declaration and order.

D. Roadway Access. The owner of a nonconforming access connection (i.e., street or highway access) may be required to bring the nonconforming access into conformance with this code and other applicable standards as a condition of the city or other roadway authority approving a new access connection permit, or a change in land use.

E. Vehicular Parking Spaces. When a development is nonconforming in the number of required vehicular parking spaces and changes to a use or building are made that increase the number of required vehicular parking spaces, only the number of vehicular parking spaces related to the increase in square footage of the building need to be provided.

F. Relocation or Removal. Should such development be moved for any reason and by any distance, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations of this code.

G. Remedy Nonconforming Development or Lot. Prior to occupancy after discontinuation or abandonment of a nonconforming development or lot, the subject development or lot, as applicable, must be brought up to current code standards or be removed. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


Chapter 5.3 LOTS OF RECORD

Sections:

5.3.100    Lots of record – Purpose.

5.3.200    Lots of record – Criteria.

5.3.300    Lots of record – Procedure.


5.3.100 Lots of record – Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish criteria and a process for determining when a lot of record exists. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


5.3.200 Lots of record – Criteria.

A lot of record is a plot of land that was not created through an approved subdivision or partition, was created and recorded before January 6, 1960, and for which the deed, or other instrument dividing the land, is recorded with the county. A lot of record shall be entitled to development of no less than one single-family dwelling and, provided all applicable code standards are met, additional land use or development may be approved. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


5.3.300 Lots of record – Procedure.

A lot of record determination shall be made by the community development director through a Type I procedure (SDC 4.1.200). It shall be the property owner’s responsibility to demonstrate that his or her plot of land meets the lot of record criteria in SDC 5.3.200. (Ord. 08-06 § 3, 2008)


Tables

The following tables list the city’s ordinances. The Development Code Ordinance Table lists only ordinances affecting the Silverton Development Code. The Ordinance Table lists all ordinances affecting the municipal code. Ordinances are codified if they are general, permanent, and/or include penalty provisions for noncompliance. If an ordinance is codified, its location in the code is cited by chapter number at the end of the ordinance description. Ordinances amending the development code are cited as “Development Code” in the Ordinance Table and cited by development code chapters in the Development Code Ordinance Table, which contains citations to the development code only.

Development Code Ordinance Table

Ordinance Table


DEVELOPMENT CODE ORDINANCE TABLE

	08-06	Amends Titles 12 and 18, zoning (1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 1.6, 1.7, 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 2.5, 2.6, 2.7, 2.8, 3.0, 3.1, 3.2, 3.3, 3.4, 3.5, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4, 4.5, 4.6, 4.7, 4.8, 4.9, 4.10, 4.11, 4.12, 4.13, 5.1, 5.2, 5.3)

	10-02	Amends Title 18, zoning (1.5, 1.6, 1.7, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 2.6, 2.8, 3.2, 3.3, 3.4, 3.5, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4, 4.5, 4.6, 4.9, 4.10, 4.12, 4.13)

	14-01	Amends Title 18, zoning (1.5, 1.6, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 2.8, 3.4, 4.1, 4.3)

	15-12	Adds § 4.1.400(E)(8), zoning (4.1)

	16-01	Adds § 2.4.160(B); amends §§ 1.5.300, 2.2.110, 2.2.200(G), 2.3.110 and 2.4.110, zoning (1.5, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4)

	16-04	Amends § 1.5.300, Table 2.2.120.A and § 2.2.170(C), number of stories allowed in residential districts (1.5, 2.2)

	16-05	Amends § 2.3.180, general commercial district design standards (2.3)

	16-17	Adds §§ 4.10.140(M), (N) and (O); amends § 4.10.140(J), annexation review criteria (4.10)

	18-22	Adds § 2.2.200(N); amends §§ 1.5.300, 2.2.110, 2.3.110, 2.4.110 and 2.8.150, transitional shelter communities (1.5, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 2.8)

	19-09	Adds § 3.4.100(U); amends § 3.4.010(A), intersection level of service standards (3.4)


ORDINANCE TABLE

	109	Closing of streets (12.32)

	27A67	Numbering of buildings and naming of streets (Repealed by 06-03)

	212	Sidewalks (Repealed by 06-03)

	261	Alcoholic beverages (5.04)

	331	Planning commission (2.08)

	384	Stopping, standing and parking (10.08)

	388	Stopping, standing and parking (10.08)

	390	Stopping, standing and parking (Repealed by 18-09)

	391	Stopping, standing and parking (10.08)

	392	Stopping, standing and parking (10.08)

	400	Driveways (Repealed by 06-03)

	401	Stopping, standing and parking (Repealed by 18-09)

	406	Stopping, standing and parking (Repealed by 18-09)

	410	Cash deposits (3.08)

	463	Trees, shrubs and plants (12.36)

	467	Offenses against public peace; weapons; street and sidewalk obstructions (9.08, 9.16, 12.28)

	498	Zoning (Repealed by 08-06)

	530	Zoning, definitions (Repealed by 06-03)

	601	Planning commission (2.08)

	603	Planning commission; stopping, standing and parking; sidewalks (2.08, 10.08)

	604	Planning commission (2.08)

	607	Zoning (Repealed by 08-06)

	611	Zoning, definitions (18.05)

	615	Trucks and heavy equipment (10.20)

	634	Trucks and heavy equipment (10.20)

	645	Public off-street parking facilities (Repealed by 06-03)

	646	Abandoned vehicles (10.24)

	647	Trucks and heavy equipment (10.20)

	651	Trucks and heavy equipment (10.20)

	652	Off-street parking and loading (Repealed by 06-03)

	674	Stopping, standing and parking (10.08)

	687	Stopping, standing and parking (Repealed by 18-09)

	697	Stopping, standing and parking (10.08)

	709	Stopping, standing and parking (10.08)

	726	Zoning, accessory structures (Repealed by 08-06)

	732	Stopping, standing and parking (10.08)

	738	Zoning, commercial district uses (Repealed by 08-06)

	749	State building codes adopted (15.04)

	750	Dangerous buildings (Repealed by 04-105)

	758	Zoning, slide hazard (Repealed by 06-03)

	775	Zoning, definitions (Repealed by 06-03)

	776	Zoning (Repealed by 08-06)

	795	Zoning, definitions (Repealed by 06-03)

	797	Disposition of property (2.16)

	801	Sewage disposal (Repealed by 15-05)

	807	Water system (Repealed by 15-05)

	818	Stopping, standing and parking (10.08)

	820	Zoning, historic landmarks (Repealed by 06-03, 08-06)

	825	Zoning, definitions (Repealed by 06-03)

	831	Zoning, off-street parking and loading (Repealed by 06-03)

	833	Water system (Repealed by 15-05)

	834	Fees, charges and billing (Repealed by 15-05)

	836	Zoning, definitions (Repealed by 06-03)

	842	City council (2.04)

	843	Stopping, standing and parking (10.08)

	845	Planning commission (2.08)

	847	Public improvements (12.08)

	850	City council (2.04)

	852	Flood plain district (Repealed by 06-03)

	853	Alcoholic beverages (5.04)

	854	General provisions (1.04)

	855	General penalty (1.08)

	858	Nuisances and nuisance abatement (Repealed by 13-11)

	859	Criminal statutes adopted (9.04)

	860	Vehicles and traffic (10.04, 10.08)

	869	Zoning, definitions (Repealed by 06-03)

	870	Vehicle code and traffic regulations (10.04)

	89-100	Code adoption (1.01)

	89-101	Vehicle code and traffic regulations (10.04)

	89-103	Planning commission; stopping, standing and parking (2.08, 10.08)

	89-107	Water use regulations (Repealed by 15-05)

	89-108	Alcoholic beverages (5.04)

	89-109	Utilities (Repealed by 15-05)

	89-110	Fees, charges and billing (Repealed by 15-05)

	89-115	Trucks and heavy equipment (10.20)

	90-101	Peddlers and solicitors (Repealed by 08-08)

	90-111	Abandoned vehicles (10.24)

	90-112	Public improvements (12.08)

	90-113	Fees, charges and billing (Repealed by 15-05)

	90-118	Public improvements (12.08)

	90-206	Stopping, standing and parking (10.08)

	91-109	Driveways (Repealed by 06-03)

	91-111	Driveways (Repealed by 06-03)

	91-116	Criminal statutes adopted (9.04)

	92-100	City council (2.04)

	92-101	Nondiscrimination policy (2.24)

	92-102	Recreational vehicles (10.26)

	92-106	Franchises (5.08)

	92-110	System development charges (13.70)

	92-111	Urban renewal agency (2.20)

	92-115	Alarm system control (9.20)

	92-117	Permit issuance and fees (15.04)

	92-120	Fees, charges and billing (Repealed by 15-05)

	93-110	Stopping, standing and parking (10.08)

	93-113	Public improvements (12.08)

	93-115	City council (2.04)

	93-118	Nuisances and nuisance abatement (8.06)

	93-122	City council (2.04)

	93-125	Urban renewal agency (2.20)

	93-127	Stopping, standing and parking (10.08)

	94-103	Planning commission (2.08)

	94-106	Stopping, standing and parking (10.08)

	94-108	Criminal statutes adopted (9.04)

	94-114	Signs (Repealed by 09-04)

	94-126	Signs (Repealed by 09-04)

	94-127	Removal of volunteer officers (2.28)

	94-132	Parental responsibility law (9.24)

	94-133	Trucks and heavy equipment (10.20)

	94-135	System development charges (13.70)

	95-103	Zoning, definitions (Repealed by 06-03)

	95-104	Zoning, administration, permits and enforcement (Repealed by 06-03)

	95-114	Building code (15.20)

	95-117	Parental responsibility law (9.24)

	95-119	Vehicle code and traffic regulations (10.04)

	95-120	Fees, charges and billing (Repealed by 15-05)

	95-121	Criminal statutes adopted (9.04)

	96-112	Zoning, administration, permits and enforcement (18.15)

	96-117	Use of public sewers (Repealed by 15-05)

	96-123	Uniform fire code (15.12)

	96-126	Site design and use standards (Repealed by 08-06)

	97-105	Penalties (1.08, 10.08, 15.04)

	97-106	City council (2.04)

	97-109	Public improvements (12.08)

	97-113	Regulation of tobacco products (5.16)

	97-116	Regulation of tobacco products (5.16)

	97-119	Vehicle code and traffic regulations (10.04)

	97-120	Criminal statutes adopted (9.04)

	97-123	Zoning, variance – major and minor (Repealed by 06-03)

	97-124	Purchasing (Repealed by 05-04)

	98-103	State building codes adopted (15.04)

	98-107	Zone change (18.35)

	98-109	Public improvements; system development charges (12.08, 13.70)

	98-111	Vehicle code and traffic regulations (10.04)

	98-112	Transient merchants (Repealed by 08-08)

	98-113	Vehicle code and traffic regulations (10.04)

	98-115	Partitions and lot line adjustments (Repealed by 06-03)

	98-116	Inventory searches of impounded vehicles (9.30)

	98-120	Curfew for minors (9.12)

	98-121	Subdivisions (Repealed by 06-03)

	98-122	Sewers (12.08)

	98-123	Emergency management (2.44)

	99-100	Building code (15.20)

	99-101	Telecommunications (12.40)

	99-109	Offenses against public peace; closing of streets (9.08, 12.32)

	99-116	City-owned facility rental (2.32)

	99-117	Criminal statutes adopted (9.04)

	99-118	Vehicle code and traffic regulations (10.04)

	99-120	Stopping, standing and parking (10.08)

	00-101	Vehicle code and traffic regulations (10.04)

	00-103	Subdivisions (Repealed by 06-03)

	00-105	Zoning, residential district uses (Repealed by 08-06)

	00-109	Zoning, accessory structures (Repealed by 08-06)

	00-110	Administrative search warrants (2.36)

	00-114	Regulation of tobacco products (5.16)

	00-116	Building code (15.20)

	00-119	Cable regulations (12.44)

	00-123	(Repealed by 16-07)

	00-124	Inspection and enforcement (Repealed by 15-05)

	00-126	Regulation of tobacco products (5.16)

	00-127	Regulation of tobacco stores (5.20)

	01-100	Zoning, administration, permits and enforcement (Repealed by 06-03)

	01-103	Utilities, administration and enforcement (Repealed by 15-05)

	01-104	Nuisances and nuisance abatement (Repealed by 13-11)

	01-105	Sidewalks (Repealed by 06-03)

	01-108	Zoning, planned unit development (Repealed by 06-03)

	01-110	Zoning, residential district uses (Repealed by 06-03, 08-06)

	01-113	Boarding up of buildings in downtown commercial core (15.09)

	01-114	Numbering of buildings and naming of streets (Repealed by 01-122)

	01-116	Streets and rights-of-way (Repealed by 06-03)

	01-117	(Void)

	01-118	City park regulations (12.48)

	01-119	Exemption from SDC requirements for Silver Falls School District concession stand (Special)

	01-120	Amends § 9.04.010, vehicle code and traffic regulations (9.04)

	01-121	Amends § 10.04.010, vehicle code and traffic regulations (10.04)

	01-122	Numbering of buildings and naming of streets; repeals Ord. 01-114 (Repealed by 06-03)

	01-123	Annexation (Special)

	02-101	Zoning, annexation (Repealed by 05-28)

	02-102	Zoning, acreage residential (AR) (Repealed by 08-06)

	02-103	Amends comprehensive plan (Special)

	02-104	Rezone (Special)

	02-105	Building code (Repealed by 10-07)

	02-106	Annexation (Special)

	02-107	High Street mural; plowing Water St. (Special)

	02-108	Hammer Building lien (Special)

	02-109	Nuisances and nuisance abatement (Repealed by 13-11)

	02-110	Parking (Deleted)

	02-111	Amends § 13.70.110, system development charges (13.70)

	02-112	Telecom amendments (Deleted)

	02-113	Hammer Building lien (Special)

	02-114	Nuisances (6.04)

	02-115	SDC update (Failed)

	02-116	Criminal background checks (2.40)

	02-117	Annexation (Special)

	02-118	Recreational vehicles (10.26)

	02-119	Design review preapplication (Special)

	02-120	Annexation (Special)

	02-121	Hammer Building lien (Special)

	03-100	Application and review procedures (Repealed by 08-06)

	03-101	Rezone (Special)

	03-102	Street vacation (Special)

	03-103	Parking; adds Ch. 10.30; amends §§ 10.08.020 and 10.08.030; repeals § 10.08.070 (10.08, 10.30)

	03-104	Annexation (Special)

	03-105	D Street assessments (Special)

	03-106	Adopts Silverton Municipal Code (1.01)

	03-107	Annexation (Special)

	03-108	Street vacation (Special)

	03-109	Design review update (Withdrawn)

	03-110	Amends § 12.08.120, special assessments (12.08)

	03-111	Amends Ch. 15.20, building code enforcement (Repealed by 04-110)

	03-112	Annexation (Special)

	03-113	Lien on specific property (Special)

	03-114	Adds Ch. 5.24, business licenses (Repealed by 08-08)

	03-115	Adds Division III [IV], Ch. 13.90, equivalent assessment connection charge (13.90)

	03-116	Annexation (Denied)

	03-117	Amends Ch. 18.200, site design and use standards (Repealed by 08-06)

	03-118	Amends Ch. 18.85, zoning, acreage residential (AR) (Repealed by 08-06)

	03-119	Annexation (Special)

	03-120	Amends § 9.04.010, criminal statutes adopted (9.04)

	03-121	Amends § 10.04.010, vehicle code and traffic regulations (10.04)

	03-122	Annexation (Special)

	03-123	Petition to install pump station (Special)

	03-124	Annexation (Special)

	03-125	Amends Ch. 17.01, subdivisions (Repealed by 06-03)

	03-126	Annexation (Special)

	04-100	Annexation (Special)

	04-101	Verizon privilege tax (Repealed by 16-03)

	04-102	Street vacation (Special)

	04-103	Annexation (Special)

	04-104	Amends § 13.70.090, system development charges (13.70)

	04-105	Repeals and replaces Ch. 15.08, property maintenance regulations; repeals § 15.20.070, model dangerous buildings code (15.08)

	04-106	Annexation (Special)

	04-107	Annexation (Special)

	04-108	Amends comprehensive plan (Special)

	04-109	Annexation (Special)

	04-110	Amends Ch. 15.20, building code enforcement; repeals Ord. 03-111 (15.20)

	04-111	B Street LID assessments (Special)

	04-112	D Street public hearing (Special)

	04-113	Annexation (Special)

	04-114	Approves urban renewal plan (Special)

	04-115	Adds Ch. 18.210, real property compensation (Repealed by 08-06)

	05-01	Rezone (Special)

	05-02	WEVP Victor Point water LID assessments (Special)

	05-03	Adds § 13.70.190; amends §§ 13.70.070 and 13.70.090, system development charges (13.70)

	05-04	Repeals and replaces Ch. 3.04, city contracts (Repealed by 15-04)

	05-05	NW Natural franchise agreement extension (Special)

	05-06	Ames St. LID assessments (Special)

	05-07	Amends Ch. 15.20, building codes (15.20)

	05-08	Amends § 2.20.020, urban renewal agency (2.20)

	05-09	Amends §§ 17.01.390, 17.01.400, 17.01.410, 17.01.420, 17.01.430 and 17.01.440, subdivisions (Repealed by 06-03)

	05-10	Pawn shops (Tabled)

	05-11	WEVP Victor Point water LID assessments (Special)

	05-12	Amends comprehensive plan map (Special)

	05-13	Alley vacation (Special)

	05-14	Amends comprehensive plan map (Special)

	05-15	(Withdrawn)

	05-16	Amends comprehensive plan (Special)

	05-17	Annexation (Special)

	05-18	Annexation (Special)

	05-19	Purchasing policy (Not presented to council)

	05-20	Annexation (Special)

	05-21	Annexation (Special)

	05-22	Rezone (Special)

	05-23	Street vacation (Special)

	05-24	Annexation (Special)

	05-25	Annexation (Special)

	05-26	Annexation (Special)

	05-27	Annexation (Special)

	05-28	Repeals and replaces Ch. 18.20, annexation procedures (Repealed by 06-03)

	05-29	Annexation (Special)

	05-30	Annexation (Special)

	05-31	Annexation (Special)

	05-32	Rezone (Special)

	05-33	Street vacation (Special)

	06-01	Annexation (Special)

	06-02	Adds § 18.130.015; amends § 18.130.010, public, semi-public and governmental use districts (Repealed by 08-06)

	06-03	Replaces Chs. 12.04, 12.12, 12.16, 12.20, 12.26, 17.01, 17.04, 18.05, 18.10, 18.15, 18.20, 18.25, 18.30, 18.35, 18.40, 18.45, 18.50, 18.140, 18.145, 18.150, 18.160, 18.165, 18.175, 18.190 and 18.195 with Articles 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 of Title 18 [18.01, 18.02, 18.03, 18.04, 18.05, 18.06 and 18.07], zoning (Repealed by 08-06)

	06-04	Annexation (Special)

	06-05	Annexation (Special)

	06-06	Annexation (Special)

	06-07	Annexation (Special)

	06-08	Annexation (Special)

	06-09	Annexation (Special)

	06-10	Adds Ch. 5.28, regulation of payday lending (5.28)

	06-11	Annexation (Special)

	06-12	Northwest Natural Gas franchise agreement (Repealed by 18-10)

	06-13	Annexation (Special)

	06-14	Rezone (Special)

	06-15	Annexation (Special)

	06-16	Rezone (Special)

	06-17	W. Main St. sidewalk repair (Special)

	06-18	Annexation (Special)

	06-19	(Number not used)

	06-20	Rezone (Special)

	06-21	Silverton marine park (Repealed by 06-22)

	06-22	Adds Ch. 12.50, city marine parks; repeals Ord. 06-21 (Repealed by 18-01)

	06-23	Adds Article 12 to Title 18 [18.12], zoning (Repealed by 08-06)

	06-24	Annexation (Special)

	06-25	Adds Article 13 to Title 18 [18.13]; repeals Ch. 18.170, zoning (Repealed by 08-06)

	07-01	Amends Ch. 15.20, building code enforcement (Repealed by 10-03)

	07-02	Annexation (Special)

	07-03	Adopts wastewater facility master plan (Special)

	07-04	Adopts downtown master plan (Special)

	07-05	Adds Ch. 10.32, truck brakes (10.32)

	07-06	Adopts Coolidge-McClaine park master plan (Special)

	07-07	Amends § 10.08.033, parking permit cards and meter hoods (10.08)

	07-08	Annexation (Special)

	08-01	Transportation master plan (Special)

	08-02	Annexation (Special)

	08-03	Amends Ch. 15.20, building code enforcement (Repealed by 10-03)

	08-04	Amends § 8.04.140, noise disturbances (Repealed by 13-11)

	08-05	Adds Ch. 3.12, transient room tax (3.12)

	08-06	Amends Titles 12 and 18 and repeals Ords. 498, 607, 726, 738, 776, 820, 96-126, 00-105, 00-109, 01-110, 02-102, 03-100, 03-117, 03-118. 06-02, 06-03, 06-23 and 06-25, zoning (12.04, Development Code)

	08-07	Rezone (Special)

	08-08	Repeals and replaces Ch. 5.12; repeals Chs. 5.14 and 5.24, business licenses (5.12)

	08-09	Amends § 10.04.420, bicycles, skateboards and scooters on sidewalks and in parks (10.04)

	08-10	Amends comprehensive plan (Special)

	09-01	Amends § 10.08.033, parking permit cards and meter hoods (10.08)

	09-02	Sewer local improvement district (Special)

	09-03	Sidewalk improvement district assessment (Special)

	09-04	Repeals and replaces Ch. 15.16, signs (15.16)

	09-05	Extends franchise (Special)

	09-06	Street improvement assessments (Special)

	09-07	Street improvement assessments (Special)

	09-08	Annexation (Special)

	09-09	Amends § 13.70.120, systems development charges (13.70)

	09-10	Amends Ch. 5.12, business licenses (5.12)

	09-11	Waste Management franchise (Special)

	10-01	Annexation (Special)

	10-02	Amends Title 18, zoning (Development Code)

	10-03	Amends Ch. 15.20, building code enforcement; repeals Ord. 07-01 (15.20)

	10-04	Amends Ch. 13.48, sewage disposal (Repealed by 15-05)

	10-05	(Not adopted)

	10-06	Amends § 13.20.060, cross-connection inspections (Repealed by 15-05)

	10-07	Amends Ch. 15.20, building codes (15.20)

	11-01	Adopts downtown signage master plan (Special)

	11-02	Amends comprehensive plan; adopts economic opportunity analysis (Special)

	11-03	Adopts water master plan (Special)

	11-04	Rezone (Special)

	12-01	Adds Ch. 5.30, social games (5.30)

	13-01	Amends § 9.16.010, discharging guns or other weapons (9.16)

	13-02	Amends comprehensive plan (Special)

	13-03	Adds Ch. 3.16, authority to impose fees (Repealed by 14-06)

	13-04	Adds Ch. 13.200, stormwater system fee (13.200)

	13-05	Amends § 12.48.010, park regulations (12.48)

	13-06	Adds Ch. 13.100, street maintenance fee (13.100)

	13-07	Authorizes explanatory statements for Marion County voter pamphlet (Special)

	13-08	Names unnamed street right-of-way (Special)

	13-09	(Not adopted)

	13-10	(Not adopted)

	13-11	Adds Chs. 8.04, 8.06 and 8.07, nuisances; repeals Ord. 858 (8.04, 8.06, 8.07)

	14-01	Amends Title 18, zoning (Development Code)

	14-02	(Tabled)

	14-03	Imposes moratorium on medical marijuana facilities (Special)

	14-04	Adds §§ 13.08.090, 13.08.100, 13.08.110, 13.08.120 and 13.08.130, public works design standards (Repealed by 15-05)

	14-05	Amends § 12.28.040, display of merchandise on public sidewalks (12.28)

	14-06	Repeals Ch. 3.16, authority to impose fees (Repealer)

	14-07	Portland General Electric privilege tax (Special)

	14-08	Annexation (Special)

	14-09	Annexation (Special)

	14-10	Approves application to amend urban growth boundary (Special)

	14-11	Adds Ch. 3.15, marijuana tax (Repealed by 15-07)

	15-01	Extends moratorium on medical marijuana facilities (Special)

	15-02	Amends Ch. 5.16, regulation of tobacco and electronic smoking device products (5.16)

	15-03	Amends Ch. 5.20, regulation of tobacco and electronic smoking device stores (5.20)

	15-04	Repeals and replaces Ch. 3.04, city contracts (3.04)

	15-05	Repeals and replaces Division I of Title 13; repeals Division II of Title 13; renumbers Divisions III through VI of Title 13 to Divisions II through V, utilities (13.01, 13.02, 13.04, 13.06, 13.08, 13.10, 13.12, 13.16, 13.20, 13.40, 13.44, 13.52)

	15-06	Annexation (Special)

	15-07	Adds Ch. 5.34; repeals Ord. 14-11, marijuana facilities (5.34)

	15-08	Adds Ch. 5.40; amends Ch. 5.12, business licenses (5.12, 5.40)

	15-09	Adds Ch. 8.08, environmental management committee (8.08)

	15-10	Annexation (Special)

	15-11	(Number not used)

	15-12	Adds § 4.1.400(E)(8), zoning (Development Code)

	16-01	Adds § 2.4.160(B); amends §§ 1.5.300, 2.2.110, 2.2.200(G), 2.3.110 and 2.4.110, zoning (Development Code)

	16-02	Adds § 13.04.255, utilities user classifications (13.04)

	16-03	Telephone franchise; repeals Ord. 04-101 (Special)

	16-04	Amends § 1.5.300, Table 2.2.120.A and § 2.2.170(C), number of stories allowed in residential districts (Development Code)

	16-05	Amends § 2.3.180, general commercial district design standards (Development Code)

	16-06	Adds Ch. 3.15, marijuana tax (3.15)

	16-07	Cable system franchise; repeals Ord. 00-123 (Special)

	16-08	(Number not used)

	16-09	Right-of-way vacation (Special)

	16-10	Amends comprehensive plan map (Special)

	16-11	Annexation (Special)

	16-12	Amends § 10.04.420, bicycles, skateboards, scooters (10.04)

	16-13	Alley vacation (Special)

	16-14	(Failed)

	16-15	Amends § 10(f) of Ord. 09-11, biweekly waste management service (Special)

	16-16	Annexation (Special)

	16-17	Adds §§ 4.10.140(M), (N) and (O); amends § 4.10.140(J), annexation review criteria (Development Code)

	16-18	Amends §§ 13.06.020 and 13.10.020, water curtailment during shortages (13.06, 13.10)

	16-19	Amends comprehensive plan map; annexation (Special)

	16-20	Rezone (Special)

	16-21	Amends comprehensive plan (Special)

	17-01	Annexation (Special)

	17-02	(Repealed by 17-03)

	17-03	Right-of-way vacation; repeals Ord. 17-02 (Special)

	17-04	Amends Ch. 3.15, marijuana tax (3.15)

	17-05	Amends Ch. 8.08, environmental management committee (8.08)

	17-06	Amends Ch. 3.15, marijuana tax (3.15)

	17-07	Denies comprehensive plan map amendment (Special)

	17-08	Amends comprehensive plan map (Special)

	17-09	Adds Ch. 3.10, motor vehicle fuel business license tax (3.10)

	17-10	Adds Ch. 2.10, transportation advisory committee (2.10)

	17-11	Adds Ch. 8.12, prohibited solicitation (8.12)

	17-12	Adds Ch. 8.15, prohibited public acts (8.15)

	17-13	Adds Ch. 6.08; amends and recodifies Ch. 8.05 as 6.04, animals (6.04, 6.08)

	18-01	Adds §§ 12.48.125, 12.48.127 and 12.48.128; amends §§ 12.48.010(A) through (C), 12.48.070, 12.48.100 and 12.48.140; repeals Ch. 12.50, city park regulations (12.48)

	18-02	Annexation (Special)

	18-03	Right-of-way vacation (Special)

	18-04	Annexation (Special)

	18-05	Adds Ch. 12.55; amends § 12.48.050; repeals Ch. 12.16, use of city property and rights-of-way (12.48, 12.55)

	18-06	Amends Ch. 3.12, transient occupancy tax (3.12)

	18-07	Telecommunications franchise (Special)

	18-08	Amends Ch. 5.34, marijuana facilities (5.34)

	18-09	Amends Ch. 10.08, stopping, standing and parking (10.08)

	18-10	(May 7, 2018) Northwest Natural Gas franchise agreement; repeals Ord. 06-12 (Special)

	18-10	(June 4, 2018) Annexation (Special)

	18-11	(Number not used)

	18-12	(Number not used)

	18-13	(Number not used)

	18-14	(Number not used)

	18-15	(Number not used)

	18-16	(Number not used)

	18-17	(Number not used)

	18-18	(Number not used)

	18-19	(Number not used)

	18-20	Withdraws property from city limits (Special)

	18-21	Annexation (Special)

	18-22	Adds § 2.2.200(N); amends §§ 1.5.300, 2.2.110, 2.3.110, 2.4.110 and 2.8.150, transitional shelter communities (Development Code)

	18-23	Annexation (Special)

	18-24	Annexation (Special)

	18-25	Adds § 15.20.140, transitional housing standards (15.20)

	18-26	Adds Ch. 5.45, plastic carryout bags (5.45)

	19-01	Approves urban renewal district expansion (Special)

	19-02	Adds Ch. 5.50, polystyrene food service product regulation (5.50)

	19-03	Adds Ch. 12.16, sidewalks (12.16)

	19-04	Amends § 13.04.220, delinquent accounts (13.04)

	19-05	(Pending)

	19-06	Withdraws property from city limits (Special)

	19-07	Amends Ch. 8.08, environmental management committee (8.08)

	19-08	(Pending)

	19-09	Adds § 3.4.100(U); amends §§ 3.4.010(A), intersection level of service standards (Development Code)



-----------------------------

The Silverton Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 19-09, passed July 1, 2019.

Disclaimer: The City Recorder's Office has the official version of the Silverton Municipal Code. Users should contact the City Recorder's Office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited above.

City Website: http://www.silverton.or.us/ City Telephone: (503) 873-5321

Code Publishing Company