1
TITLE 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION ........................................................................................... 1
Chapter 1.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS ............................................................................... 3
Chapter 1.12 RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTION ....................................................... 6
Chapter 1.16 GENERAL PENALTY ...................................................................................... 6
Chapter 1.18 CIVIL INFRACTION PROCEDURE .............................................................. 7
Chapter 1.20 TRIAL BY JURY3 ........................................................................................... 11
Chapter 1.24 CITY SEAL ...................................................................................................... 13
Chapter 1.28 OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER .............................................................................. 13
Chapter 1.30 ELECTIONS CODE ....................................................................................... 13
Chapter 1.01
CODE ADOPTION
1.01.010 Adoption.
The city of Sandy adopts by reference that certain code of ordinance provisions of the
city entitled "Sandy Municipal Code" that the council received June 2, 1975, an order
placed on file for public inspection in the office of the recorder and that has since
continuously been so on file and available for public inspection during regular office
hours, as fully as if this chapter set forth in full the entire contents of the code.
The city of Sandy also adopts by reference Ordinances Nos. 22-75 and 23-75, which
were adopted by the city council after June 2, 1975, and prior to the adoption of the
ordinance codified in this chapter, as part of the "Sandy Municipal Code." (Ord. 20-75 §
1, 1975.)
1.01.020 Title-Citation-Reference.
This code shall be known as the "Sandy Municipal Code" and it shall be sufficient to
refer to this code as the "Sandy Municipal Code" in any prosecution for the violation of
any provision of this code or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to
designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or
portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the "Sandy
Municipal Code." Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and
subsections of the "Sandy Municipal Code," and such references shall apply to that
numbered title, chapter, and section or subsection as it appears in the code. (Ord. 20-75
§ 2, 1975.)
2
1.01.030 Contents.
This code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the
administrative ordinances of the city of Sandy, Oregon. (Ord. 20-75 § 3, 1975.)
1.01.040 Reference applies to all amendments.
Whenever a reference is made to this code as the "Sandy Municipal Code" or to any
portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city of Sandy, Oregon, the reference shall
apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made.
(Ord. 20-75 § 4, 1975.)
1.01.050 Title, chapter and section headings.
Title, chapter and section headings contained in this code shall not be deemed to
govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the
provisions of any title, chapter or section of this code. (Ord. 20-75 § 5, 1975.)
1.01.060 Reference to specific ordinances.
The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer
to or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated
by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference
shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code.
(Ord. 20-75 § 6, 1975.)
1.01.070 Savings provisions.
This chapter shall not affect:
A. Any offense or act committed or done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any
contract or right established or accruing before the ordinance codified in this chapter is
enacted;
B. Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by the
city or authorizing any contract or the issuance of any obligation assumed by the city;
C. The legal status of any nonconforming use;
D. Any tax levy;
E. Any right or franchise conferred by ordinance or resolution on any person or
corporation;
F. The term of office of members of the planning commission and members of all other
city offices, official positions, boards or commissions created under an ordinance
repealed by the ordinance codified herein; these officials shall continue to hold office for
the period of time specified in the repealed ordinance;
G. Any ordinance relating to the boundaries of the city;
3
H. Any ordinance annexing territory to the city;
I. Any ordinance naming, opening, accepting or vacating a street or alley;
J. Any ordinance relating to a street, sidewalk, alley, sewer or other public improvement
or an assessment therefor;
K. Any prosecution, suit or proceeding pending at the time the ordinance codified in this
chapter is enacted; or
L. Any judgment rendered prior to the time the ordinance codified in this chapter is
enacted.
(Ord. 20-75 § 7, 1975.)
1.01.080 Effective date.
This code shall become effective on the date the ordinance codified in this chapter
adopting this code as the "Sandy Municipal Code" becomes effective.
(Ord. 20-75 § 8, 1975.)
1.01.090 Constitutionality.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase is for any reason held to be
invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of this code. The council declares that it would have passed this code, and
each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact
that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been
declared invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this code should be declared
invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full force
and effect. (Ord. 20-75 § 9, 1975.)
Chapter 1.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.04.010 Definitions.
The following words and phrases, whenever used in the ordinances of the city of Sandy,
Oregon, shall be construed as defined in this section unless from the context a different
meaning is intended or unless different meaning is specifically defined and more
particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases:
1. "City" means the city of Sandy, Oregon, or the area within the territorial limits of the
city of Sandy, Oregon, and such territory outside of the city over which the city has
jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision.
2. "Computation of time" means the time within which an act is to be done. It is
computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, and if the last day is
Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded.
4
3. "Council" means the city council1 of the city of Sandy, Oregon. "All its members" or
"all councilmen" means the total number of councilmen provided by the general laws of
the state of Oregon.
4. "County" means the county of Clackamas, Oregon.
5. "Law" denotes applicable federal law, the Constitution and statutes of the state of
Oregon, the ordinances of the city of Sandy, and, when appropriate, any and all rules
and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder.
6. "May" is permissive.
7. "Month" means a calendar month.
8. "Must" and "shall." Each is mandatory.
9. "Oath" includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and
"sworn" are equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed."
10. "Ordinance" means a law of the city, provided that a temporary or special law,
administrative action, order or directive may be in the form of a resolution.
11. "Owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant
in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building
or land.
12. "Person" means natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership,
association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or the manager,
lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them.
13. "Personal property" includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences
of debt.
14. "Preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively.
15. "Property" includes real and personal property.
16. "Real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
17. "Sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
18. "State" means the state of Oregon.
5
19. "Street" includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places,
squares, curbs or other public ways in this city which have been or may hereafter be
dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any
law of this state.
20. "Tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, include any person who
occupies whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
21. Title of Office. Use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board or
commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the city.
22. "Written" includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed or multigraph.
23. "Year" means a calendar year.
24. All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common
and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others
as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed
and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning.
25. When an act is required by an ordinance, the same being such that it may be done
as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed as to
include all such acts performed by an authorized agent.
(Ord. 26-74 § 1, 1974.)
1.04.020 Grammatical Interpretation.
The following grammatical rules shall apply in the ordinances of the city:
A. Gender. Designation in the form of any gender includes the masculine, feminine and
neuter genders.
B. Singular and Plural. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes
the singular.
C. Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and the future tenses and
vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable.
D. Use of Words and Phrases. Words and phrases not specifically defined shall be
construed according to the context and approved usage of the language.
(Ord. 26-74 § 2, 1974.)
1.04.030 Prohibited acts include causing and permitting.
Whenever in the ordinances of the city, any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall
include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing the fact of
such act or omission. (Ord. 26-74 § 3, 1974.)
6
1.04.040 Construction.
The provisions of the ordinances of the city, and all proceedings under them, are to be
construed with a view to affect their objects and to promote justice. (Ord. 26-74 § 4,
1974.)
1.04.050 Repeal shall not revive any ordinances.
The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of such ordinance or
revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. (Ord. 26-74 § 5, 1974.)
Chapter 1.12
RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTION
1.12.010 Generally
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any ordinance or resolution, or
whenever there is reasonable cause to believe there exists an ordinance or resolution
violation in any building or upon any premises within the jurisdiction of the city, any
authorized official of the city may, upon presentation of proper credentials, enter such
building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty
imposed upon him by ordinance; provided, that except in emergency situations or when
consent of the owner and/or occupant to the inspection has been otherwise obtained,
he shall give the owner and/or occupant, if they can be located after reasonable effort,
twenty-four hours' written notice of the authorized official's intention to inspect. The
notice transmitted to the owner and/or occupant shall state that the property owner has
the right to refuse entry and that in the event such entry is refused, inspection may be
made only upon issuance of a search warrant by a duly authorized magistrate. In the
event the owner and/or occupant refuses entry after such request has been made, the
official is empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in
obtaining such entry. (Ord. 24-74 § 1, 1974.)
Chapter 1.16
GENERAL PENALTY
1.16.010 Designated.
Unless otherwise specifically provided, any person violating any provisions or failing to
comply with any of the ordinances of the city is guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person
convicted of a misdemeanor under the ordinances of the city shall be punished by a fine
of not more than five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or
by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person is guilty of a separate offense
for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provisions of the
ordinances of this city is committed, continued or permitted by any such person, and he
shall be punished accordingly. (Ord. 14-75, 1975.)
7
Chapter 1.18
CIVIL INFRACTION PROCEDURE
1.18.010 Establishment and purpose.
A. A procedure to handle violations of city ordinances as civil infractions, subject to the
provisions set forth below, is established, pursuant to the home rule powers granted the
city by Article IV, Section 1, and Article XI, Section 2 of the Oregon Constitution and by
Sections 4 and 5 of the Sandy City Charter.
B. A civil infractions procedure has been established for the purpose of decriminalizing
penalties for violations of certain civil ordinances and for the purpose of providing a
convenient and practical forum for the civil hearing and determination of cases arising
out of said violations.
(Ord. 22-79 § 1, 1979.)
1.18.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply:
A. City Infractions. An offense against the city in the form of a violation of any
provision of the Sandy Municipal Code which provides no specific penalty or provides a
penalty other than imprisonment. All infractions shall be handled in accordance with the
procedures established by this chapter. When an infraction is of a continuing nature, a
separate infraction will be deemed to occur on each calendar day the infraction
continues to exist and separate citations may be filed for each such infraction.
B. Forfeiture; Forfeiture Schedule. The only penalty to be imposed for an infraction is
a monetary penalty called a forfeiture. The municipal court shall, however, possess the
additional enforcement powers set forth in Section 1.18.040. The appropriate forfeiture
to be assessed for a specific infraction will be determined from the forfeiture schedule in
Section 1.18.050. The procedure prescribed by this chapter shall be the exclusive
procedure for imposing forfeiture; however, this section shall not be read to prohibit in
any way any other alternative remedy set out in ordinances covered by this infraction
procedure which is intended to abate or alleviate ordinance violations, nor shall the city
be prohibited from recovering, in a manner prescribed by law, any expense incurred to it
in abating or removing ordinance violations pursuant to said ordinances.
C. Person. The term "person," as used in this chapter, shall be construed to include any
person, firm, partnership, corporation, or association of persons.
(Ord. 11-85 § 1, 1985; Ord. 22-79 § 2, 1979.)
1.18.030 Infraction procedure.
A. Reporting. All reports of infractions covered by this chapter will be made to the city
manager or his designated representative.
B. Uniform Infraction Citation and Complaint.
8
1. A uniform infraction citation and complaint signed by the city manager or his
designated representative may be filed with the municipal court, charging the recipient
with a civil infraction and setting a date for said person to appear before the municipal
court to answer said complaint.
2. The city manager or his designated representative shall prescribe the form of the
uniform infraction citation and complaint but it shall consist of at least three parts.
Additional parts may be inserted for administrative purposes by those charged with the
enforcement of the ordinances. The required parts are:
a. The complaint;
b. The city department record;
c. The summons.
3. Each of the three parts shall contain the following information:
a. The name of the court and the court's file number;
b. The name of the person or persons cited;
c. The infraction with which the person is charged, the date, time and place the
infraction occurred, or if the infraction is of a continuing nature, the date, time and
place the infraction was observed by the city manager or his designated
representative, the date on which the citation was issued, and the name of the
complainant;
d. The scheduled forfeiture for the alleged infraction;
e. The time and place at which the person cited is to appear in court.
4. The complaint shall contain a form of verification by the city administrator or his
designated representative that he swears that he has reasonable grounds to believe,
and does believe, that the person cited committed the infraction.
5. The summons shall also contain notice to the person cited that a civil complaint will
be filed in the municipal court of Sandy.
D. Answer.
1. A person who receives a summons for an infraction shall answer such summons by
personally appearing to answer at the time and place specified therein, except an
answer may be made by mail or personal delivery within ten days of the date of the
receipt of the summons as provided in divisions 2 and 3 of this subsection.
9
2. If a person alleged to have committed an infraction admits the infraction or otherwise
desires to pay the forfeiture without appearing in municipal court, he may complete the
appropriate answer on the back of each summons and forward the summons to the
municipal court. A check or money order in the amount of the forfeiture for the infraction
alleged as shown on the face of the summons shall also be submitted with the answer.
3. If the person alleged to have committed the infraction denies part or all of the
infraction, he may request a hearing by completing the appropriate answer on the back
of the summons and forwarding the summons to the municipal court. Upon receipt, the
answer shall be entered and a hearing date established by the municipal court. The
municipal court shall notify the person alleged to have committed the infraction by mail,
of the date of the hearing.
4. The court may, in any case, after notice, require the cited person to appear for a
hearing.
E. Hearing.
1. Every hearing to determine whether an infraction has occurred shall be held before
the municipal court without a jury.
2. The hearing shall be limited to production of evidence only on the infraction alleged in
the complaint.
a. Oral Evidence. Oral evidence shall be taken only on oath or affirmation.
b. Hearsay Evidence. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing
or explaining any direct evidence, but shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding
unless it would be admissible over objection in civil actions in courts of competent
jurisdiction in this state.
c. Admissibility of Evidence. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the type of
evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious
affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might
make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in civil actions in courts
of competent jurisdiction in this state.
d. Exclusion of Evidence. Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded.
3. The defendant shall have the right to present evidence and witnesses in his favor, to
cross-examine witnesses who testify against him and to submit rebuttal evidence.
4. The defendant may be represented by counsel, but counsel shall not be provided at
public expense. If defense counsel is to appear, written notice shall be provided to the
municipal court ten days prior to the hearing date, excluding weekends and holidays.
10
5. The city shall have the burden of proving the alleged ordinance infraction by a
preponderance of the evidence.
6. After due consideration of the evidence and arguments presented at the hearing, the
court shall determine whether the infraction as alleged in the complaint has been
established. When the infraction has not been established, an order dismissing the
complaint shall be entered in the municipal court records. When a determination is
made that an infraction has been established or if an answer admitting the infraction has
been received, or the forfeiture otherwise paid by the defendant, an appropriate order
shall be entered in the municipal court records.
7. Unless otherwise provided by ordinance, upon a finding that an infraction has
occurred, the court shall assess the forfeiture shown on the schedule established in
accordance with this chapter plus court costs.
8. There shall be no administrative appeal or legal review from a determination by the
municipal court of an infraction violation.(Ord. 22-79 § 4, 1979.)
1.18.040 Enforcement.
A. If a cited person fails to answer the summons or appear at a scheduled hearing as
provided in this chapter, the municipal court may enter a default judgment for the
scheduled forfeiture applicable to the charged infraction, or it may issue a warrant for
the arrest of the cited person for reason of his nonappearance, or it may do both of the
above actions.
B. After a hearing and determination by the municipal court that an infraction has
occurred, the court shall assess the scheduled forfeiture applicable to the determined
infraction.
C. Delinquent forfeitures and those brought to default judgment which were assessed
for infractions occurring on real property or for improper use of real property may be
held as city liens against said real property and collected in the same manner as other
such debts owing to the city.
D. Nothing in this section shall limit the city from revoking or denying any city license or
permit held or desired by a person owing a forfeiture to the city.
E. Nothing in this section shall limit the inherent power of the municipal court to impose
criminal penalties for contempt of court in cases where it deems such sanctions
appropriate.(Ord. 22-79 § 5, 1979.)
1.18.050 Forfeiture.
A. All assessment of a forfeiture for an infraction shall be an amount not to exceed five
hundred dollars.
11
B. Each day a violation continues or occurs shall constitute a separate infraction.
(Ord. 12-85 § 2, 1985.)
Chapter 1.20
TRIAL BY JURY3
1.20.010 Right to trial by jury.
Every person charged with an offense which carries a potential sentence of
incarceration, as defined and made punishable by the City Charter or city ordinance
shall have the right to trial by jury. (Ord. 12-85 § 1, 1985: Ord. 1-74 § 1, 1974.)
1.20.020 Number of jurors.
The jury shall consist of six persons duly sworn to try the cause for which they are
called. The jurors shall be selected as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 1-74 § 2, 1974.)
1.20.030 Term of court.
The terms of municipal court shall be for a period of one year, beginning on January 1st
of each year following the passage of the ordinance codified herein. (Ord. 1-74 § 3,
1974.)
1.20.040 Jury list.
Upon the passage of the ordinance codified herein, and commencing on January 2,
1974, the recorder shall prepare a preliminary jury list, by lot, of not less than one
hundred fifty nor more than five hundred names of persons selected from the latest tax
role and registration books used in the last city election. The recorder, in preparing the
preliminary jury list, shall place thereon only those names of persons who are known or
believed to be possessed of the qualifications described in O.R.S. 10.030 and not
entitled to exemption as provided in O.R.S.10.040.
If for any reason the making of a jury list is omitted and neglected on the 2nd day of
January, it may be done on the first Monday of any month following to serve until the
close of the year, and until another list is made. (Ord. 1-74 § 4, 1974.)
1.20.050 Jury panels.
The jury panel for each term shall be selected on the first day of each term of court and
the recorder shall select one hundred names of persons, by lot, from the preliminary jury
list, to serve as a jury panel until the next panel is selected. No person shall be required
to serve more than one term during any three-year period. A jury panel shall be selected
on January 2, 1974, upon the passage of the ordinance codified herein and thereafter
on January 2nd of each and every year; provided, however, that if the preliminary jury
list is not selected on the second day of January of any year, the jury panel may be
selected on the first Monday of any following month. The jury panel shall be selected by
the recorder in the presence of the municipal judge. No challenge shall be made or
allowed to the panel and substantial compliance with this chapter for selecting the panel
shall be sufficient. (Ord. 1-74 § 5, 1974.)
12
1.20.060 Selection of trial jury.
At least ten days, excluding Sundays and legal holidays, prior to the trial date, the
defendant or his attorney and the city attorney shall appear before the municipal judge
for the selection of the trial jury. The time and place of said selection shall be
designated by the court and the judge thereof shall notify the defendant or his attorney
and the city attorney of said time and place. The judge shall then select, by lot, six
names of persons from the jury panel. When it appears to the municipal judge that any
of the persons whose names are drawn is dead or resides out of the city, the ballot shall
be destroyed. If it appears to the municipal judge, or he has good reason to believe that
a person whose name is drawn is temporarily absent from the city, or is ill, or is so
engaged as to be unable to attend at the time of trial without great inconvenience, the
ballot shall be laid aside, the name not placed on the jury list for the trial for which the
jury is being selected, but such ballot shall be returned to the jury box after the drawing
of the trial jury is completed. The defendant or his attorney may then challenge by
peremptory challenge four of the prospective jurors and the city may challenge by
peremptory challenge two prospective jurors. The order of challenge shall be that the
defendant or his attorney may challenge two and then the city attorney may challenge
one and then the defendant or his attorney may again challenge two and then the city
attorney may challenge one. Additional names shall be selected, by lot, to replace those
jurors challenged. When six jurors have been selected, they shall be notified to appear
at trial at the appointed time and place and shall constitute the trial jury. (Ord. 1-74 § 6,
1974.)
1.20.070 Alternate jurors.
The defendant or his attorney and the city attorney may agree by stipulation to the
drawing of additional names from the jury panel to serve as alternate trial jurors to be
summoned should summons not be served upon any of those persons selected as a
part of the trial jury pursuant to Section 1.20.060. (Ord. 1-74 § 7, 1974.)
1.20.080 Conduct of trials.
Trials shall be conducted as trials in justice court and the rules of evidence shall be the
same as in state courts and shall include applicable statutes of the state regarding the
introduction or admission of evidence. (Ord. 1-74 § 8, 1974.)
1.20.090 Verdict.
Six of the six jurors sworn to try the cause must concur to render a verdict. (Ord. 1-74 §
9, 1974.)
1.20.100 Payment of jurors.
Those jurors notified and who appear at trial shall receive compensation from the city in
the amount of five dollars for each day of attendance upon the municipal court. (Ord. 1-
74 § 10, 1974.)
1.20.110 Powers of the municipal judge.
The municipal judge shall have all inherent statutory powers and duties of a justice of
the peace within the jurisdictional limits of the city. The chief of police shall assist the
13
judge in the serving of subpoenas, notices of jury duty, and such other orders of the
court necessary for the proper conduct thereof. The municipal judge may hold any
prospective juror who disregards the notice of jury duty in contempt of court and may
punish said juror by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars or by imprisonment in
the city or county jail for not more than thirty days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. (Ord. 1-74 § 11, 1974.)
Chapter 1.24
CITY SEAL
1.24.010 Description.
A circular seal depicting in graphic form Mt. Hood and the Sandy River with the words
"City of Sandy, Oregon, 1911" is adopted as the official seal of the city. (Ord. 29-74 § 1,
1974, Ord.2018-24.)
1.24.020 Use.
The city seal shall be prominently displayed in the council chamber. The City Seal may
be used by the City Recorder and other City Officials as needed to water mark, emboss
or otherwise mark official documents. (Ord. 29-74 § 2, 1974, Ord. 2018-24.)
1.24.030 Prohibited use.
The city seal shall not be used for any promotion or commercial or civic endeavor,
program. (Ord. 29-74 § 3, 1974.)
Chapter 1.28
OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER
1.28.010 Designated.
The Sandy Post is designated as the official newspaper of the city for the purpose of
publishing legal notices as prescribed by the Charter and ordinances of the city. (Ord.
30-74 § 1, 1974.)
Chapter 1.30
ELECTIONS CODE
1.30.010 Initiative and Referendum Explanatory Statements.
A. The City Manager or City Attorney share designated and authorized to prepare
explanatory statement(s) for the Clackamas County Voter’s Pamphlet for matters
relating to municipal legislation referred or initiated by petition consistent with the
terms of ORS 251.345 and OAR 165-022-0040.
B. The explanatory statement as prepared by either the City Manager or the City
Attorney shall conform to the requirements imposed by state law and regulation.
(Ord. 2009-04 § 1, 2009.)
14
Footnotes:
1. All references in this code to "common council" have been editorially changed to read
"city council" in compliance with the request of the city manager and city attorney.
3. For statutory provisions regarding the right of trial by jury for any crime or offense
defined and made punishable by any city charter or ordinance, see ORS 221.349.
1
TITLE 2
ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Chapter 2.04 COUNCIL MEETINGS1 ................................................................................... 1
Chapter 2.08 CITY MANAGER .............................................................................................. 2
Chapter 2.12 OFFICIALS' BONDS........................................................................................ 4
Chapter 2.13 CONTRACT PURCHASES ............................................................................ 4
Chapter 2.15 Repealed 05.21.18 .......................................................................................... 5
Chapter 2.16 PLANNING COMMISSION2 ........................................................................... 5
Chapter 2.18 CITY SURVEYOR ............................................................................................ 8
Chapter 2.21 Repealed 05.21.18 .......................................................................................... 9
Chapter 2.22 Repealed 05.21.18 .......................................................................................... 9
Chapter 2.23 Repealed 05.21.18 .......................................................................................... 9
Chapter 2.24 PERSONNEL .................................................................................................... 9
Chapter 2.30 CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD CHECKS ................................................ 10
Chapter 2.52 LIBRARY–PENALTIES FOR PROHIBITED ACTIONS ........................... 11
Chapter 2.56 PERSONNEL–COLLECTIVE BARGAINING PROCEDURES ............... 12
Chapter 2.60 UNCLAIMED PROPERTY ............................................................................ 13
Chapter 2.70 LIQUOR LICENSE REVIEW ........................................................................ 15
Chapter 2.80 EMERGENCY PLANNING ........................................................................... 19
Chapter 2.90 MEASURE 37 CLAIMS PROCEDURE ...................................................... 22
Chapter 2.04
COUNCIL MEETINGS1
2.04.010 Time and place.
Regular meetings of the city council shall be held in the Council Chamber at the City
Hall at seven p.m. on the first Monday of each month; provided, that the city council
shall have the right to adjourn said meeting from time to time; provided further, if said
regular meeting date falls on a legal holiday, the city council shall have the right, at the
last meeting preceding said legal holiday, to adjourn said meeting to any time not
exceeding thirty days; provided further, that advance notification be given. (Ord. 3-93 §
1, 1993: Ord. 22-74 § 1, 1974.)
2.04.020 Special meetings.
The recorder shall call special meetings of the council upon request of the mayor or a
2
majority of councilmen. Requests for special meetings shall state the subjects to be
considered, and no other subjects shall be considered at a special meeting. (Ord. 22-74
§ 2, 1974.)
2.04.030 Joint meetings.
The recorder shall call joint meetings of the city council - planning commission upon
request of the mayor and the planning commission chairman. (Ord. 22-74 § 3, 1974.)
2.04.040 Open to public.
All meetings of the council and of committees thereof shall be open to the public, and
citizens of the city shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard at any meeting in
regard to any matter being considered therein. (Ord. 22-74 § 4, 1974.)
2.04.050 Meeting notification.
All meetings of the council shall be posted in the front window of city hall at least twentyfour
hours prior to a meeting. The recorder shall certify that he posted said notices as
required herein. (Ord. 22-74 § 5, 1974.)
Chapter 2.08
CITY MANAGER
2.08.010 Office created–Authority.
There is created the office of city manager, and the appointee to said office shall have
general supervision, direction and control over all non-elective officers and public
employees of the city in the exercise of their duties and of the work of all city
departments, other than the office of municipal judge, which is specifically exempted
from the operation of this chapter. (Ord. 14-74 § 2 (part), 1974; Ord. 7-72 § 1, 1972.)
2.08.020 Powers and duties.
The powers and duties of the city manager shall be as follows:
A. To prepare the annual budget for consideration by the city council and budget
committee;
B. To act as purchasing agent for all departments of the city, subject to the provisions of
the City Charter; and any purchase over the sum of one thousand five hundred dollars
shall require prior council approval;
C. To act as administrative head of all departments of the city government, subject to
the control and direction of the mayor and city council;
D. To act as business agent of the city council in connection with city business;
E. To prepare and furnish all reports requested by the mayor or city council;
3
F. To recommend ordinances to the city council designed to increase the efficiency of
the city government;
G. To see that all ordinances are enforced and that the provision of all franchises,
leases, contracts, permits and privileges granted by the city are observed;
H. To collect all sums of money due the city, whether by way of fees, liens,
assessments, taxes, special assessments or any other source whatsoever;
I. To supervise the operation of all public utilities owned and operated by the city and to
have general supervision over all city property;
J. To meet with private citizens and interested groups seeking information or bringing
complaints and to attempt to resolve any problems tactfully and fairly.
(Ord. 4-80 § 1, 1980; Ord. 14-74 § 2 (part), 1974; Ord. 7-72 § 2, 1972.)
2.08.030 Supervision of non-elective city employees.
The city manager shall have, in exercising general charge, supervision and control over
all non-elective city employees, the power to appoint and/or remove said non-elective
employees of the city and to have general supervision and control over all city officers,
excluding the position of municipal judge, with the power to transfer an employee from
one department to another to the end that the utmost efficiency shall be obtained from
all departments and from the city government as a whole, and shall designate the duties
employees shall perform, the hours of their employment and all matters pertaining to
their work for the city. The city council may by motion, resolution or ordinance provide
rules under which the city manager shall conduct his office and affairs of the various
departments of the city, and any resolutions now in effect with reference to hours of
work and vacations shall be binding upon the city manager. (Ord. 7-84 § 1, 1984: Ord.
14-74 § 2 (part), 1974; Ord. 7-72 § 3, 1972.)
2.08.040 Appointment and removal.
The city manager shall be appointed by the city council and shall serve at the city
council's pleasure. The city manager so appointed may be an appointed official of the
city who has been appointed to perform other duties, and in such case, he shall hold the
office of city manager and perform the duties thereof in addition to the powers and
duties prescribed for such other appointed office, in such manner that the efficiency and
administration of such other appointive office shall in no way be affected or diminished.
(Ord. 3-86 § 1, 1986: Ord. 14-74 § 2 (part), 1974; Ord. 7-72 § 4, 1972.)
2.08.050 Attendance at council meetings.
The city manager shall sit with the city council at all meetings thereof and at all
committee meetings of the city council at which he is requested to attend and shall have
the right to take part in all discussions coming before the city council or such
committees of the city council and shall have no vote therein. (Ord. 14-74 § 2 (part),
1974; Ord. 7-72 § 5, 1972.)
4
2.08.060 Compensation.
The salary of the city manager shall be such as shall be from time to time fixed and
determined by action of the city council and the council shall have the power to require
an appointed officer of the city, having other duties than that of city manager, to serve
as city manager without additional compensation other than his regular salary, from his
other appointive office or offices. (Ord. 14-74 § 2 (part), 1974; Ord. 7-72 § 6, 1972.)
Chapter 2.12
OFFICIALS' BONDS
2.12.010 Bonding.
The city manager and the city finance director shall, assuming the duties of the
respective office, be bonded for faithful performance of those duties in an amount
determined by the city council. Other city officers and employees shall be covered by
general liability and excess crime and liability coverage through the city’s insurance
carrier.
Chapter 2.13
CONTRACT PURCHASES
2.13.010 Contract review board.
The city council is designated as the local contract review board for contractual matters
pertaining to the city. (Ord. 10-93 § 2 (part), 1993.)
2.13.020 Standards for public bidding and public improvement contracts.
The city council, as the local contract review board for the city, shall act pursuant to the
definitions, regulations and standards of Oregon Administrative Rules, Chapter 137,
Division 30 and Division 40 as they now exist or may subsequently be amended relating
to public bidding and public improvement contracts. (Ord. 10-93 § 2 (part), 1993; Ord.
06, 2013.)
2.13.030 Exemptions.
The city council, acting as the local contract review board, shall act pursuant to the
powers and subject to the public contract exemptions, definitions, procedures and
standards contained in OAR Chapter 125, Divisions 300-360, excluding Division 330, as
they now exist or as they may subsequently be amended. In addition, contracts for the
purchase of goods where competitive bids for the same goods have been obtained by
the state of Oregon or any other Oregon public contracting agency and the contract is to
be awarded to the party to whom the contract was awarded by the state or public
agency, are exempt from competitive bidding so long as the price of the goods is the
same or lower than that paid by the state or public agency. (Ord. 10-93 § 2 (part), 1993;
Ord. 06, 2013.)
2.13.040 Appeal disqualifications.
The person who has been disqualified as a bidder may appeal such disqualification to
the city council as provided in this section:
5
(1) The person shall, within three business days after receipt of notice of
disqualification, in writing notify the city recorder that the person wishes to appeal the
decision;
(2) Immediately upon receipt of such written notice of appeal, the city recorder shall
inform the city council;
(3) Upon receipt of notice of appeal, the city recorder shall notify the person appealing
of the time and place of the hearing;
(4) The city council shall consider de novo the notice of disqualification, the record of
the investigation made by the city manager, and any events provided by the parties.
The hearing shall be public and the appeal decided within ten days after receiving the
notification. The city council's decision and the reasons therefor shall be in writing. (Ord.
10-93 § 2 (part), 1993.)
Chapter 2.15
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Repealed 05.21.18 with Ordinance 2018-06 and established by Resolution 2018-14
Chapter 2.16
PLANNING COMMISSION2
2.16.010 Establishment.
There is established a planning commission for the city. (Ord. 1473 § 1, 1973.)
2.16.020 Membership.
The commission shall consist of seven members, at least five of whom shall be city
residents. The other two members may be residents or may consist of the following:
A. An owner and operator of a business located within the city limits, provided such
owner and operator is a resident of Clackamas County or that portion of Multnomah
County east of 181st Street, Portland, Oregon;
B. A resident within the city's urban growth boundary but outside city limits. Nothing in
this section requires nonresident members. (Ord. 17-91 § 1, 1991: Ord. 1875 § 2, Ord.
13, 2017.)
2.16.030 Powers and duties of commission.
The powers and duties of the planning commission shall be as follows:
6
A. To base all its decisions relating to land use, public facilities, circulation, community
appearance and similar matters on the Sandy area comprehensive plan as now or
hereafter constituted;
B. To recommend to the city council legislation that will implement the purposes of the
comprehensive plan;
C. To recommend zoning amendments consistent with the comprehensive plan;
D. To review the capital improvement programs each year for consistency with the
comprehensive plan;
E. To review and, subject to appeal, take final action on proposed subdivisions and land
partitions;
F. To conduct hearings, prepare findings of fact, conclusions and recommendations,
and perform such other duties relating to land use controls as may be prescribed by law
(e.g., zoning, consideration of conditional use permit, variance and other applications);
G. To review and submit recommendations to the city council regarding any annexation
to or withdrawal of territory to or from the city;
H. To recommend and make suggestions to the council and to all other public
authorities concerning laying out, widening, extending and locating of streets and
parking areas, sidewalks and boulevards, relief of traffic congestion, betterment of
housing and sanitation conditions and establishment of zones or districts limiting the
use, height, area and bulk of buildings and structures;
I. To recommend to the council and all other public authorities plans for regulation of
future growth, development and beautification of the municipality in respect to its public
and private buildings and works, streets, parks, grounds and vacant lots, and plans
consistent with future growth and development of the city in order to secure to the city
and its inhabitants sanitation, proper service of all public utilities and transportation
facilities;
J. To study and propose in general such measures as may be advisable for promotion
of the public interest, health, morals, safety, comfort, convenience and welfare of the
city and of the area;
K. To exercise any express or implied power, right or act pursuant to city ordinances
and state law. (Ord. 14-73 § 11, 1973.)
2.16.040 Commission member occupations.
No more than two voting members shall be engaged in the same kind of business, trade
or profession. No more than two voting members shall be engaged principally in the
buying, selling or developing of real estate. (Ord. 14-73 § 12, 1973.)
7
2.16.050 Hearings officer.
The city council may appoint or designate one or more qualified persons as planning
and zoning hearings officer. The hearings officer shall have the power to conduct
hearings on applications for permits or of contested cases under rules and regulations
adopted by the council pursuant to ORS 227.230. (Ord. 14-73 § 13, 1973.)
2.16.060 Advisory board.
The commission may establish an advisory board with such members to be appointed
by the city council. Advisory members are invited to attend all meetings to lend their
expertise to the commission in an advisory capacity. Advisory members are authorized
by city council to have voting power only in the event of a lack of a quorum of appointed
Planning Commissioners. (Ord. 14-73 § 15, 1973, Ord. 2018-04)
8
Chapter 2.18
CITY SURVEYOR
Repealed by Ordinance 2001-06
9
Chapter 2.21
PARK BOARD
Repealed 05.18.18 by Ordinance 2018-06 and established by Resolution 2018-14
Chapter 2.22
SANDYNET BOARD
Repealed 05.18.18 by Ordinance 2018-06 and established by Resolution 2018-14
Chapter 2.23
LIBRARY ADVISORY BOARD
Repealed 05.18.18 by Ordinance 2018-06 and established by Resolution 2018-14
Chapter 2.24
PERSONNEL
2.24.010 Title.
The title of this chapter shall be "the personnel ordinance of the city of Sandy." (Ord. 2-
80 § 1, 1980.)
2.24.020 Purpose.
This chapter is adopted to establish an equitable and uniform procedure for dealing with
personnel matters; to attract to municipal service and to retain the best and most
competent persons available; to assure that appointments and promotions of
employees will be based on merit and fitness; and to provide a reasonable degree of job
security for qualified employees. (Ord. 2-80 § 2, 1980.)
2.24.030 Adoption and amendment of rules.
Personnel rules shall be adopted and amended by resolution of the city council. The
rules shall provide means to recruit, select, develop, and maintain an effective and
responsive work force, and shall include policies and procedures for employee hiring
and advancement, training and career development, job classification, salary
administration, retirement, fringe benefits, discipline, discharge, and other related
activities. All appointments and promotions shall be made in accordance with the
personnel rules without regard to sex, race, color, age, religion, political affiliation,
national origin, physical handicap, or marital status; and, furthermore, shall be based on
merit and fitness. (Ord. 2-80 § 3, 1980.)
10
2.24.040 Administration of the rules.
The city manager shall be responsible for:
A. Administering all the provisions of this chapter and of the personnel rules not
specifically reserved to the city council:
B. Preparing or causing to be prepared and recommending to the city council personnel
rules and revisions and amendments to such rules.
(Ord. 2-80 § 4, 1980.)
Chapter 2.30
CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD CHECKS
2.30.010 – Purpose.
In order for the City of Sandy government to operate effectively, persons selected for
employment or as a public service volunteer with the City of Sandy, Sandy Fire District,
Boring Fire District and the Oregon Trail School District must have the highest degree of
citizen and public trust and confidence.
All City of Sandy employees and public service volunteers represent the City to its
citizens. Many City, Fire District and Oregon Trail School District employees and
volunteers have responsibilities to regulate and maintain public health and safety. Most
City, Fire District and Oregon Trail School District employees and volunteers,
contractually, have access to public funds and property, and possess access to
privileged and proprietary information submitted to the City, the Fire District and the
Oregon Trail School District in confidence. Additionally, City, Fire District and Oregon
Trail School District employees and volunteers may be required to operate publiclyowned
vehicles.
SECTION 2.30.020 – Criminal record check required.
All applicants for employment and appointed volunteers with the City of Sandy, Sandy
Fire District, Boring Fire District and the Oregon Trail School District will be required to
authorize the City to conduct a criminal offender information check through the OSP
LEDS system. Additionally, applicants will authorize the City to conduct a check of their
driving record and status. The criminal history and driving record/status authorization
form will be presented to the Sandy Police Department at the time the records checks
are conducted. Authorization forms will be returned to the requesting entity after the
records check has been conducted.
SECTION 2.30.030 – Procedure.
A member of the Police Department who is trained and authorized to perform criminal
history (using the appropriate LEDS authorization coding) and driving record/status
checks will conduct the check on the prospective employee or volunteer and orally
report to the City of Sandy, Sandy Fire District, Boring Fire District or the Oregon Trail
School District the applicant’s record, the hard copy of which will then be shredded. A
11
request for a written criminal history report from OSP Identification Services Section can
be made by the employing agency after paying the applicable fee for this service.
SECTION 2.30.040 – Retention of Criminal Record Checks.
The written criminal history report (if one is requested from the OSP Identification
Services Section) on persons who are not hired as an employee or appointed as a
volunteer will be retained in accordance with the requirements of OAR 166-200-
0090(21) for a period of three years and thereafter will be destroyed by shredding. The
criminal history report of applicants and volunteers with a criminal history that are hired
or appointed, will become a part of the confidential personnel file of that employee or
volunteer. Access to confidential personnel files is limited to persons who have an
official need to access such files.
SECTION 2.30.050 – Use of Criminal Record Checks.
Applicants for employment or appointment as a volunteer who have a felony criminal
history, or a history of conviction of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or theft,
will be closely examined by selecting officials to determine if the applicant possesses
the required degree of citizen and public trust and confidence. Each employment or
volunteer selection will, however, be made on an individual, case-by-case basis, taking
into account the applicant’s qualifications, the requirements of the particular job or
volunteer post applied for, and the results of the criminal history check. Factors such as
the age of an offender at the time of the offense, the type offense and subsequent
rehabilitation, and the public sensitivity of the position under consideration, must be
taken into account in evaluating a criminal history report. Hiring or appointing a
volunteer with a criminal history record will require a positive recommendation by the
selecting official and the approval of the appropriate City, Fire District or School District
elected official or governing body, after full disclosure and consideration of the criminal
history and the applicant.
Chapter 2.52
LIBRARY–PENALTIES FOR PROHIBITED ACTIONS
2.52.010 Offenses designated.
A. It is unlawful for any person to detain any library materials belonging to the Sandy
and Hoodland Libraries after its due date. Notice shall be given after the expiration of
time which by regulation of the library such materials may be kept.
B. It is unlawful for any person willfully or maliciously to write upon, injure, deface, tear
or destroy any library material belonging to the Sandy and Hoodland libraries. Notice of
a violation in writing shall be given by the librarian.
(Ord. 14-97 § 3, 1997: Ord. 28-75 § 1, 1975; Ord. 06, 2013.)
2.52.020 Notice–Contents.
The notice shall include the nature of the violation as set forth in Section 2.52.010. (Ord.
14-97 § 4, 1997: Ord. 28-75 § 2, 1975.)
12
2.52.030 Penalty.
A. Violation of Section 2.52.010A is punishable by a fine to be set by council resolution.
Violation of Section 2.52.010B is punishable by a fine equal to the amount of the repair
or replacement costs of the item(s) tampered with. Payment of a fine imposed under
this section shall not be construed to constitute payment for library material thereby
relieving any obligations to return to the library such material.
B. If the unreturned library material in violation of Section 2.52.010 is not returned within
forty-five days from the date the violation notice is sent under Section 2.52.030A, the
library material will be deemed lost and the lendees account will automatically be
assessed a fine equal to the replacement costs of the material lost.
(Ord. 14-97 § 5, 1997: Ord. 28-75 § 3, 1975; Ord. 06, 2013.)
2.52.040 Patronage denied.
The right to borrow materials from the Sandy and Hoodland libraries will be denied to
any person who is in violation of this chapter until such time as the balance owed on
their account is less than $25.00. Use of library facilities may be barred due to
inappropriate behavior, under guidelines set by the Library Board. (Ord. 28-75 § 4,
1975; Ord. 06, 2013)
Chapter 2.56
PERSONNEL–COLLECTIVE BARGAINING PROCEDURES
[Deleted – preempted by ORS 243]
13
Chapter 2.60
UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
All property not held for evidence in a pending criminal investigation or proceeding, and
held for 90 days or longer (60 days or more, plus 30 days after notice), where the owner
has not been located or fails to claim the property, may be disposed of in compliance
with existing laws upon receipt of proper authorization for disposal. The property and
evidence technician shall request a disposition or status on all property which has been
held in excess of 120 days, and for which no disposition has been received from a
supervisor or detective. Oregon Revised Statutes 98.245 and 98.336 govern the
disposition of property held by law enforcement agencies. (Ord. 06, 2013,)
2.60.010 Disposal
Unclaimed property will be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of Oregon
Revised Statutes 98245.
Disposal may consist of:
(a) Destruction
(b) Sale at public auction
(c) Retention for public use
2.60.020 Report and notice of sale.
A. The Sandy Police Department shall complete an inventory describing unclaimed
property. The Chief of Police or his/her designee shall publish notice of intent to
dispose of the unclaimed property described in the inventory prepared. The notice shall
be posted in three public places in the jurisdiction, and shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the jurisdiction of the police department. The notice
shall include a description of the unclaimed property as provided in the inventory, the
address and telephone number of the police department and a statement in
substantially the following form:
“Notice
The Sandy Police Department has in its physical possession the unclaimed
personal property described below. If you have any ownership interest in any of
the unclaimed property, you must file a claim with the Sandy Police Department
within 30days from the date of publication of this notice, or you will lose your
interest in that property.”
B. A copy of the notice described above shall also be sent to any person that the Sandy
Police Department has reason to believe has an ownership or security interest in any of
the unclaimed property described in the notice. A notice sent pursuant to this
paragraph shall be sent by regular mail to the last known address of this person.
14
C. Prior to the expiration of the time period stated in a notice issued pursuant to this
section, a person may file a claim that present proof of satisfactory to the Sandy Police
Department that the person is the lawful owner or security interest holder of any
property described in that notice. The Sandy police department shall then return the
property to that person.
D. If the Sandy Police Department fails to return property to a person that has timely
filed a claim, the person may file, within 30 days of the date of the failure to return the
property, a petition seeking return of the property to the person. The petition shall be
filed in the circuit court of the county in which the property is located. If one or more
petitions are filed, the Sandy Police Department shall hold the property pending receipt
of an order of the court directing disposition of the property or dismissing the petition or
petitions with prejudice. If the court grants the petition, the Sandy Police Department
shall turn the unclaimed property over to the petitioner in accordance with the order.
E. Unless the Sandy Police Department or court upholds the claim or petition, title to all
unclaimed property described in a notice issued pursuant to this section shall pass to
the Sandy Police Department free of any interest or encumbrance thereon in favor of
any person who has:
1. A security interest in the property and to whom the Sandy Police Department mailed
a copy of the notice described above; or
2. Any ownership interest in the property.
2.60.030 Disposition of proceeds.
The chief of police shall cause the sale to be conducted and shall deposit the proceeds
thereof, together with any other money included in the notice, in the city treasury to the
credit of the city general fund. (Ord. 15-79 § 3, 1979.)
2.60.040 Alternatives to sale.
In lieu of a sale of the property under the provisions of this chapter, the chief of police,
with the approval of the city manager, may transfer any portion of the unclaimed
property to the city for use by the city, other governmental agencies, or nonprofit
charitable organizations, or by destruction after the same notices as set forth in Section
2.60.020. (Ord. 15-79 § 4, 1979.)
2.60.050 Destruction.
The chief of police shall cause contraband or illegal drugs and/or substances to be
destroyed at the direction of the court after such property has been provided to the
courts as evidence and is no longer required by the procedure at the courts. Any
unclaimed or found contraband, illegal drugs and/or substances shall be destroyed at
the direction of the chief of police and certification of destruction shall be placed in the
case file jacket relating to such found or unclaimed property. (Ord. 15-79 § 5, 1979.)
15
2.60.060 Perishable items.
Due to health, safety and welfare concerns, nonperishable items will be maintained as
evidence, safekeeping or found property. (Ord. 15-79 § 6, 1979.)
2.60.070 Value less than fifty dollars.
In the case of abandoned property, other than abandoned motor vehicles, which, after
careful examination, appears to have a value of fifty dollars or less, the same shall be
held for a period of at least thirty days. If not claimed within that period, such property
may be disposed of without notice or public sale, but in no event shall any officer or
employee of the city obtain title to or possession of such property upon disposal. (Ord.
15-79 § 7, 1979.)
Chapter 2.70
LIQUOR LICENSE REVIEW
2.70.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide review criteria and administrative procedures
for review of liquor licenses. Per ORS 471.166, the city council may make a
recommendation to the Oregon Liquor Control Commission concerning the granting,
denying, modifying or renewing of all liquor license applications within the city, if so
requested by the Commission. (Ord. 10-84 § 1 (part), 1984; Ord. 06, 2013.)
2.70.020 Scope of provisions.
This chapter shall govern the procedures and criteria for consideration of liquor license
applications and city council recommendation to the Oregon Liquor Control
Commission. (Ord. 10-84 § I (part), 1984.)
2.70.030 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter the words set out in this section shall mean:
A. "City manager" means the city manager or his designee.
B. "Application" means the written request to the city council to grant, modify or renew a
liquor license.
C. "Commission" means the Oregon Liquor Control Commission.
(Ord. 10-84 § 1 (part), 1984.)
2.70.040 License application.
Any person or business subject to a city council recommendation to the commission on
a liquor license application shall make application upon suitable forms furnished by the
Oregon Liquor Control Commission. The application shall contain:
A. The type of license applied for and a description of the nature of the business for
which the application is made;
16
B. The name of the applicant, with address; if a partnership, the names and addresses
of all partners; if the business is a corporation, the name and address of the home
office, and the name and address of the designated agent in the state; if a foreign
corporation, the name and address of the local agent or representative who will be in
charge of the business in the city;
C. The address of the location where the business will be located in the city;
D. The date of application;
E. Any other relevant information the city manager deems necessary for review;
F. The signature of the applicant or agent making the application. At the time of
submission of the application, the applicant will be required to pay applicable fees as
determined by the city council by resolution. (Ord. 18-93 § 4, 1993; Ord. 10-84 § 1
(part), 1984; Ord. 06, 2013.)
2.70.050 City manager's duties.
The city manager shall provide application forms and shall maintain a record of all
applications. The city manager shall review all applications for the purpose of making a
recommendation to the city council. The review may include those subjects contained in
this chapter and the city manager may require the applicant to supply any relevant
additional information to determine the qualifications of the applicant. Upon completion
of the review, the city manager shall make a recommendation to the city council. (Ord.
10-84 § 1 (part), 1984.)
2.70.060 Hearing procedure.
A. If the city manager recommends approval of the application, the application will be
scheduled as a council agenda item. Upon adverse recommendation by the city
manager, a public hearing will be scheduled and notice given pursuant to Section
2.70.070 of this chapter.
B. The hearing will be presided over by the mayor or, in his or her absence, the
president of the council.
C. The city and the applicant shall have the right to present evidence and witnesses and
shall have the right to cross examine witnesses presenting opposing testimony. The city
manager shall present the evidence and witnesses for the city.
D. The applicant may be represented by legal counsel, but legal counsel shall not be
provided at public expense.
E. The hearing shall be limited to production of evidence as alleged in the city
manager's recommendation, unless the city council waives the rule.
17
1.) Admissibility of Evidence. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the type of
evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of their
serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which
might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in civil actions in
courts of competent jurisdiction in this state.
2.) Exclusion of Evidence. Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded.
F. After due consideration of all pertinent information and testimony, the city council
shall make its recommendation. The recommendation shall be based on substantial
evidence relative to the criteria in this chapter and shall be final. In the case of an
adverse recommendation, the specific reasons for the recommendation shall be
announced at the meeting and set out in the city council's minutes. A copy of the
minutes shall be provided to the commission.
(Ord. 10-84 § 1 (part), 1984.)
2.70.070 Applicant notice.
Before the city council recommends denial of a liquor license application to the
commission, notice of the public hearing must be given either personally or by
registered or certified mail postmarked no later than ten days prior to the hearing. The
notice shall contain:
A. A statement of the time and place of hearing;
B. A statement from the city manager of the matter(s) asserted or charged supporting
the adverse recommendation or stating why the hearing was requested;
C. A statement that the applicant may be represented by legal counsel at the hearing,
but legal counsel shall not be provided at public expense;
D. A statement that if the applicant desires to participate in the hearing, the manager
must receive notice in writing, no later than five working days prior to the hearing; and
E. A statement that if participation is requested by the applicant, that a copy of this
chapter may be obtained at the city manager's office.
(Ord. 10-84 § 1 (part), 1984.)
2.70.080 Public notice.
In the event that a public hearing is scheduled, the city, in addition to any regular city
council notice provisions, shall cause to be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city a notice specifying a time, date and location of the hearing and
business name and address of the applicant. The notice shall inform the public that
testimony may be given for or against the application. (Ord. 10-84 § 1 (part), 1984.)
2.70.090 Standards and criteria.
The city council shall make its recommendation for approval, denial or modification of
the liquor license application based on the city council's evaluation of the relevant
18
standards and criteria. The applicant shall be held strictly accountable for the conditions
of the premises. The city council may recommend against the applicant if:
A. The application is incomplete;
B. The applicant neglects or refuses to provide in a timely manner any information
reasonably requested by the city manager or city council:
C. The applicant provides false or misleading information to the city manager, city
council or any city employee;
D. Public opinion weighs against the application. Public opinion may be received by
written or oral comment. Persons who comment on a pending application must provide
their names in order to have the opinion considered. Public opinion will be evaluated in
light of the reasons expressed and the extent to which the persons expressing it are
likely to be affected by the issuance of the license. Greater weight will be given to
opinions of persons residing, working or owning a business within a one-half mile radius
of the premises. The number of persons expressing support or opposition will not, in
and of itself, be controlling;
E. The applicant's premises and the area nearby are heavily frequented by persons
under twenty-one years of age unaccompanied by adults;
F. The applicant has been convicted of violating any of the alcoholic liquor laws of this
state, general or local, or has been convicted of any felony or any misdemeanor
involving moral turpitude;
G. The applicant uses controlled substances or alcoholic beverages to excess;
H. The applicant has maintained, or allowed to exist a noisy, lewd, or disorderly
establishment, or an establishment which creates or is a public nuisance under the
ordinances of the city or laws of the state;
I. The applicant's premises are not maintained in good repair, both interior and exterior,
and kept clean and free of litter, rubbish or dirt;
J. The applicant's premises are unsanitary;
K. The applicant or applicant's premises fail to conform to, abide by, or comply with, city
ordinances or regulations or state laws and regulations;
L. The applicant's premises place unreasonable, excessive demand on city services,
including law enforcement.
(Ord. 10-84 § 1 (part), 1984.)
19
Chapter 2.80
EMERGENCY PLANNING
2.80.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "emergency planning chapter" and may be so cited
and pleaded and is referred to herein as "this chapter." (Ord. 1-89 § 1 (part), 1989.)
2.80.020 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to define the authority and responsibility for emergency
planning, to provide a procedure to minimize injury to persons and property and to
preserve the established civil authority in the event a state of emergency exists within
the city. (Ord. 1-89 § 1 (part), 1989.)
2.80.030 Definition of emergency.
For the purposes of this chapter, "emergency" means any manmade or natural event or
circumstance causing or threatening loss of life, injury to person or property, human
suffering, or financial loss to the extent that extraordinary measures must be taken to
protect the public health, safety and welfare. Such events shall include, but not be
limited to, fire, explosion, flood, severe weather, drought, earthquake, volcanic activity,
spills of oil or other hazardous substances, disease, blight, infestation, utility or
transportation service disruptions, civil disturbance, riot, sabotage and war. (Ord. 1-89 §
1 (part), 1989.)
2.80.040 Authority of city.
Under the provisions of ORS Chapter 401 and applicable municipal charter provisions.
The authority and responsibility to organize for and respond to emergency situations is
vested in each political subdivision of the state. ORS Chapter 401 further authorizes the
governing body or executive officer of each city to establish an emergency management
agency to perform emergency program development, fiscal management, coordination
with nongovernmental agencies and organizations, public information, personnel
training and development and implementation of exercises to test the system. (Ord. 1-
89 § 1 (part), 1989.)
2.80.050 Declaration of emergency.
A. When, in the judgment of the city council, a state of emergency exists, it shall declare
in writing and publicize the existence of the emergency. If circumstances prohibit the
timely action of the city council, the mayor may declare a state of emergency, provided
that the approval of a majority of the city council is sought and obtained at the first
available opportunity.
B. Upon that declaration, the mayor is empowered to assume centralized control of and
have authority over all departments, divisions and offices of the city in order to
implement the provisions of this chapter. The state of emergency declared pursuant to
this section shall specify the area(s) which warrant the exercise of emergency controls.
The mayor shall terminate the state of emergency when the emergency no longer exists
20
or the threat of an emergency has passed.
(Ord. 1-89 § 1 (part), 1989.)
2.80.060 Succession of authority.
A. In the event the mayor is unavailable or unable to perform his/her duties under this
chapter, the duties shall be performed by:
1. President of the council;
2. City manager;
3. Police chief.
B. All references to the mayor in this chapter shall be deemed to refer to the successor
referred to in this section.
(Ord. 1-89 § 1 (part), 1989.)
2.80.070 Regulation and control.
Whenever a state of emergency has been declared to exist with the city, the city council
is empowered to order and enforce the measures listed in this section. However, if
circumstances prohibit the timely action of the city council, the mayor may order the
following measures provided that approval from a majority of the city council is sought
and obtained at the first available opportunity, or the mayor's order will become null and
void.
A. Establish a curfew for the area designated as an emergency area which fixes the
hours during which all persons other than officially authorized personnel may not be
upon the public streets or other public places;
B. Prohibit or limit the number of persons who may gather or congregate upon any
public street, public place, or any outdoor place within the area designated as an
emergency area;
C. Barricade streets and roads, as well as access points onto streets and roads, and
prohibit vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or restrict as an emergency area for such
distance or degree of regulation as may be deemed necessary under the
circumstances;
D. Evacuate persons from the area designated as an emergency area;
E. Close taverns or bars and prohibit the sale of alcoholic beverages throughout the city
or a portion thereof;
F. Commit to mutual aid agreements;
21
G. Suspend standard procurement procedures to obtain necessary services and/or
equipment;
H. Redirect funds for emergency use;
I. Order such other measures as are found to be immediately necessary for the
protection of life and/or property.
(Ord. 1-89 § 1 (part), 1989.)
2.80.080 Acquisition of resources.
Under this section, the city council is authorized to extend government authority to
nongovernmental resources (i.e., personnel, equipment) which may support regular
government forces during an emergency and may enter into agreements with other
public and private agencies for use of resources. When real or personal property is
taken under power granted by this section, the owner of the property shall be entitled to
reasonable compensation. (Ord. 1-89 § 1 (part), 1989.)
2.80.090 Penalty.
A. Any person, firm, corporation, association or entity who violates any emergency
measure taken by the city council under authority of this chapter shall be subject, upon
conviction, to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars per offense.
B. Each day of violation shall be deemed a separate offense for purposes of imposition
of penalty.
C. Where the Oregon Revised Statutes provide for a penalty for the act, commission or
omission, the penalty prescribed herein shall be no greater than prescribed by said
Oregon Revised Statutes.
(Ord. 1-89 § 1 (part), 1989.)
2.80.100 Responsibility for emergency program management.
For the purposes of this chapter, emergency planning and management will be done
according to the city’s emergency management plan, developed in coordination with
Clackamas County, Sandy Fire District and other emergency responders.
2.80.110 Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is, for any
reason, held invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such portion
shall be deeded a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter (Ord. 1-89 § 1 (part),
1989.)
22
Chapter 2.90
MEASURE 37 CLAIMS PROCEDURE
(Ord. 04, 2007)
2.90.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to accomplish the following regarding claims for
compensation under ORS Chapter 197, as amended by Ballot Measure 37, adopted
November 2, 2004:
Process claims for compensation quickly, openly, thoroughly, and consistently with the
law; enable present real property owners making claims for compensation to have an
adequate and fair opportunity to present their claims to the City; provide the City with
the factual and analytical information necessary to adequately and fairly consider claims
for compensation, and take appropriate action under the alternatives provided by law;
preserve and protect limited public funds; preserve and protect the interests of the
community by providing for public input into the process of reviewing claims; and
establish a record of decisions capable of withstanding legal review.
2.90.020 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter the following definitions apply:
(1) Appraisal. Means a written statement prepared by an appraiser licensed by the
Appraiser Certification and Licensure Board of the State of Oregon under ORS Chapter
674. For commercial or industrial property, the term “appraisal” also means a written
statement prepared by an appraiser holding the MAI qualification and evidenced by
written certificate.
(2) Ballot measure 37. Means the provisions added to ORS Chapter 197 by Ballot
Measure 37 as approved by Oregon voters on November 2, 2004.
(3) Claim. Means the written demand for compensation made by an owner of real
property in accordance with Ballot Measure 37 and this chapter.
(4) Exceptions to land use regulation. The following land use regulations are
excluded from the application of this chapter:
(a) A regulation restricting or prohibiting activities commonly and historically recognized
as public nuisances under common law, including Title 8 of the Sandy Municipal Code,
as amended from time to time, and the criminal laws of Oregon and the City.
(b) A regulation restricting or prohibiting activities for the protection of public health and
safety such as fire and building codes, health and sanitation regulations, solid or
hazardous waste regulations, and pollution control regulations;
(c) A regulation required for compliance with federal law;
23
(d) A regulation restricting or prohibiting the use of a property for the purpose of selling
pornography or performing nude dancing; or
(e) A regulation enacted prior to the date of acquisition of the real property by the owner
or a family member of the owner who owned the subject property prior to acquisition or
inheritance by the owner, whichever occurred first.
(5) Family member. Means the wife, husband, son, daughter, mother, father, brother,
brother-in-law, sister, sister-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, mother-in-law, father-inlaw,
aunt, uncle, niece, nephew, stepparent, stepchild, grandparent, or grandchild of the
owner of the real property, an estate of any of the foregoing family members, or a legal
entity owned by any one or combination of these family members or the owner of the
real property.
(6) Land use regulation. Means any City comprehensive plan, zoning ordinance, land
division ordinance or transportation ordinance. A land use regulation does not include
any land use regulation excepted from this chapter, any City system development
charge, or any other City development fees or charges.
(7) City manager. Means the City Manager or designee.
(8) Owner. Means the present owner of real property that is the subject of the claim for
compensation, or any interest therein. The owner must be a person who is the sole fee
simple owner of the real property or all joint owners whose interests add up to a fee
simple interest in property including all persons who represent all recorded interests in
property, such as co-owners, holders of less than fee simple interests, leasehold
owners, and security interest holders.
(9) Property. Means any private real property or interest therein. It includes only a
single parcel or contiguous parcels in single ownership. It does not include any parcels
that are under different ownerships, regardless of contiguity.
(10) Reduction in value. Means the difference in the fair market value of the property
before and after enactment, enforcement or application of a land use regulation as
defined in this chapter.
2.90.030 Pre-filing conference.
1) Before submitting a claim for compensation, the owner must schedule and attend a
pre-filing conference with the city manager to discuss the claim. The pre-filing
conference will follow the procedure set forth by the city manager and may include a
filing fee and notice to neighbors, other organizations and agencies. The filing fee will
be set by city council resolution.
(2) To schedule a pre-filing conference, the owner must contact the city manager and
pay the appropriate conference fee. The pre-filing conference is for the owner to provide
a summary of the owner’s claim to the city manager, and for the city manager to provide
24
information to the owner about regulations that may affect the claim. The city manager
may provide the owner with a written summary of the pre-filing conference within 10
days after it is held.
(3) The city manager is not authorized to settle any claim at a pre-filing conference. Any
omission or failure by staff to recite to an owner all relevant applicable regulations will
not constitute a waiver or admission by the City.
(4) A pre-filing conference is valid for six months from the date it is held. If no claim is
filed within six months of the conference, the owner must schedule and attend another
conference before the City will accept a claim for filing. The city manager may waive the
pre-filing requirements if, in the city manager’s opinion, a pre-filing conference would
serve no purpose.
2.90.040 Claim Requirements.
1) Form, completeness and review.
(a) A claim must be submitted and accepted for filing only using the forms provided by
the city manager. A claim must consist of all materials required by this Chapter. A claim
will not be considered filed under Ballot Measure 37 until the City accepts the claim after
the requirements of this chapter are fulfilled by the owner of real property.
(b) The city manager will conduct a completeness review within 15 days after submittal
of the claim and will advise the owner in writing of any material remaining to be
submitted. The owner must submit the material needed for completeness within 30 days
of the written notice that additional material is required. If the owner fails to provide the
additional materials within the 30 day period, the claim will not be accepted for filing.
(c) The 180-day period required before accrual of a cause of action for compensation in
circuit court under Ballot Measure 37 begins on the date the city manager deems the
claim complete, and accepts it for filing. The city manager will mark the date of
completeness and filing on the claim form and provide a copy to the claimant.
(d) The owner may request an extension for filing a complete claim. A request for an
extension or continuance will be deemed a waiver of the beginning of the 180-day
period required before accrual of a cause of action for compensation.
(2) Claim requirements. A claim will not be accepted for filing without all of the
following information:
(a) Fee. An application fee must be paid in advance of acceptance for filing to cover the
costs of completeness review and claim processing. This fee will be established by city
council resolution.
(b) Claim form. A completed claim on a form provided by the city manager.
25
(c) Identification of owner and other interest holders. The name(s), address(es) and
telephone number(s) of all owners, and anyone with any interest in the property,
including lien holders, trustees, renters, lessees, and a description of the ownership
interest of each.
(d) Property description. The address, tax lot number, and legal description of the real
property that is the subject of the claim.
(e) Nearby property owner information. The names and addresses of all owners of
property within 300 feet of the property, as listed on the most recent property tax
assessment roll where such property is located.
(f) Listing of nearby owned property. Identification of any other property owned by the
owner within 300 feet of the boundary of the claim property.
(g) Title report. A title report demonstrating the title history, the date the owner acquired
ownership of the property, and the ownership interests of all owners. The title report
must also specify any restrictions on use of the property unrelated to the land use
regulation including, but not limited to, any restrictions established by covenants,
conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs), other private restrictions, or other regulations,
easements or contracts.
(h) Copy of existing regulation. A copy of the land use regulation that the owner
making the claim believes restricts the use of the property, or interest therein, and that
the owner believes has had the effect of reducing the fair market value of the property,
including the date the owner claims the land use regulation was first enacted, enforced
or applied to the property.
(i) Copy of prior regulations. A copy of the land use regulation in existence, and
applicable to the property, when the owner became the owner of the property, and a
copy of the land use regulation in existence immediately before the regulation that was
enacted or enforced or applied to the property, that the owner claims restricts the use of
the property and, the owner claims, caused a reduction in fair market value due to the
regulation described in item (h) above being more restrictive.
(j) Appraisals. A written appraisal by an appraiser, qualified as such in the State of
Oregon, stating the amount of the alleged reduction in the fair market value of the
property by showing the difference in the fair market value of the property before and
after enactment, enforcement or application of the land use regulation described in item
(h) above, and explaining the rationale and factors leading to that conclusion. If the
claim is for more than $10,000, copies of two appraisals by different appraisers must be
included.
(k) Narrative. The owner must provide a narrative describing the history of the owner
and any family member’s ownership of the property, the history of land use regulations
applicable to the claim, and how the enactment, enforcement or application of the land
26
use regulation restricts the use of the property, or any interest therein, and has the
effect of reducing the fair market value of the property, or any interest therein.
(l) Statement regarding exceptions. A statement by the owner making the claim of
why the following Ballot Measure 37 exceptions do not apply:
1. Commonly and historically recognized public nuisances under common law;
2. Protection of public health and safety;
3. Regulations required under federal law;
4. Use of property for the purpose of selling pornography or performing nude dancing;
or
5. The subject land use regulation was enacted prior to the date of the acquisition of the
property by the owner, or prior to acquisition by a family member of the owner who
owned the subject property prior to the acquisition or inheritance by the owner [if “family
member” status is claimed it must also be addressed in the title report required by item
(h) above].
(m) Owner statement. A statement by the owner explaining the effect a modification,
removal or non-application of the land use regulation would have on the potential
development of the property, and stating the most extensive development the owner
believes would be permitted on the property if the identified land use regulation were
modified, removed or not applied.
(n) Copies of documents. Copies of any land use actions, development applications or
other applications for permits previously filed in connection with the property and the
action taken. City “enforcement” or “application” of the land use regulation is a
prerequisite to making a Measure 37 claim must be described and identified by the
claimant.
(o) Site Plan and drawings. A copy of the site plan and drawings in a legible 8 ½ by
11-inch format that relate to the proposed use of the property if the land use regulation
is modified, removed or not applied.
(p) Statement of relief sought. A statement of the relief sought by the owner.
2.90.050 Claim review process.
(1) The city manager will assess any claim for compensation and make a
recommendation to the city council on the disposition of the claim. The recommendation
will state that the claim be:
(a) Denied,
27
(b) Investigated further,
(c) Declared valid, in which case the recommendation will further state whether the land
use regulation at issue should be removed, waived or modified, or that the claimant
should be compensated, or
(d) Evaluated in another manner not inconsistent with this chapter or Ballot Measure 37,
including possible City condemnation of the property.
(2) The city council will conduct a public hearing before taking final action on a
recommendation from the city manager.
(3) Notice of the public hearing will be provided to the claimant and to all record owners
of the subject property, and to all owners of property within 300 feet of the subject
property. Additional notice may be sent to the Oregon Department of Land Conservation
and Development, Metro and such others as the City may designate.
(4) The notice will state the date, time and location of the hearing and will be sent no
later than 10 days before the hearing. The notice will describe the hearing process, and
will state how evidence may be submitted.
(5) After the conclusion of the public hearing, and no later than 180 days from the date
the claim was filed, the city council will:
(a) Determine that the claim does not meet the requirements of this chapter and Ballot
Measure 37, and deny the claim; or
(b) Adopt an order with appropriate findings that supports a determination that the claim
is valid and directs that the claimant be compensated in an amount set forth in the
order, or remove, waive or modify the challenged land use regulation as applied to the
subject property.
(6) The city council’s decision to remove, waive or modify a land use regulation or to
compensate the claimant will be based on whether the public interest would be better
served by compensating the owner, or by removing, waiving or modifying a land use
regulation with respect to the subject property; or any other factors deemed relevant by
the city council.
(7) If the city council removes, waives or modifies a land use regulation, it may apply the
land use regulations in effect at the time the claimant acquired the property.
(8) The owner will bear the burden of proof relating to the claim, the devaluation of the
owner’s property and the owner’s entitlement to just compensation. The standard of
proof will be by a preponderance of the evidence.
28
(9) A copy of the city council order will be sent by mail to the owner and to each
individual or entity that participated in the city council review process if the City was
provided with a mailing address.
(10) The city council may establish by resolution additional procedures related to the
processing of Ballot Measure 37 claims.
2.90.060 Conditions, revocation and transfer.
(1) The city council may establish any relevant conditions of approval for compensation,
should compensation be granted, or for any other action taken under this chapter.
(2) Failure to comply with any condition of approval is grounds for revocation of the
approval of the compensation for the claim, grounds for recovering any compensation
paid and grounds for revocation of any other action taken under this chapter.
(3) If the owner, or the owner’s successor in interest, fails to fully comply with all
conditions of approval, the City may institute a revocation or modification proceeding
before the city council under the same process for city council review of a claim under
this chapter.
(4) Unless otherwise stated in the City’s decision, any action taken under this chapter
runs with the property and is transferred with ownership of the property. All conditions,
time limits or other restrictions imposed with approval of a claim will bind all subsequent
owners of the subject property.
(5) A land use regulation waived under this chapter will create a Measure 37
nonconforming use, or a Measure 37 nonconforming structure, as appropriate, on the
property benefiting from the waiver.
2.90.070 Waiver of claims.
All potential claims that an owner knew or should have known exist as of the date a
claim is submitted must be included in that claim if they are to be preserved. Any
potential claim not included is waived by the property owner.
2.90.080 Costs and attorney fees.
If an owner commences an action to collect compensation and the City prevails, the City
is entitled to all fees and costs it incurred, as well as any sum that a court, including any
appellate court, may deem reasonable as attorney’s fees.
2.90.090 Availability of funds to pay claims.
Compensation can only be paid based on the availability and appropriation of funds for
this purpose.
2.90.100 Review of a decision.
A writ of review under ORS 34.010 to 34.102 is the exclusive means to contest a final
decision of the city council under 2.90.050, and must be filed within 60 days of the
29
notice provided under 2.90.050. The owner of the real property that is the subject of the
claim under this chapter is a necessary party in such a proceeding.
2.90.110 Private cause of action.
If the city council’s removal, modification, or waiver of a land use regulation reduces the
value of other property adjacent to a property that is the subject of a claim under this
chapter, the adjacent property owner(s) are granted a cause of action in a court of
competent jurisdiction to recover from the claimant the amount of the reduction. In any
such action, the adjacent property owner(s) are entitled to all fees and costs incurred,
as well as any sum that a court, including any appellate court, may deem reasonable as
attorney fees. This section does not create a cause of action against the City.
2.90.120 Compensation by other.
An individual or entity other than the City may compensate the claimant for any
diminution in value established under this chapter, in lieu of the City removing,
modifying or waiving the land use regulation causing the diminution. A contract between
the City, the claimant and the individual or entity providing the compensation is a
condition precedent to compensating a claimant under this subsection, and must be
approved by the city attorney.
2.90.130 Severability.
If any phrase, clause, or other part or parts of this chapter are found invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, the remaining phrases, clauses and other part or parts will
remain in full force and effect.
2.90.140 Applicable state law, no independent rights.
For all claims filed the applicable state law is those portions of ORS Chapter 197 added
by Ballot Measure 37, or as amended, modified or clarified by subsequent amendments
or rules adopted by the Oregon Legislature or Oregon administrative agencies. Any
claim that has not been processed completely under this chapter will be subject to any
such amendments, modifications, clarifications or other state actions. This chapter is
adopted solely to address claims filed under the ORS Chapter 197 provisions added by
Ballot Measure 37. This chapter does not create any rights independent of those
provisions.
1
TITLE 3
REVENUE AND FINANCE
Chapter 3.04 GENERAL FUND............................................................................................. 1
Chapter 3.08 OTHER FUNDS ............................................................................................... 1
Chapter 3.12 TRUST FUND................................................................................................... 2
Chapter 3.18 ASSESSMENTS AND INTEREST FOR DELINQUENT MUNICIPAL
BILLINGS................................................................................................................................... 2
Chapter 3.24 PROCESSING CHECKS RETURNED FOR INSUFFICIENT FUNDS
OR DRAWN ON CLOSED ACCOUNTS1............................................................................. 3
Chapter 3.28 HOTEL/MOTEL TAX....................................................................................... 3
Chapter 3.30 MONIES OWED CITY..................................................................................... 6
Chapter 3.32 THE RIGHT TO LIEN PROPERTY FOR MUNICIPAL SERVICES......... 8
Chapter 3.04
GENERAL FUND
3.04.010 Created.
There is created a general fund for the general operation of the city. All revenues
accruing to the city, other than those designated for special funds as provided for in
Chapter 3.08, shall be paid into and credited to the general fund.
(Ord. 3-75 § 1, 1975.)
3.04.020 Expenditures.
Checks or warrants may be drawn on said fund for the general operation of the city in
accordance with the annual budget or budgets. The accounts of the city shall be so kept
that they shall show the departments and the respective amounts for which the check or
warrant is issued and paid.
(Ord. 3-75 § 2, 1975.)
Chapter 3.08
OTHER FUNDS
3.08.010 Additional funds.
The city council may create or eliminate other funds by resolution as required by the
state or federal government, or when it is in the best interests of the city of Sandy.
(Ord. 3-83 § 1 (part), 1983.)
3.08.020 Method of making expenditures.
Checks or warrants may be drawn on other funds in accordance with the annual budget
2
or budgets.
(Ord. 3-83 § 1 (part), 1983.)
Chapter 3.12
TRUST FUND
3.12.010 Establishment.
The city council may establish by resolution separate trust funds of the city for the
benefit of designated city services and/or facilities. These funds may also be
established to account for revenues and expenditures of nonprofit organizations for
which the City of Sandy acts as the fiscal agent.
3.12.020 Donations.
The city may accept gifts, devises or bequests of money or property to the respective
trust funds. Donations may be accepted on such conditions as may be approved by the
city council.
3.12.030 Use of Funds.
A trust fund and the income therefrom shall be used exclusively for the benefit of the
programs or facilities designated in the establishment of the fund. Subject to any other
requirements of law, expenditures from a trust fund exceeding $20,000 shall be
approved by the city council; expenditures under this limit may be authorized by the city
manager or designee. Where the city acts as fiscal agent for another organization, the
governing board of that organization will establish its own procedures for approval of
fund expenditures.
3.12.040 Segregation and investment of funds.
Assets of the fund may be segregated into separate accounts, and such accounts may,
for convenience or in order to comply with the conditions or requests of the donor, be
designated by separate names. The assets of the various accounts may nevertheless
be commingled as may be deemed expedient by the city for investment or accounting
purposes.
3.12.060 Accounting practices.
Trust funds established under this chapter are classified as Trust & Agency Funds
under generally accepted accounting principles, and are not subject to appropriation as
part of the city’s budget.
Chapter 3.18
ASSESSMENTS AND INTEREST FOR DELINQUENT MUNICIPAL BILLINGS
3.18.010 Established.
Unless any other provision or section of this code provides to the contrary, any charge
or fee owed to the city will incur to the city's benefit charges to be established by the city
council by resolution.
(Ord. 18-93 § 6, 1993: Ord. 6-85 § 1, 1985.)
3
Chapter 3.24
PROCESSING CHECKS RETURNED FOR INSUFFICIENT FUNDS
OR DRAWN ON CLOSED ACCOUNTS1
3.24.010 Purpose.
The city has incurred substantial employee inconvenience and city expense because of
checks returned to the city for insufficient funds and drawn on closed accounts. The city
is desirous of establishing a process of compensating the city for the expense so
incurred.
(Ord. 4-87 § 1 (part), 1987.)
3.24.020 Procedure.
All checks hereinafter drawn to the account of the city and returned by a financial
institution because of insufficient funds or because they were drawn on a closed
account shall be assessed an administrative processing fees as set by the city council
by resolution.
(Ord. 18-93 § 7, 1993: Ord. 4-87 § 1 (part), 1987.)
Chapter 3.28
HOTEL/MOTEL TAX
3.28.010 Definitions.
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions in this section govern the
construction of this chapter:
A. "Hotel" means any structure or any portion of any structure which is occupied or
intended or designed for transient occupancy for thirty days or less for dwelling, lodging
or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home, condominium, motel,
studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, public or
private dormitory, fraternity, sorority, public or private club, space in mobile home or
trailer parks or similar structure or portions thereof so occupied.
B. "Occupancy" means the use or possession of the right to the use of possession for
lodging or sleeping purposes of any room or rooms in a hotel, space in a mobile home
or trailer park or portion thereof.
C. "Operator" means the person who is proprietor of a hotel in any capacity. Where the
operator performs his function through a managing agent of any type or character other
than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the
purpose of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal.
Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or managing agent
shall be considered to be compliance by both.
D. "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social
club fraternal organization, fraternity, sorority, public or private dormitory, joint stock
4
company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, of any
other group or combination acting as a unit.
E. "Tax" means either the tax payable by the transient or the aggregate amount of taxes
due from an operator during the period for which he is required to report his collection.,
F. "Transient" means any individual who exercises occupancy or is entitled to
occupancy in a hotel for a period of thirty consecutive calendar days or less, counting
portions of calendar days as full days. The day a transient checks out of the hotel shall
not be included in determining the thirty day period of the transient is not charged rent
for that day by the operator. Any such individual so occupying space in a hotel shall be
deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty days has expired unless there is an
agreement in writing between the operator and the occupancy providing for a longer
period of occupancy, or the tenancy actually extends more than thirty consecutive days.
In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending
both prior and subsequent to the effective date of this chapter may be considered. A
person who pays for lodging on a monthly basis, irrespective of the number of days in
such month, shall not be deemed a transient.
G. Motel. See definition for "hotel" above.
H. "Rent" means the consideration charged, whether or not received by the operator, for
the occupancy of space in a motel, valued in money, goods, labor credits, property or
other consideration valued in money, without any deduction.
I. "Cash accounting" means a system of accounting in which the operator does not
enter the rent due from a transient on the records until rent is paid.
J. "Accrual accounting" means a system of accounting in which the operator enters the
rent due from a transient on his records when the rent is earned, whether or not it is
paid.
(Ord. 7-88 § 1 (part), 1988.)
3.28.020 Tax imposed.
For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient shall pay a tax in the amount
of three percent of the rent charged by the operator. The tax constitutes a debt owed by
the transient to the city which is extinguishable only by payment to the operator. The
transient shall pay the tax to the operator at the time the rent is collected. The operator
shall enter the tax on his records when rent is collected if the operator keeps his records
on a cash accounting basis and when earned if the operator keeps his records on the
accrual accounting basis. If rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax
shall be paid by the transient to the operator with each installment. In all cases, the rent
paid or charged for occupancy shall exclude the sale of any goods, services or
commodities.
(Ord. 1-96 § 1, 1996: Ord. 7-88 § 1 (part), 1988.)
5
3.28.030 Rules for collection.
A. Every operator renting rooms or space for lodging or sleeping purposes, unless the
occupancy is exempt, shall collect the tax from the occupant. The tax collected or
accrued by the operator constitutes a debt owed by the operator to the city.
B. In cases of credit or deferred payment of rent, payment of tax by the operator may be
deferred until the rent is paid, and the operator shall not be liable for the tax until the
credits are paid or the deferred payments are made. Adjustments may be made for
uncollectibles.
C. The manager may enforce the provisions of this chapter and may adopt rules and
regulations necessary to aid in its enforcement.
D. For rent collected on portions of a dollar, fractions of a penny of tax shall not be
remitted.
(Ord. 7-88 § 1 (part), 1988.)
3.28.040 Operator's duties.
The tax collected by the operator shall be separately stated on the operator's records
and on the receipt given by the operator. An operator shall not advertise that the tax or
any part of the tax will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be
added to the rent, or that, when added, any part will be refunded unless specifically set
forth herein.
(Ord. 7-88 § 1 (part), 1988.)
3.28.050 Exemptions.
The tax required by this chapter shall not be imposed upon:
A. An occupant who occupies any room for more than thirty successive days.
B. An occupant whose rent is of a value less than two dollars per day.
(Ord. 7-88 § 1 (part). 1988.)
3.28.060 Payment of tax.
All net taxes collected are due and payable to the city on a monthly basis on the
fifteenth day of the month for the preceding month. Any delinquency in payment shall be
subject to a penalty of ten percent of the amount together with interest on the amount
due at two percent per month without proration for fractions of a month.
If the operator has complied with all of the terms of this chapter, and specifically those
relating to prompt payment of taxes, the operator shall be permitted to deduct as a
personal collection expense five percent of the amount of taxes collected.
(Ord. 7-88 § 1 (part), 1988.)
3.28.070 Records.
The operator shall keep complete records separately, itemizing the tax accrued or
6
collected, collection expense deducted, payments made, and interest accruing, which
records shall be available for inspection by the city at all reasonable times.
(Ord. 7-88 § 1 (part), 1988.)
3.28.080 Disposition of tax.
All transient room taxes collected by the city shall be used for the promotion of tourism
and economic development.
(Ord. 7-88 § 1 (part), 1988.)
3.28.090 Penalties.
A. Failure to remit taxes when due shall be grounds for revocation of the operator's city
business license and shall subject the operator to the penalties of a Class "A" infraction.
B. Failure to comply with any provision of this chapter shall be a Class "A" infraction.
(Ord. 7-88 § 1 (part), 1988.)
Footnotes:
1. Ordinances 1-87 and 4-87 each added a new Chapter 3.20. The numbering of
Ordinance 4-87 has been editorially changed to add a new Chapter 3.24
Chapter 3.30
MONIES OWED CITY
3.30.010 - Definitions.
As used in this chapter the following terms shall mean as set out below unless the
context requires otherwise:
A. "Activity or enterprise" means and includes all conduct or activity for gain or
otherwise conducted by an applicant or any enterprise or undertaking for gain or
otherwise.
B. "Applicant" means and includes any natural person or any entity (including
corporation, unincorporated association, partnership, etc.) lawfully capable of engaging
in or conducting activity in the city which activity requires a permit from the city.
C. "City" means the city of Sandy.
D. "City finance director" means and includes the director and any designate other
than the city manager.
E. "City manager" means and includes the city manager or the city manager's
designate.
F. "Permit" means and includes any and all permit(s), approval(s) or other form(s) of
city authorization of whatever nature required by federal, state or local law as a
7
condition for the lawful pursuit of an activity or enterprise in the city, including business
licenses issued under the authority of Sandy Municipal Code (SMC) Chapter 5.08 and
building permits issued pursuant to SMC Chapter 15.04, excepting land use permit(s)
required or authorized under SMC Title 17.
3.30.015 - Authority to withhold or deny issuance.
A. If an applicant for a city issued permit owes money to the city, the city may (through
the offices of the city finance director) revoke, suspend or deny issuance of said permit
until the monies owed are either paid in full or arrangements, satisfactory to the city
finance director, are entered into for payment.
B. Any revocation, suspension or denial made by the city based on the terms of this
chapter shall be set out in writing, describing the basis for the city's action and setting
out the amount deemed by the city to be owed it.
3.30.020 - Appeal of denial--Hearing before city manager--Appeal of city
manager's decision.
A. In the event an applicant wishes to challenge a decision by the city pursuant to
Section 3.30.015, the applicant may, at their option, file an appeal thereof with the office
of the city manager within fifteen (15) days of the city's action.
B. The appeal shall be in writing and include, at a minimum, the following:
1. Information identifying the applicant (i.e., name and address);
2. Telephone number;
3. The type of permit at issue and the action (revocation--suspension--denial)
taken by the city;
4. A copy of the written determination described in Section 3.30.015; and
5. Reason(s) why the city's action is unlawful or otherwise inappropriate.
C. Within ten business days of the date the completed appeal is filed with the city
manager's office, the city manager shall hold a hearing on the matter, unless the
applicant agrees to an extension. At the hearing, the city manager will take testimonial
and other evidence, if any, offered by applicant as well as include in the record any
material offered by the city supporting the city's position that monies are owed and the
amount thereof.
D. After reviewing the material and evidence offered and received, the city manager
shall make a written decision and either uphold, modify or reverse the city's action. The
decision of the city manager shall be final.
E. An appeal of the city manager's decision may be taken by way of writ of review (ORS
34.010 to ORS 34.100) and not otherwise.
8
Chapter 3.32
THE RIGHT TO LIEN PROPERTY FOR MUNICIPAL SERVICES
(Ord.03, 2017)
(Tax on the Sale of Marijuana and Marijuana-Infused products
(Repealed with Ord. 04, 2016))
3.32.010 General Provisions and Procedures
A. When the City provides services or benefits to specific property, the City may, in
addition to any other right or remedy lawfully available to it, assess that property for the
costs of services or benefits relating to it, and make an assessment lien on the
property. The assessment must be recorded with the City in its lien docket and must
be recorded with Clackamas County. The assessment lien is a public record. From the
date of entry of the assessment, the sum entered is a lien upon the land. These
assessment liens will have priority over all other liens and encumbrances except as
may otherwise be provided by state statute and shall accrue interest at the interest rate
established by City Council resolution.
B. Before any charge may become an assessment lien under the terms of this section,
written notice of the proposed assessment must be mailed or given to the owner of the
property shown in the Clackamas County Tax Records. Notice shall be sent or given
not less than thirty (30) days prior to recording in the City lien docket and with
Clackamas County. If the notice is mailed, it shall be certified, return receipt requested.
Failure of an owner to receive actual notice of the proposed assessment will not in any
way affect the validity of the underlying charge or the lien resulting therefrom. An owner
may waive in writing the notice required pursuant to this paragraph.
C. If the owner wishes to challenge the validity or amount of the proposed assessment,
they may do so by filing a written objection with the City Council setting out with
particularity the basis for the objection. The objection must be received by the City not
more than twenty (20) days after the date of the notice referred to in subsection (B),
unless the Council waives the timing requirement for good cause. The objection will
then be scheduled for a hearing at which time the owner may present such evidence as
deemed necessary to show that the amount or validity of the assessment is in error. If
the Council agrees with the owner, the Council shall then adjust the assessment to the
extent necessary and direct the City Recorder to record the corrected assessment in the
City lien docket and with Clackamas County. While an objection is pending before
Council, no assessment shall be made a lien on the City's lien docket. An owner may
waive in writing the right to object to an assessment. (Ord. 03, 2017.)
1
TITLE 5
BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Chapter 5.04 OCCUPATIONS, PROFESSIONS AND BUSINESSES TAX ................... 1
Chapter 5.05 PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION AND SELF EMPLOYMENT TAX ............. 4
Chapter 5.06 SALE AND TRANSFER OF HAND GUNS BACKGROUND
INVESTIGATIONS ................................................................................................................. 16
Chapter 5.07 PAWNBROKERS, SECONDHAND, AND PRECIOUS MATERIAL
SECONDHAND STORES..................................................................................................... 17
Chapter 5.10 LICENSE TAX ON MOTOR VEHICLE FUEL DEALERS ........................ 20
Chapter 5.20 AMUSEMENT DEVICES1 ............................................................................. 28
Chapter 5.24 ADVERTISEMENTS ON UTILITY POLES ................................................ 29
Chapter 5.28 BINGO AND LOTTO ..................................................................................... 29
Chapter 5.32 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISES .......................................................... 30
Chapter 5.36 BUSINESS RECYCLING REQUIREMENTS ............................................ 34
Chapter 5.04
OCCUPATIONS, PROFESSIONS AND BUSINESSES TAX
5.04.010 Person and business defined.
As used in this chapter, the term "person" means all domestic and foreign corporations,
associations, syndicates, partnerships of every kind, joint adventures, societies and
individuals transacting and carrying on business in the city; and the term "business"
means professions, trades, occupations, shops and all and every kind of calling carried
on for profit or livelihood. (Ord. 17-74 § 1, 1974, Ord. 03, 2014, Ord.09, 2015)
5.04.020 Employer to pay tax.
No person whose income is based solely on an hourly, daily, weekly, monthly or annual
wage or salary shall, for the purpose of this chapter, be deemed a person transacting or
carrying on any business in the city; and it is the intention that all license taxes levied
herein shall be borne by the employer for the privilege of doing business in the city.
(Ord. 17-74 § 2, 1974.)
5.04.030 Agent liable to pay tax.
The agents of a nonresident proprietor engaged in any business for which a license is
required by this chapter shall be liable for the payment of the tax thereon as herein
provided and for the penalties for failure to pay the same or to comply with the
provisions of this chapter to the extent and with like effect as if such agent or agents
were themselves the proprietors or owners thereof.
2
Any person representing himself or itself or exhibiting any sign or advertisement that he
or it is engaged in any of the businesses in the city on which an occupational tax is
levied by this chapter, shall be deemed to be actually engaged in such business and
shall be liable for the payment of such tax, and subject to the penalties for failure to pay
same. (Ord. 17-74 § 3, 1974.)
5.04.040 Purpose of chapter.
This chapter is enacted, except as hereinafter otherwise specified, to provide revenue
for municipal purposes and to provide revenue to pay for the necessary expenses
required to issue the license. (Ord. 17-74 § 4, 1974.)
5.04.050 Applicability.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to apply to any person transacting and
carrying on any business within the city which is exempt from such license fee or
regulation by the city by virtue of the Constitution or laws of the United States of
America, or the constitution or laws of the state of Oregon. (Ord. 17-74 § 5, 1974.)
5.04.060 Tax not to sanction unlawful business.
The levy or collection of an occupational tax upon any business shall not be construed
to be a license or permit of the city to the person engaged therein to engage therein in
the event such business shall be unlawful, illegal or prohibited by the laws of the state
or the United States or ordinances of the city. (Ord. 17-74 § 6, 1974 Ord. 03, 2014 Ord.
09, 2015.)
5.04.065 (Ord. 03, 2014 Ord 07, 2014) Repealed with Ord. 09, 2015)
5.04.070 Subcontractors—Failure to pay.
It shall be the responsibility of all general contractors and utility companies working in
the city to provide a list of all names and addresses of subcontractors under their
direction. Failure of any subcontractor to pay an occupational tax result in a "stop work"
order on any project in process within the city. (Ord. 17-74 § 7, 1974.)
5.04.080 Tax fees designated.
The city council shall set by resolution tax fees to be imposed upon businesses, trades,
shops, professions, callings and occupations. (Ord. 18-93 § 1, 1993: Ord. 3-84 § 1,
1984; Ord. 17-74 § 8, 1974.)
5.04.090 Tax year.
The tax year for which occupational taxes shall be charged hereunder shall commence
with the first day of January of each year and terminate with the close of the thirty-first
day of December of each year. The taxing year shall begin with the first day of January,
and all taxes shall be due and payable on the first day of January of each year, which
shall be in advance for the ensuing year, and if not paid before the first day of February
of the respective year, the license fee will be delinquent and the penalties and rights
given the city under this chapter may be imposed as hereinafter set forth, subject to
further provisions set forth in Section 5.04.100. (Ord. 17-74 § 9, 1974.)
3
5.04.100 Separate businesses—Branch establishments.
If any person is engaged in operating or carrying on in the city more than one trade,
shop, profession, occupation, business or calling, then such person shall pay the
occupational tax prescribed for as many of said trades, businesses, professions,
occupations, shops or callings as are carried on by such person.
Each branch establishment of business or location of a business conducted by any
person shall, for the purposes hereof, be a separate business and subject to the tax
therefor herein provided, except that warehouses used solely incidental in connection
with a business licensed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and operated by the
person conducting such business shall not be separate places of business or branch
establishments. (Ord. 17-74 § 10, 1974.)
5.04.110 Proration of tax.
Occupational taxes for persons engaged in any trade, shop, business, occupation,
profession or calling after July 1st shall be prorated at one-half the full year rate. (Ord.
17-74 § 11, 1974.)
5.04.120 Application for license.
On or before the first day of January of each and every tax year as herein provided,
after the passage of the ordinance codified herein, every person as herein defined,
engaged in business as defined herein, in the city, which said businesses are in this
chapter scheduled and designated, shall make application to the city recorder upon
suitable blanks furnished by the city, for a license to carry on his business for the
license year and at the time of filing same shall make payment of the tax fee herein
required. Said application shall be filed with the recorder for use of city officials. (Ord.
17-74 § 12, 1974.)
5.04.130 Transfer or assignment.
No transfer or assignment of any occupational tax herein provided shall be made
without consent of the city manager. An entry of such transfer shall be made by the
recorder in the record of taxes, for which entry the recorder shall charge and receive the
sum of ten dollars. (Ord. 17-74 § 13, 1974.)
5.04.140 Compliance—Delinquent fee.
It is unlawful for any person to willfully make any false or misleading statement to the
recorder in his application for the purpose of determining the amount of any
occupational tax herein provided to be paid by any such person, or to fail or refuse to
comply with any of the provisions of this chapter to be complied with or observed by
such person, or to fail or refuse to pay before, the same shall be delinquent, any
occupational tax or penalty required to be paid by any such person.
In the event any person required to pay an occupational tax fails or neglects to pay the
same before the same becomes delinquent, the recorder shall collect upon the payment
thereof and in addition thereto a penalty of five percent thereof for each calendar month
or fraction thereof the same shall be delinquent.
4
The conviction of any person for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall
not operate to relieve such person from paying any occupational tax or penalty
thereupon for which such person shall be liable, nor shall the payment of any such tax
be a bar to or prevent any prosecution in the city municipal court of any complaint for
the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 17-74 § 14, 1974.)
5.04.150 City rights—Reclassification and change in fees.
Nothing herein contained shall be taken or construed as vesting any right in any
licensee as a contract obligation on the part of the city as to the amount or character of
license hereunder, and such occupational tax may be increased or decreased in any or
all instances at any time by said city, and any trade, business, profession or occupation
herein scheduled may be reclassified or sub classified at any time, and all occupational
taxes herein levied shall be due and payable in advance. (Ord. 17-74 § 15, 1974.)
5.04.160 Violation—Penalty.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall upon conviction thereof
in the municipal court of the city, be punished by a fine of not to exceed one hundred
dollars, or by imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed thirty days, or by both fine
and imprisonment, in the discretion of the municipal judge. (Ord. 17-74 § 16, 1974.)
5.04.170 Legal action by city.
In addition to the penalty provided for the violation of this chapter, and as separate and
distinct remedies, the city may sue in any court of competent jurisdiction to obtain
judgment and enforce collection of the occupational taxes, or any of them, due under
this chapter, and may avail itself of the right of mandamus or injunction in such courts to
properly enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 17-74 § 17, 1974.)
5.04.180 Receipt and disbursement of moneys.
The recorder is authorized to receive such occupational taxes on and after the first day
of the month immediately preceding the first day of the license year for which it is paid.
Said moneys received from such occupational taxes shall be placed in the general fund.
5.04.190 Display of license.
Occupational tax licenses (business licenses) shall be openly displayed in the place of
business so taxed, if such place of business is within the city, or shall be carried by
these persons, their employees or agents, engaged in business in the city but whose
place of business is outside the city. (Ord. 17-74 § 19, 1974.)
Chapter 5.05
PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION AND SELF EMPLOYMENT TAX
5.05.005 Created-Short title.
A. There is created a business tax known as a "public transportation payroll and selfemployment
tax."
5
B. Short title. The ordinance codified in this chapter may be referred to as the "public
transportation payroll and self-employment tax" ordinance, and the tax imposed by this
chapter shall be known as "payroll and self-employment tax" and shall be added to the
Sandy Code as follows.
(Ord. 99-03 (part), 1999.)
5.05.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings unless
the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended:
"Association" means any club, group or organization, whether organized for business
purposes, civic purposes, religious purposes or other purposes.
"Business entity" means any sole proprietorship, self-employed person, partnership,
and limited partnership, corporation including nonprofit corporations engaged in any
business enterprise, and any firm, association or entity of any kind engaged in business.
This term shall also include any personal representative or assignee of any business
entity.
"City" means the city of Sandy.
"Collector" means the city collector of the city. This may be an employee of the city or a
contract agent or agency as the city council shall from time to time determine. The city
manager shall have supervisory responsibilities over the collector.
"Commission merchant" or "commission employee" means any person who engages in
the sale of goods for compensation in the form of a commission only and is subject to
withholding under ORS Chapter 316. This also includes any person who buys and
resells goods if the person does not maintain a retail store or wholesale sales floor and
does not store goods except during a short period before transportation to the buyer.
"Corporation" means any business corporation and any nonprofit corporation organized
under the laws of this state, or under the laws of any jurisdiction.
"Employee" means any individual employed by another, for wages. This also includes
all real estate sales people employed by a real estate broker and paid on a commission
basis, and all mechanics who perform services for customers of an auto repair shop and
who are paid by the owner of the auto shop for each repair or maintenance job done
provided that such remuneration is subject to withholding under ORS Chapter 316.
"Employer" has the meaning prescribed by ORS 267.380.
"Firm" means any sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, joint venture, limited
partnership or other form of organization formed for the purpose of doing business.
"Individual" means a natural person.
6
"Local transit area" means designated areas within a boundary established by the city
which will receive benefits of operation, management or delivery of a transit system.
"Net earnings from self-employment" has the definition as prescribed by ORS 267.380.
"Payroll expense" means the wages paid by any employer to any employee. Payroll
expenses also include the commission received by a commission merchant or a
commission employee if such a person is subject to withholding under ORS Chapter
316.
"Personal representative" means any trustee, receiver, executor, administrator,
guardian, conservator or similar personal representative of any person, firm, association
or corporation.
"Taxpayer" means any person, firm, corporation or association required by this chapter
to file a return or to pay a payroll and self-employment tax.
"Wages" as prescribed by ORS 267.380.
(Ord. 99-03 (part), 1999.)
5.05.020 Application.
Doing business in the city.
A. The payroll and self-employment tax shall apply only to persons, firms, corporations
and associations doing business within the boundaries of the city of Sandy.
B. A person, firm, corporation or association is doing business within the boundaries of
the local transit area if such entity does any of the following:
1. Maintains a place of business in the city;
2. Conducts business as a home occupation.
3. Receives taxable income due to business activity conducted in the City.
(Ord. 99-03 (part), 1999.)
5.05.030 Payroll and self-employment tax imposed.
To carry out the purposes set forth herein, an excise tax is imposed and levied on every
person, firm, corporation or association doing business within the boundaries of the
local transit area, which employs one or more employees, or contracts orally or in
writing with any commission merchant or commission employee. For the same
purposes, a tax is imposed on each individual's net earnings from self-employment and
hereinafter shall be included when there is a reference to payroll and self-employment
tax. The amount of the tax shall be .006 (0.6 percent) of the total payroll expense of
each taxpayer or of the individual's net earnings from self-employment as the case may
7
be. The payroll and self-employment tax shall be in full force and effect from and after
January 1, 2000, and shall apply to payroll expense and net earnings from selfemployment
incurred after that date. This tax is imposed for the provision of public
transportation services within the local transit area in order to provide for the business
community to carry a share of the costs of local government in return for the benefits
and opportunities available because of the city government and services. (Ord. 99-03
(part), 1999.)
5.05.040 Apportionment of tax.
The payroll and self-employment tax applies to the payrolls of employees either working
or being paid within the local transit area or doing business within the local transit area
unless a portion of or all of the payroll is subject to a like type tax by TriMet. If an
employer employs or pays some individuals for work performed within the local transit
area and employs or pays some individuals for work performed outside of the local
transit area who are subject to TriMet tax, then the tax shall apply only to the payroll
covering employees working or being paid within the local transit area who are not
subject to TriMet tax. If any employee spends part of his working hours within the city
and part outside of the city, the fraction or percentage of the payroll of that employee to
be taxed shall be determined as follows:
A. If the employee's compensation depends on the amount of sales or volume of repair
work or other services done, only the payroll attributable to sales made or services done
in the local transit area shall be subject to the payroll tax.
B. If the employee is paid on any other basis, the fraction or percentage of the payroll
concerning that employee to be taxed shall equal the fraction or percentage of the
employee's working hours spent in the local transit area. The same apportionment is
applicable to net earnings from self-employment if any of such earnings are subject to
the TriMet payroll and self-employment tax.(Ord. 99-03 (part), 1999.)
5.05.050 Alternate method of apportioning tax.
Any taxpayer may, at the taxpayer's sole option, propose an alternate method to the
methods of apportioning the payroll tax set out in the preceding section of this chapter.
If, due to the circumstances of the taxpayer's business, the methods set out in the
preceding section result in more of the taxpayer's payroll being taxed than can
reasonably be attributed to the connection of the taxpayer and the employees,
commission merchants or commission employees within the local transit district, and if
the proposed alternate method does provide for a reasonably accurate proportion of the
taxpayer's payroll to be subject to the tax, the collector may approve the alternate
method and the amount of payroll and self-employment tax owed by the taxpayer shall
be the amount determined by the alternate method. (Ord. 99-03 (part), 1999.)
5.05.060 Fixed percentage.
If the collector finds that the percentage of any taxpayer's payroll required to be
apportioned to business done in the local transit area remains stable with little variation,
the collector may notify the taxpayer that a fixed percentage has been established and
8
that the percentage does not have to be calculated when each return is filed. If the
taxpayer objects within thirty days of receiving such notice, the fixed percentage shall
not be put into effect and the percentage shall continue to be determined as before. If
the taxpayer does not object, such fixed percentage shall remain in effect until changed
by action of the collector, or changed by the taxpayer as follows: At any time the use of
the fixed percentage may be discontinued, at the sole option of the taxpayer, by the
taxpayer giving thirty days notice to the collector. Each taxpayer whose payroll tax is
determined by use of a fixed percentage under this section has a continuing duty to
notify the collector immediately of any significant change in conditions which would
change the proportion of the payroll reasonably attributable to business done or work
done in the local transit district. The collector may change or discontinue the use of a
fixed percentage at any time. (Ord. 99-03 (part), 1999.)
5.05.070 Employer located outside of local transit district.
Employers located outside of the local transit area are subject to the payroll and selfemployment
tax if any employee, commission merchant or commission employee of the
employer does business in the local transit area in any way designated in Section
5.05.020. Each such employer shall contact the city collector to obtain forms and shall
file all returns required by this chapter. (Ord. 99-03 (part), 1999.)
5.05.080 Exceptions.
A. Wages which are excluded as remuneration paid under ORS 267.380.
B. Any payroll of any employer subject to the TriMet payroll or self-employment tax.
(Ord. 99-03 (part), 1999.)
5.05.090 Nature of the tax.
The tax imposed by this chapter is a tax on persons, firms, corporations and
associations doing business in the local transit area. It is not a tax on employees. The
payroll and self-employment tax shall not be withheld by the employer from the
employee's compensation. (Ord. 99-03 (part), 1999.)
5.05.100 Date due, returns, payments, prepayments and extensions.
A. Taxpayers shall comply with the following requirements concerning returns,
payments, prepayments and extensions.
B. Taxes shall be determined for:
1. Payroll: each quarter of the calendar year, and the tax due for each quarter of the
calendar year shall be paid on or before April 30, July 31, October 31, and January 31.
2. Self-employment (this applies to the business owner only; taxes for employees must
be reported as payroll, above): annually, and the tax due for each calendar year shall be
paid on or before April 15th of the following year.
9
Each taxpayer shall file a return, on a form to be furnished by the collector, and file the
same along with payment of the tax, on or before the date payment is due.
C. Extensions for filing may be granted by the collector for good and sufficient cause
shown, such as events outside the control of the taxpayer and which could not have
been avoided by prudent business practices. Such extensions shall be for not more
than thirty days. If the collector grants an extension under this subsection, the taxpayer
shall pay interest at the rate of one and one-half percent per month on the payroll and
self-employment tax due and shall pay no other penalty or late charge.
(Ord. 99-03 (part), 1999.)
5.05.110 Rebates.
A. The collector may request approval from the city council to grant tax rebates or
credits based on the financial performance of the transportation fund, giving due
consideration to projected operating expenses and prudent reserves.
B. Rebates will be returned to taxpayers on a pro-rata basis less costs of administration
of such rebates and any incentive charges.
(Ord. 99-03 (part), 1999.)
5.05.120 Collector's duties.
The collector shall have the following duties in connection with the payroll and selfemployment
tax:
A. Keep accurate records of all returns and of all sums received for payroll and selfemployment
tax. Such records shall contain the names and addresses of each
taxpayer, and the dates and amounts of payments. The nature of installment payments
shall be indicated on the records. The collector shall keep the original returns on file for
a period of not less than three years after filing;
B. Enforce the provisions of this chapter;
C. Prepare forms and instructions for the returns and payments required by this chapter;
D. Examine returns, and, for any returns appearing to be incorrect, make inquiries,
investigations and adjustments in the amount of tax due;
E. Where necessary to determine accurate figures for determining the amount of tax
due, examine books, records and information stored in computers of any taxpayer,
provided that each city officer or employee acting under this chapter shall identify
himself or herself and request the information desired. If the officer or employee is
refused admission to any place of business or refused access to any records or
computer memory, the collector or employee shall leave the premises and shall seek an
appropriate court order, with the assistance of the city attorney, to obtain access to the
information needed;
10
F. The collector may delegate duties assigned to the collector in this chapter to any
officer or employee under the collector's supervision, provided that the collector shall
approve the form of all returns and written instructions;
G. The collector shall prepare pamphlets for distribution to the public, clearly explaining
the payroll and self-employment tax and the returns and payments required;
H. The collector shall perform all of the other duties assigned to the collector by this
chapter.
(Ord. 99-03 (part), 1999.)
5.05.130 Penalties and interest.
A. Original Delinquency. Any operator who has not been granted an extension of time
for filing a return or remittance of tax due and who fails to remit any tax imposed by
Section 5.05.030, et seq. prior to delinquency, shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the
amount of tax due in addition to the amount of the tax.
B. Continued Delinquency. Any operator who has not been granted an extension of time
for filing a return or remittance of tax due, and who failed to pay any delinquent
remittance on or before a period of thirty days following the date on which the
remittance last became delinquent, shall pay a second delinquency penalty of fifteen
percent of the amount of the tax due plus the amount of the tax and the ten percent
penalty first imposed.
C. Fraud. If the collector determines that the failure to file a return or that the
nonpayment of any remittance due under Section 5.05.030, et seq., is due to fraud or
intent to evade the provisions thereof, a penalty of twenty-five percent of the amount of
the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections A and B
of this section.
D. Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit a tax
imposed by Section 5.05.030, et seq., shall pay interest at the rate of one and one-half
percent per month or a fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax due, exclusive of
penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.
E. Penalties Merged with Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues
under provisions of this section shall be merged and become a part of the tax herein
required to be paid. Payments shall first be applied to penalties imposed, then to
interest accrued, then taxes due.
F. Attorney Fees. In the event it becomes necessary for an enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter for the city of Sandy to incur attorney fees expense and cost,
the tax payer shall be assessed any such expense and/or cost and it shall be due and
owing upon billing and shall bear interest at the rate of one and one-half percent per
month.
11
G. Imposition of Civil Penalties. An imposition of any civil penalties, interest, fees, or
costs by this section shall not be a bar for any prosecution under Section 5.05.240.
(Ord. 99-03 (part), 1999.)
5.05.140 Failure to file, failure to pay, underpayment.
The following rules apply when a taxpayer fails to file a return, fails to pay the payroll
and self-employment tax when due or pays less than the amount due:
A. If a taxpayer fails to make a return, the collector shall prepare an estimate of the
amount of payroll and self-employment tax due from the taxpayer, based on the best
information available to the collector. The collector may make investigations to assist in
making the estimate. The collector may consider the number of employees, the wages
or other compensation customarily paid in the type of business, the volume of business
done and customary commissions or bonuses paid to employees in the same type of
business, and any other relevant matters. The collector may estimate the compensation
customary in the business by comparing returns filed by other taxpayers in the same
business or similar businesses. When the collector estimates the payroll and selfemployment
tax, the amount of the interest and late charge provided by this chapter
shall be added to the taxes due. The collector shall notify the taxpayer of the amount
due. Such notification shall be in writing and shall contain a brief description of the
method and estimated figures used in arriving at the estimated tax. Any taxpayer may
dispute the amount of the estimated tax by filing, within thirty days of notification of the
estimated tax, a tax return accompanied by payment of the entire balance due, together
with interest and late charge due. Such return shall be processed like any late return,
and shall establish the payroll tax liability of the taxpayer in place of the estimated tax
prepared by the collector. The collector may, however, later determine that the amount
shown on the return is insufficient, so there is a deficiency, in the same manner as in
the case of other returns.
B. If the collector determines, by examining available evidence that the amount of
payroll and self-employment tax paid by any taxpayer is less than the amount required
by this chapter, the collector shall notify the taxpayer of the deficiency. The collector
may use any of the methods authorized by Sections 5.05.010, et seq., of this chapter to
determine whether a deficiency exists and to determine the amount of such deficiency.
The collector shall thereupon notify the taxpayer of the deficiency. Such notice shall be
in writing and shall state not only the amount of the deficiency, but also the methods
and estimates used in arriving at the amount of deficiency. If the taxpayer does not
object within thirty days of the date of receiving such notice, the taxpayer shall be
deemed to have accepted the revised figures for payroll tax liability. If the taxpayer does
file a written objection within the time specified, the taxpayer shall pay the tax, together
with penalties and interest, under protest, and may thereupon, pursue administrative
and judicial remedies as provided by ordinance and by state law, to seek a refund.
C. If the collector finds that any taxpayer has overpaid, the collector shall notify the
taxpayer of the taxpayer's overpayment and shall refund the amount of the overpayment
to the taxpayer in accordance with Section 5.05.180.
12
D. When the collector notifies any taxpayer of any estimated tax, alleged overpayment
or refund, the collector shall include in the notice clear instructions on how, when and
where the taxpayer may protest or appeal the decision.
E. If a taxpayer or any person, firm, association or corporation required by this chapter
to pay a tax or to file a return shall fail to file any return for any year, such failure to file
shall constitute a continuing offense against the city and the collector may proceed to
estimate and collect the payroll and self-employment tax at any time. In all other cases,
no increase shall be made in any taxpayer's payroll tax liability unless the first notice of
such increase is received by the taxpayer within three years of the time the return was
first due.
(Ord. 99-03 (part), 1999.)
5.05.150 Tax as debt-Termination of taxable period and immediate assessment of
tax.
A. Every tax imposed upon employers measured by wages paid to employees and upon
self-employed persons measured by net earnings from self-employment, and all
increases, interest and penalties thereon shall become, from the time such liability is
incurred, a personal debt, due the city, from the person or persons liable therefor.
B. If the collector finds that the taxpayer designs to depart quickly from the state or to
remove his property therefrom, or to do any other act tending to prejudice or to render
wholly or partially ineffectual proceedings to collect the tax for any past quarter or the
tax quarter then current, unless such proceedings be brought without delay, the
collector shall declare the current taxable period for such taxpayer immediately
terminated and shall cause notice of such finding and declaration to be given the
taxpayer. Simultaneously, the collector, on the basis of the best information available to
it, shall assess a tax for such terminated period and for the preceding tax quarter (if no
return has been filed therefor, whether or not the time otherwise allowed by law for filing
such return and paying the tax has expired), and shall assess additional tax for any
quarters open to assessment under provisions of the applicable law. The collector shall
give notice to the taxpayer of all taxes so assessed. Such taxes shall thereupon
become immediately due and payable as soon as the notice and findings are issued to
the taxpayer or mailed to his last known address. In any proceeding in court brought to
enforce payment of taxes made due and payable by virtue of the provisions of this
section, the findings of the collector, made as provided in this section, whether made
after notice to the taxpayer or not, shall be for all purposes presumptive evidence of the
taxpayer's design, and the certificate of the collector if the mailing or issuing of the
notice and findings specified in this section is presumptive.
(Ord. 99-03 (part), 1999.)
5.05.160 Penalty for failure to file tax report and remit taxes due.
A. Any tax that is not paid within 30 days after it is due, or within five days, in the case
of taxes that may be immediately due pursuant to Section 5.05.150, is delinquent,
unless the taxpayer has secured the payment of the amount due by bond, deposit, or
13
otherwise and the collector, in its sole discretion, has approved the security for the
payment.
B. The city may seek any and all remedies available to it Oregon law, or the city’s
charter or ordinances, to collect delinquencies under this chapter.
C. Without limiting the remedies available to the city, the city may: (1) issue a citation to
the delinquent taxpayer in accordance with Sandy Municipal Code Chapter 1.18; (2)
submit any delinquent amount to a collection agency; or (3) in accordance with Sandy
Municipal Code Chapter 3.30, refuse to issue or renew a business license or other
permit to any delinquent taxpayer. If the city submits the delinquent amount to a
collection agency, the city may add a reasonable fee to the delinquent amount to
compensate the city for any collection agency fees the city may incur, but only in
accordance with ORS 697.105. (Ord. 2019-22, 2019.)
5.05.170 Discontinuing business in the local transit district.
Whenever any person, firm, corporation or association subject to the payroll and selfemployment
tax ceases to do business in the local transit area, due either to going out
of business or to moving all of the business out of the local transit area, the person, firm
or corporation shall file forthwith the payroll tax return and pay the tax required by this
chapter, regardless of the time of year. Taxes shall be due and payable only for the
actual payroll expense for the part of the year during which the taxpayer did business in
the local transit area. Each officer, partner or owner of any taxpayer failing to comply
with the terms of this section shall be jointly and severally liable personally for any
unpaid amounts of the tax due under this section. The personal liability provided in the
preceding sentence shall not be applied to a person solely because of ownership of a
minority of stock in a corporation or ownership of any minority interest not involving
control of the business entity. (Ord. 99-03 (part), 1999.)
5.05.180 Refunds.
A. When any amount of any payroll and self-employment tax, penalty or interest has
been overpaid, the taxpayer who made the overpayment shall be reimbursed under the
terms of this section. If the collector determines that an overpayment has been made,
the collector shall make the refund whether a claim for the refund has been filed or not.
Any taxpayer may make a claim for the refund by filing a statement signed by the
taxpayer or by a person with actual knowledge of the facts, stating the reasons for the
claim for refund. The collector shall examine each such claim, and may require
additional information and evidence from the taxpayer. The collector may make an
investigation to determine the facts as to whether a refund is due. Such investigation
may include examining the books, records and information in computer storage of the
taxpayer.
B. If any sum is due from the taxpayer to the city for any reason, the amount of the
refund shall be applied first to offset the sum owed by the taxpayer to the city. Any
balance remaining thereafter may, at the option of the taxpayer, be held by the collector
to apply on future payroll tax payments. Any sum not used for such offset and not held
14
at the taxpayer's request to apply on future payroll tax payments, shall be returned to
the taxpayer as soon as practicable. The collector shall notify the taxpayer in writing of
the collector's decision approving a claim for refund, denying the claim or approving a
refund for a smaller amount than the taxpayer claimed. If the collector shall deny all or
part of the refund claim, the taxpayer may, within thirty days, file a written protest. If the
taxpayer fails to file such written protest within thirty days, the taxpayer shall be deemed
to have waived any objections to the action of the collector. Any taxpayer who has filed
a written protest in accordance with this section may pursue the administrative remedies
and judicial remedies available under city ordinances and state law, to obtain review of
the decision denying all or part of the refund. Any action by the collector under this
section, except an action fully approving a claim for refund, shall be accompanied by a
set of clear instructions on how to file an administrative appeal or court action and shall
make it clear that failure to file a timely administrative appeal or court action will cause
the collector's decision to stand.
(Ord. 99-03 (part), 1999.)
5.05.190 Sale or other transfer of business.
A. If any owner or group of owners acting together, transfer a majority of ownership
interest or controlling interest in any business entity that is subject to the payroll and
self-employment tax, the seller or transferor must furnish to the buyer or transferee a
complete record of payments, accompanied by receipts, showing past payments of the
payroll expense tax for the past three years or the period of time since the business was
subject to the tax, whichever period is shorter. The buyer and seller, or transferor and
transferee, must also furnish written evidence to the collector that the steps described in
at least one of the following paragraphs have been taken;
B. The seller has filed a payroll and self-employment tax return covering the period up
to the date of sale of the business entity, accompanied by payment of all payroll and
se]f employment tax accrued to the date of sale. This is due not later than ten days after
the sale is closed by transfer of ownership, regardless of the payment schedule; or
C. The buyer or transferee has filed a written agreement with the city, undertaking to
pay all payroll taxes to become due, including those accrued during the part of the year
before the sale or transfer; or
D. The buyer has furnished evidence to the city that the funds of the business entity are
sufficient and will be sufficient to pay all payroll and self-employment tax anticipated to
be due when the next payment is due, that the business entity has acknowledged its
responsibility to pay such taxes and that there are no past due payroll expense taxes,
penalties or interest payments owed to the city by the business entity; or
E. A cash deposit or bond with a corporate surety has been filed with the collector,
sufficient to cover the amount of payroll and self-employment tax anticipated to become
due for the payroll expenses before the transfer; or
15
F. The buyer or seller has prodded an alternative means of assuring that the payroll and
self-employment tax for the period before the sale will be paid, and such alternative
means is reasonably sufficient, in the judgment of the collector, to insure the payment of
the tax when due.
(Ord. 99-03 (part), 1999.)
5.05.200 Receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, guardians, conservators
and others.
If control of any employer subject to the payroll and self-employment tax passes to any
trustee, receiver, executor, administrator, guardian, conservator or other personal
representative or fiduciary, such personal representatives or fiduciary shall have all the
duties of the employer under this chapter. (Ord. 99-03 (part), 1999.)
5.05.210 Right of privacy.
Except when disclosure is required by law or in connection with the collecting and
enforcing the payroll and self-employment tax, no city officer or employee shall disclose
to any person outside of the collector's office any information learned from any return or
other information filed by any taxpayer under this chapter. City officers and employees
enforcing this chapter and collecting taxes shall not seek information that is irrelevant to
the payroll and self-employment tax. (Ord. 99-03 (part), 1999.)
5.05.220 Computer records of taxpayers.
The following rules apply to taxpayers who have records stored in temporary or
permanent memory in any computer.
A. In lieu of any return or report required by this chapter, any taxpayer may submit a
printout from a computer containing all of the information required in the return, in a
format approved by the collector.
B. Whenever the collector has the authority or the duty to examine any books and
records of any taxpayer, the collector shall also have the authority or duty to examine
relevant information stored in any computer used by the taxpayer. The taxpayer need
not permit the collector or any city employee to operate the computer, but the taxpayer
shall furnish to the collector an employee or other person authorized by the taxpayer to
operate the computer, permitting readouts and printouts as requested or determined by
the collector. The duties and powers of the collector may be exercised by any person
working under the supervision of the collector.
(Ord. 99-03 (part), 1999.)
5.05.230 Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are severable, and if any part of this chapter should be
held void by any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect the
remainder of the chapter, and the remainder of this chapter shall remain in full force and
effect. (Ord. 99-03 (part), 1999.)
16
5.05.240 False information-Penalty.
No person, firm, corporation or association shall knowingly furnish any false information
to the city as all or part of any information furnished under any provision of this chapter.
The furnishing of such false information shall constitute a violation of this section even if
the person furnishing the false information could not have profited or saved money by
the deception. If any individual officer, employee or owner of any firm, corporation or
association knowingly furnishes such false information, such individual shall also be
subject to the penalty set out in this section. The penalty set out in this section shall be
in addition to any interest, late charge or other civil penalty provided by ordinance. Any
person, firm, corporation or association committing any violation described in this
section shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than one hundred dollars, nor more than
two thousand five hundred dollars, for each offense, and shall be subject to one year in
jail. A separate offense shall be deemed committed with the filing of each false
document. (Ord. 99-03 (part), 1999.)
5.05.250 Appeal from collector.
A. An appeal from the determination upon the application made by the taxpayer for
refund or revision of any tax, as provided for in this chapter, may be taken by the
taxpayer to the circuit court located in Clackamas County. Any such appeal must be
within sixty days after notice of the collector's determination has been received by the
taxpayer, given as provided in this chapter. If the collector fails to notify the taxpayer
within twelve months after the claim was filed of its determination of the claim for refund
or revision of the tax, the taxpayer may then appeal to the circuit court.
B. Unless otherwise ordered by the circuit court, an appeal to the collector or to the
court from an assessment of taxes or additional taxes, shall not stay proceedings to
collect any unpaid tax if the collector believes that collection of the tax will be
jeopardized by delay.
(Ord. 99-03 (part), 1999.
Chapter 5.06
SALE AND TRANSFER OF HAND GUNS
BACKGROUND INVESTIGATIONS
5.06.010 Fees for background investigations for the sale and transfer of hand
guns.
Whenever the Sandy police department is requested by a firearm dealer to conduct a
background check on a prospective hand gun purchaser pursuant to ORS 166.420, the
firearm dealer shall submit a fifteen dollar processing fee for each such background
check requested. A background check fee shall be paid by the firearm dealer and shall
be used to defray police department expenses incurred in conducting the check. (Ord.
4-92 § 1, 1992.
17
Chapter 5.07
PAWNBROKERS, SECONDHAND, AND PRECIOUS MATERIAL SECONDHAND
STORES
5.07.010 Definitions.
A. “Acceptable identification” is either:
1. a current Oregon driver’s license or a State of Oregon Identification Card
issued by the Department of Motor Vehicles;
2. or two (2) current federal, state or local government-issued identification cards,
one of which has a photograph of the seller.
B. “Item of precious metal” means an item that consists of or incorporates gold in eight
karat or greater purity, silver, platinum or palladium. “Item of precious metal” does not
include dental gold, unrefined metal ore, an electronic product, any part of a mechanical
system on a motor vehicle, gold or silver coins or bullion in any form.
C. “Precious metal secondhand dealer” means a person engaged in precious metal
secondhand dealing; and does not include:
1. A pawnbroker licensed under ORS chapter 726 who engages exclusively in
pledge loans, as defined in ORS 726.010;
2. A manufacturer of items of precious metal;
3. A person engaged in commercial or industrial scrap metal recycling
operations;
4. A person primarily engaged in business through the Internet;
5. A motor vehicle dealer holding a certificate issued under ORS 822.020 or a
motor vehicle dismantler holding a certificate issued under ORS 822.110; or
6. A person primarily engaged in purchasing for resale newly manufactured
items of precious metal. For purposes of this subparagraph, a person is
primarily engaged in purchasing newly manufactured items of precious
metal if the person's inventory of items of precious metal for resale consists
exclusively of:
a. Newly manufactured items of precious metal acquired from a
manufacturer; or
b. Items described in sub-subparagraph (a) of this subparagraph and
used items of precious metal acquired for trade-in value as part of
retail sales of newly manufactured items of precious metal by the
person.
D. “Precious metal secondhand dealing” means soliciting, receiving, purchasing, trading
or accepting delivery of items of precious metal from individuals in return for money or
other consideration.
18
E. “Seller” means the other party to a transaction with a precious metal secondhand
dealer.
F. “Secondhand Dealer” means any business engaged in the purchase of items for
resale from private citizens.
G. “RAPID (Regional Automated Property Information Database)” means the electronic
database that will be used for the documentation, recording and maintenance of all
sales, sellers’ information and other information related to the purchase/sales of
merchandise.
H. “Pawnbroker” is defined in ORS 726.010
5.07.020 City permit required.
No person may engage in business as a pawnbroker, secondhand store, or precious
material secondhand dealer without first obtaining a business license. The business
license must be maintained in accordance with the Sandy Municipal Code.
5.07.030 Where State license required.
The city will not issue a business license under SMC 5.07.020 unless proof of a valid
required Oregon State license(s) (if applicable) accompanies the permit
application. The city may revoke a business license if a business that requires a state
license fails to maintain a valid Oregon license.
5.07.040 Record of articles received.
A. Pawnbrokers, secondhand store and precious metal store owners must keep and
maintain an electronic record, using RAPID, of the following:
1. Pawnbrokers - An accurate, detailed description and detailed photos of all
goods, to be pawned or pledged.
a. The amount of money pledged, advanced or paid;
b. The date on which a good, article or thing is purchased, pawned,
pledged or received; and
c. The name, address, date of birth and photocopy of the acceptable
identification of a person pawning, pledging, selling or delivering a good,
article or thing.
2. Secondhand Store and Precious metal Store - An accurate, detailed
description along with photos of goods purchased if the goods are classified as
any of the following:
a. Computers, electronics, stereos, speakers, stereo components;
b. Car parts, equipment or other items related to vehicles;
19
c. Jewelry, coins, or other precious metals;
d. Tools, including power tools and hand tools;
e. Televisions, video game consoles, video games, and other related
items;
f. Any item bearing a serial number or other owner applied number
3. Secondhand Stores and Precious Metal Stores keep a detailed description
of the amount of money pledged, advanced or paid;
4. The date on which a good, article or thing is purchased, pawned, pledged or
received; and
5. The name, address, date of birth and photocopy of the acceptable
identification of a person pawning, pledging, selling or delivering a good, article
or thing. Additionally pawn, secondhand stores and precious metal secondhand
stores will be required to take an electronic thumb print and photograph of the
customer, entering same into the electronic database known as RAPID.
6. No pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall be required to record the
description of any property purchased from manufactures or wholesale dealers
having an established place of business, or secured from any person doing
business and having an established place of business in the City, or from garage
sales, public auctions and swap meets. However, such goods shall be
accompanied by a bill of sale or other evidence of legitimate purchase, and must
be shown to any police officer upon request.
7. Minor means any person under the age of 18 years of age.
8. Hold/Police Hold means a hold on property that disallows the store from
selling, giving away, or otherwise removing the property from their custody.
a. Records of all transactions must be maintained for a minimum of ten
years. Law enforcement officials may inspect the record and the things pledged,
pawned, sold or received at all reasonable times.
b. The record must be in a form approved by the Chief of Police. This may
include electronic formatting (RAPID).
c. The record must be periodically mailed or delivered to the Chief of Police or
designee, according to a schedule that the Chief of Police may approve in his or
her discretion.
5.07.050 Purchase from minors.
No pawnbroker, secondhand store or secondhand precious materials store owners may
take, receive or purchase any good, article or thing from any minor person unless the
minor’s parent or legal guardian is physically present at the time of the transaction. If
20
the minor does not have acceptable identification then acceptable identification from the
minor’s parent or legal guardian may be used instead.
5.07.060 Sale limitations.
A. pawnbroker, secondhand store or precious metals secondhand store may not sell
any good as listed in articles 5.07.040 (1) (2), article or thing for a period of 14 calendar
days from the day the pawnbroker takes, receives or purchases it. The property must
be maintained in substantially the same form and may not commingle the property so as
to preclude identification during the holding period. The property must remain on the
business premises in order to permit the inspections authorized under SMC 5.07.040. If
the item(s) cannot be maintained on the premises, the store owner will make the
property available for inspection by police within 24 hours of a request for inspection.
Notwithstanding this requirement, if the store can show that extreme financial hardship
will result from holding an item for the 14-day period, the Chief of Police may authorize
the sale or transfer of the item before the expiration of this period. Any property with a
removed, obliterated or altered serial number must be held for a minimum of 90 days.
B. If the Sandy Police Department reasonably suspects that any good, article or thing
possessed by a business subject to this ordinance is the subject of theft or any other
crime, the Chief of Police will order the business in writing or electronically not to sell or
otherwise dispose of such property, and law enforcement may seize the property as
evidence of the crime. Upon completion of the criminal case law enforcement will return
the property to the victim of the theft, to the pawnbroker, or will otherwise dispose of the
property in accordance with a court’s order or in another manner consistent with Oregon
law.
1. A business may request a hearing to contest an order from the Chief of Police
under this section. The request must be in writing and be filed with the Chief of
Police within five business days of the date of the order. The business may
present evidence contesting another person’s claim that it is the rightful owner of
the good, article or thing in question.
2. The Municipal Court Judge will preside over the hearing. The Judge will
uphold the order if substantial evidence supports it.
3. Failure to abide by an order from the Chief of Police under this section is a
Class A violation.
Chapter 5.10
LICENSE TAX ON MOTOR VEHICLE FUEL DEALERS
5.10.010 This Chapter shall be known as the "City of Sandy Fuel License Tax
Ordinance".
21
5.10.020 Definitions. As used in this ordinance, unless the context requires otherwise:
1) "Aircraft fuel" means any gasoline and any other inflammable or combustible gas or
liquid by whatever name such gasoline, gas or liquid is known or sold, usable as fuel for
the operation of aircraft, except gas or liquid, the chief use of which, as determined by
the City is for purposes other than the propulsion of aircraft.
2) "City" means City of Sandy, a municipal corporation of the State of Oregon.
3) "Dealer" means any person who:
a) Imports or causes to be imported motor vehicle fuel for sale, use or distribution in,
and after the same reaches the City, but "Dealer" does not include any person who
imports into the City motor vehicle fuel in quantities of 500 gallons or less purchased
from a supplier who is licensed as a dealer hereunder and who assumes liability for
the payment of the applicable license tax to the City; or
b) Produces, refines, manufactures or compounds motor vehicle fuels in the City for
use, distribution or sale in the City; or
c) Acquires in the City for sale, use or distribution in the City motor vehicle fuel with
respect to which there has been no license tax previously incurred.
4) "Distribution" means, in addition to its ordinary meaning, the delivery of motor
vehicle fuel by a dealer to any service station or into any tank, storage facility or series
of tanks or storage facilities connected by pipelines, from which motor vehicle fuel is
withdrawn directly for sale or for delivery into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles whether or
not the service station, tank or storage facility is owned, operated or controlled by the
dealer.
5) "Highway" means every way, thoroughfare and place of whatever nature, open for
use of the public for the purpose of vehicular travel.
6) "Motor Vehicle" means all vehicles, engines or machines, movable or immovable,
operated or propelled by the use of motor vehicle fuel.
7) "Motor Vehicle Fuel" means and includes diesel and gasoline and any other
flammable or combustible gas or liquid, by whatever name such as diesel and gasoline,
gas or liquid is known or sold, usable as fuel for the operation of motor vehicles, except
gas or liquid, the chief use of which, as determined by the City, is for purposes other
than the propulsion of motor vehicles upon the highways.
8) "Person" includes every natural person, association, firm, partnership, or corporation.
9) "Service Station" means and includes any place operated for the purpose of retailing
and delivering motor vehicle fuel into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles.
22
5.10.030 Tax Imposed.
A business license tax is hereby imposed on every dealer. The tax imposed shall be
paid monthly to the City or its duly authorized agent. The City may delegate to any
department of the City enforcement of any portion or all of this ordinance.
5.10.040 Amount and payment.
1) Subject to subsections (2) and (3) of this section, in addition to any fees or taxes
otherwise provided for by law, every dealer engaging in his own name, or in the name of
others, or in the name of his representatives or agents in the City, in the sale, use or
distribution of motor vehicle fuel, shall:
a) Not later than the 25th day of each calendar month, render a statement to the
City or its duly authorized agent of all motor vehicle fuel sold, used or distributed by him
in the City as well as all such fuel sold, used or distributed in the City by a purchaser
thereof upon which sale, use or distribution the dealer has assumed liability for the
applicable license tax during the preceding calendar month.
b) Pay a license tax computed on the basis of two cents per gallon of such motor
vehicle fuel so sold, used or distributed as shown by such statement in the manner and
within the time provided in this ordinance.
2) In lieu of claiming refund of the tax as provided in Section 5.10.210, or of any prior
erroneous payment of license tax made to the City by the dealer, the dealer may show
such motor vehicle fuel as a credit or deduction on the monthly statement and payment
of tax.
3) The license tax shall not be imposed wherever it is prohibited by the Constitution or
laws of the United States or of the State of Oregon.
5.10.050 License requirements.
No dealer shall sell, use or distribute any motor vehicle fuel until he has secured a
dealer's license as required herein.
5.10.60 License applications and issuance.
1) Every person, before becoming a dealer in motor vehicle fuel in this City, shall make
an application to the City for a license authorizing such person to engage in business as
a dealer.
2) Applications for the license must be made on forms prescribed, prepared and
furnished by the City.
3) The applications shall be accompanied by a duly acknowledged certificate
containing:
a) The business name under which the dealer is transacting business.
23
b) The place of business and location of distributing stations in the City and in areas
adjacent to the City limits in the State of Oregon.
c) The name and address of the managing agent, the names and addresses of the
several persons constituting the firm or partnership and, if a corporation, the
corporate name under which it is authorized to transact business and the names and
addresses of its principal officers and registered agent.
4) The application for a motor vehicle fuel dealer's license having been accepted for
filing, the City shall issue to the dealer a license in such form as the City may prescribe
to transact business in the City. The license so issued is not assignable, and is valid
only for the dealer in whose name it is issued.
5) The City shall keep and file all applications with an alphabetical index thereof,
together with a record of all licensed dealers.
5.10.070 Failure to secure license.
1) If any dealer sells, distributes or uses any motor vehicle fuel without first filing the
certificate and securing the license required by Section 6, the license tax shall
immediately be due and payable on account of all motor vehicle fuel so sold, distributed
or used.
2) The City shall proceed forthwith to determine, from the best available sources, the
amount of such tax, and it shall assess the tax in the amount found due, together with a
penalty of 100% of the tax, and shall make its certificate of such assessment and
penalty. In any suit or proceeding to collect such tax or penalty or both, the certificate is
prima facie evidence that the dealer therein named is indebted to the City in the amount
of the tax and penalty therein stated.
3) Any tax or penalty so assessed may be collected in the manner prescribed in Section
11 with reference to delinquency in payment of the tax or by court action.
5.10.080 Revocation of license.
The City shall revoke the license of any dealer refusing or neglecting to comply with any
provision of this ordinance. The City shall mail by certified mail addressed to such
dealer at his last known address appearing on the files of the City, a notice of intention
to cancel. The notice shall give the reason for the cancellation. The cancellation shall
become effective without further notice if within 10 days from the mailing of the notice
the dealer has not made good its default or delinquency.
5.10.90 Cancellation of license.
1) The City may, upon written request of a dealer, cancel any license issued to such
dealer, the cancellation to become effective 30 days from the date of receipt of the
written request.
24
2) If the City ascertains and finds that the person to whom a license has been issued is
no longer engaged in the business of a dealer, the City may cancel the license of such
dealer upon investigation, after 30 days notice has been mailed to the last known
address of the dealer.
5.10.100 Remedies cumulative.
Except as otherwise provided in Sections 5.10.110 and 5.10.130, the remedies provided
in Sections 5.10.070, 5.10.080 and 5.10.090 are cumulative. No action taken pursuant
to those sections shall relieve any person from the penalty provisions of this ordinance.
5.10.110 Payment of tax and delinquency.
1) The license tax imposed by Sections 5.10.030 and 5.10.040 shall be paid on or
before the 25th day of each month to the City which, upon request, shall receipt the
dealer therefor.
2) Except as provided in subsection (4) of this section, to any license tax not paid as
required by subsection (1) of this section, there shall be added a penalty of one percent
of such license tax.
3) Except as provided in subsection (4) of this section, if the tax and penalty required by
subsection (2) of this section are not received on or before the close of business on the
last day of the month in which the payment is due, a further penalty of ten percent shall
be paid in addition to the penalty provided for in subsection (2) of this section.
4) If the City determines that the delinquency was due to reasonable cause and without
any intent to avoid payment, the penalties provided by subsections (2) and (3) of this
section shall be waived. Penalties imposed by this section shall not apply when the
penalty provided in Section 5.10.070 has been assessed.
5) If any person fails to pay the license tax or any penalty provided for by this ordinance,
the amounts thereof shall be collected from such person for the use of the City. The City
shall commence and prosecute to final determination in any court of competent
jurisdiction an action to collect the same.
6) No dealer who collects from any person the tax provided for herein shall knowingly
and willfully fail to report and pay the same to the City as required herein.
5.10.120 Monthly statement of dealer.
Every dealer in motor vehicle fuel shall render to the City or its duly authorized agent
on or before the 25th day of each month, on forms prescribed, prepared and furnished
by the City, a signed statement of the number of gallons of motor vehicle fuel sold,
distributed or used by him during the preceding calendar month. The statement shall be
signed by the licensee. All statements filed with the City, as required in this section, are
public records.
5.10.130 Failure to file monthly statements.
25
If any dealer, except one subject to Section 5.10.070, fails to file the report required by
Section 5.10.120, the City shall proceed forthwith to determine from the best available
source the amount of motor vehicle fuel sold, distributed or used by such dealer for the
period unreported, and such determination shall be prima facie evidence of the amount
of such fuel sold, distributed or used. The City immediately shall assess the license tax
in the amount so determined, adding thereto a penalty of ten percent for failure to
report. The penalty shall be cumulative to other penalties provided in this ordinance. In
any suit brought to enforce the rights of the City under this section, the certificate of the
City showing the amount of tax, penalties and costs unpaid by any dealer and that the
same are due and unpaid to the City is prima facie evidence of the facts as Shown.
5.10.140 Billing purchasers.
Bills shall be rendered to all purchasers of motor vehicle fuel by dealers in motor vehicle
fuel. The bills shall separately state and describe to the satisfaction of the City the
different products shipped thereunder and shall be serially numbered except where
other sales invoice controls acceptable to the City are maintained. The bills required
hereunder may be the same as those required under ORS 319.210.
5.10.150 Failure to provide invoice or delivery tag.
No person shall receive and accept any shipment of motor vehicle fuel from any dealer,
or pay for the same, or sell or offer the shipment for sale, unless the shipment is
accompanied by an invoice or delivery tag showing the date upon which shipment was
delivered and the name of the dealer in motor vehicle fuel.
5.10.160 Transporting motor vehicle fuel in bulk.
Every person operating any conveyance for the purpose of hauling, transporting or
delivering motor vehicle fuel in bulk shall, before entering upon the public highways of
the City with such conveyance, have and possess during the entire time of his hauling
or transporting such motor vehicle fuel an invoice, bill of sale or other written statement
showing the number of gallons, the true name and address of the seller or consignor,
and the true name and address of the buyer or consignee, if any, of the same. The
person hauling such motor vehicle fuel shall at the request of any officer authorized by
the City to inquire into or investigate such matters, produce and offer for inspection the
invoice, bill of sale or other statement.
5.10.170 Exemption of export fuel.
1) The license tax imposed by Section 5.10.030 and 5.10.040 shall not be imposed on
motor vehicle fuel:
a) Exported from the City by a dealer; or
b) Sold by a dealer in individual quantities of 500 gallons or less for export by the
purchaser to an area or areas outside the City in containers other than the fuel tank
of a motor vehicle, but every dealer shall be required to report such exports and
sales to the City in such detail as may be required.
26
2) In support of any exemption from license taxes claimed under this section other
than in the case of stock transfers or deliveries in his own equipment, every dealer must
execute and file with the City an export certificate in such form as shall be prescribed,
prepared and furnished by the City, containing a statement, made by some person
having actual knowledge of the fact of such exportation, that the motor vehicle fuel has
been exported from the City, and giving such details with reference to such shipment as
the City may require. The City may demand of any dealer such additional data as is
deemed necessary in support of any such certificate, and failure to supply such data will
constitute a waiver of all right to exemption claimed by virtue of such certificate. This
City may, in a case where it believes no useful purpose would be served by filing of an
export certificate, waive the certificate.
3) Any motor vehicle fuel carried from the City in the fuel tank of a motor vehicle
shall not be considered as exported from the City.
4) No person shall, through false statement, trick or device, or otherwise, obtain
motor vehicle fuel for export as to which the City tax has not been paid and fail to export
the same, or any portion thereof, or cause the motor vehicle fuel or any portion thereof
not to be exported, or divert or cause to be diverted the motor vehicle fuel or any portion
thereof to be used, distributed or sold in the City and fail to notify the City and the dealer
from whom the motor vehicle fuel was originally purchased of his act.
5) No dealer or other person shall conspire with any person to withhold from export,
or divert from export or to return motor vehicle fuel to the City for sale or use so as to
avoid any of the fees imposed herein.
6) In support of any exemption from taxes on account of sales of motor vehicle fuel
in individual quantities of 500 gallons or less for export by the purchaser, the dealer
shall retain in his files for at least three years an export certificate executed by the
purchaser in such form and containing such information as is prescribed by the City.
This certificate shall be prima facie evidence of the exportation of the motor vehicle fuel
to which it applies only if accepted by the dealer in good faith.
5.10.190 Fuel in Vehicle coming into city not taxed.
Any person coming into the City in a motor vehicle may transport in the fuel tank of such
vehicle motor vehicle fuel for his own use only and for the purpose of operating such
motor vehicle without securing a license or paying the tax provided in Sections 5.10.030
and 5.10.040, or complying with any of the provisions imposed upon dealers herein, but
if the motor vehicle fuel so brought into the City is removed from the fuel tank of the
vehicle or used for any purpose other than the propulsion of the vehicle, the person so
importing fuel into the City shall be subject to all the provisions herein applying to
dealers.
5.10.200 Fuel sold or delivered to dealers.
1) A dealer selling or delivering motor vehicle fuel to dealers is not required to pay a
license tax thereon.
27
2) The dealer in rendering monthly statements to the City as required by Sections
5.10.040 and 5.10.120 shall show separately the number of gallons of motor vehicle fuel
sold or delivered to dealers.
5.10.210 Refunds.
Refunds will be made pursuant to applicable state and federal laws. Claim forms for
refunds may be obtained from the City Clerk's office.
5.10.220 Examination and investigations.
The City, or its duly authorized agents, may make any examination of accounts,
records, stocks, facilities and equipment of dealers, service stations and other persons
engaged in storing, selling or distributing motor vehicle fuel or other petroleum product
or products within this City, and such other investigations as it considers necessary in
carrying out the provisions of this ordinance. If the examinations or investigations
disclose that any reports of dealers or other persons theretofore filed with the City
pursuant to the requirements herein have shown incorrectly the amount of gallonage or
motor vehicle fuel distributed or the tax accruing thereon, the City may make such
changes in subsequent reports and payments of such dealers or other persons, or may
make such refunds, as may be necessary to correct the errors disclosed by its
examinations or investigations.
5.10.230 Limitation on credit for or refund of overpayment and on assessment of
additional tax.
1) Except as otherwise provided in this ordinance, any credit for erroneous
overpayment of tax made by a dealer taken on a subsequent return or any claim for
refund of tax erroneously overpaid filed by a dealer must be so taken or filed within
three years after the date on which the overpayment was made by the City.
2) Except in the case of a fraudulent report or neglect to make a report, every notice of
additional tax proposed to be assessed under this ordinance shall be served on dealers
within three years from the date upon which such additional taxes become due.
5.10.240 Examining books and accounts of carrier of motor vehicle fuel.
The City or its duly authorized agents may at any time during normal business hours
examine the books and accounts of any carrier of motor vehicle fuel operating within the
City for the purpose of checking shipments or use of motor vehicle fuel, detecting
diversions thereof or evasion of taxes in enforcing the provisions of this ordinance.
5.10.250 Records to be kept by dealers.
Every dealer in motor vehicle fuel shall keep a record in such form as may be
prescribed by the City of all purchases, receipts, sales and distribution of motor vehicle
fuel. The records shall include copies of all invoices or bills of all such sales and shall at
all times during the business hours of the day be subject to inspection by the City or its
authorized officers or agents.
28
5.10.260 Records to be kept three years.
Every dealer shall maintain and keep, for a period of three years, all records of motor
vehicle fuel used, sold and distributed within the City by such dealer, together with stock
records, invoices, bills of lading and other pertinent papers as may be required by the
City. In the event such records are not kept within the State of Oregon, the dealer shall
reimburse the City for all travel, lodging, and related expenses incurred by the City in
examining such records. The amount of such expenses shall be an additional tax
imposed hereunder.
5.10.270 Use of tax revenues.
1) The City Manager and his designated representative shall be responsible for the
disposition of the revenue from the tax imposed by this ordinance in the manner
provided by this section.
2) For the purposes of this section, net revenue shall mean the revenue from the tax
imposed by this ordinance remaining after providing for the cost of administration and
any refunds and credits authorized herein.
3) The net revenue shall be used only for the construction, reconstruction,
improvement, repair, maintenance, operation and use of public highways, roads and
streets within the City of Sandy, including street lighting and storm drainage. The net
revenue received by the City shall be credited to the City Street Fund for the purposes
provided herein.
Section 2. Severability.
If any portion of this Chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by a court
of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of this ordinance.
Section 3. All remaining provisions of Chapter 5 of the Sandy Municipal Code are
reaffirmed in their entirety.
Section 4. This Chapter will be effective January 1, 2003.
Chapter 5.20
AMUSEMENT DEVICES1
5.20.010 Definitions.
A "coin-operated amusement device" means and includes any pinball machine, pool
table, shuffleboard game, jukebox, electronic game or any similar device that is
actuated by a coin or coins for amusement purposes. (Ord. 25-74 § 1, 1974.)
29
5.20.020 License gee.
The monthly license fee for each coin-operated amusement device is $2.50. Said fee is
payable in advance at the City Hall, which license fee shall be in addition to any other
license fee or tax required by any ordinance of the city. (Ord. 25-74 § 2, 1974.)
5.20.030 Penalty.
Any person operating or causing to be operated any such device or devices without
having first paid the license fee is guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof
shall be punished by a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars or by
imprisonment of not to exceed three months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 25-74 § 3, 1974.)
Chapter 5.24
ADVERTISEMENTS ON UTILITY POLES
5.24.010 Permit required.
Individuals or organizations desiring to affix seasonal decorations or advertising
banners to certain power poles or telephone poles within the city must secure from the
city council a special permit to do so with approval of all utilities owning or using the
power poles or telephone poles endorsed thereon prior to submission of the special
permit request to the city. The issuance of the special permit shall be discretionary by
the council, and the issuance of all such special permits shall be strictly conditioned
upon satisfaction by the applicant of all conditions contained in the Standard Practice
Instruction No. 400-5 of Portland General Electric Company dated November 14, 1969,
and revised November 21, 1975. The duration of the special permit shall be established
by the city council. Permits may be issued only for utilization of the following power and
telephone poles:
A. Portland General Electric Company Poles Number D24-13A/28 and 749 (located at
east end of Proctor Avenue);
B. Portland General Electric Company Poles Number D24-13B/1318 and General
Telephone Company Pole Number 412 (located at west end of Pioneer Blvd.). (Ord. 11-
76 § 1, 1976.)
5.24.020 Violation-Penalty.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall upon conviction thereof be
punished by a fine not to exceed fifty dollars. (Ord. 11-76, § 2, 1976.)
Chapter 5.28
BINGO AND LOTTO
5.28.010 Permitted when.
Charitable, fraternal and religious organizations which are located within the city and
which comply with the provisions of Subsection 2 of Section 2 of D-Eng. HB 2341 may
30
engage in bingo or lotto when no person other than the organization or a player profits
in any manner from the operation of the lottery. Bingo or lotto means a game played
with cards bearing lines of numbers, in which a player covers or uncovers a number
selected from a container, and which is won by a player who is present during the game
and who first covers or uncovers the selected numbers in a designated combination,
sequence or pattern. As used in this section, "charitable, fraternal or religious
organization" means any person organized and existing for charitable, benevolent,
eleemosynary, humane, patriotic, religious, philanthropic, recreational, social,
educational, civic, fraternal or other nonprofit purposes, and who is also exempt from
payment of federal income taxes because of its charitable, fraternal or religious
purposes. The fact that contributions to an organization profiting from the contest do not
qualify for charitable deductions for tax purposes or that the organization is not
otherwise exempt from payment of federal income taxes pursuant to the Internal
Revenue Code of 1954, as amended, constitutes prima facie evidence that the
organization is not a bona fide charitable, fraternal or religious organization. (Ord. 11-77
§ 1 (part), 1977.)
5.28.020 Violation-Penalty.
A. A violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred
dollars, by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both.
B. Each violation of a separate provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate
offense, and each day that a violation of this chapter is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense.
C. The maximum penalty for violation of this chapter shall not exceed the maximum
penalty prescribed for violation of a substantially similar offense prescribed by Oregon
Revised Statutes.
(Ord. 11-77 § 1 (part), 1977.)
Chapter 5.32
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISES
5.32.010 Application-Solicitation.
A. The council may, by advertisement or any other means, solicit and call for
applications for cable television system franchises, and may determine and fix any date
upon or after which the same shall be received by the city, or the date before which the
same must be received, or the date after which the same shall not be received, and
may make any other determinations and specify any other times, terms, conditions, or
limitations respecting the soliciting, calling for, making and receiving of such
applications.
B. The grantee shall pay to the city a sum of money sufficient to reimburse it for all
publication expenses incurred by it in connection with the granting of a franchise
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Such payment shall be made within thirty
31
days after the city furnishes the grantee with a written statement of such expenses.
(Ord. 11-79 § 1(e), 1979.)
5.32.020 Application-Information required.
Each application for a franchise to construct, operate, or maintain any cable television
systems in this city shall be filed with the city recorder and shall contain or be
accompanied by the following:
A. The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant;
B. A detailed statement of the corporate or other business entity organization of the
applicant, including but not limited to, the following and to whatever extent required by
the city:
1. The names, residence and business addresses of all officers, directors, and
associates of the applicant,
2. The names, residences and business addresses of all officers, persons and entities
having, controlling, or being entitled to have or control of five percent or more of the
ownership of the applicant and the respective ownership share of each such person or
entity,
3. The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant, namely, any
other business entity owning or controlling applicant in whole or in part or owned or
controlled in whole or in part by the applicant, and a statement describing the nature of
any such parent or subsidiary business entity, including but not limited to cable
television systems owned or controlled by the applicant, its parent and subsidiary and
the areas served thereby,
4. A detailed description of all previous experience of the applicant in providing cable
television system service and in related or similar fields,
5. A detailed and complete financial statement of the applicant, prepared by a certified
public accountant, for the fiscal year next preceding the date of the applicant hereunder,
or a letter or other acceptable evidence in writing from a recognized lending institution
or funding source, addressed to both the applicant and the council, setting forth the
basis for a study performed by such lending institution or funding source, and a clear
statement of its intent as a lending institution or funding source to provide whatever
capital shall be required by the applicant to construct and operate the proposed system
in the city, or a statement from a certified public accountant, certifying that the applicant
has available sufficient free, net and uncommitted cash resources to construct and
operate the proposed system in this city,
6. A statement identifying, by place and date, any other cable television franchise(s)
awarded to the applicant, its parent or subsidiary; the status of said franchise(s) with
respect to completion thereof; the total cost of completion of such system(s); and the
32
amount of applicant's and its parent's or subsidiary's resources committed to the
completion thereof;
C. A detailed description of the proposed plan of operation of the applicant which shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:
1. A detailed map indicating all areas proposed to be served, and a proposed time
schedule for the installation of all equipment necessary to become operational
throughout the entire area to be served,
2. A statement or schedule setting forth all proposed classifications of rates and charges
to be made against subscribers and all rates and charges as to each of said
classifications, including installation charges and service charges,
3. A detailed, informative, and referenced statement describing the actual equipment
and operational standards proposed by the applicant. In no event shall said operational
and performance standards be less than those contained in Title 47, Subpart K
(Sections 76.601 et seq.), Rules and Regulations, Federal Communications
Commission, adopted February 2, 1972, and as amended,
4. A copy of the form of any agreement, undertaking, or other instrument proposed to be
entered into between the applicant and any subscriber,
5. A detailed statement setting forth in its entirety any and all agreements and
undertakings, whether formal or informal, written, oral, or implied, existing or proposed
to exist between the applicant and any person, firm, or corporation which materially
relate or pertain to or depend upon the application and the granting of the franchise;
D. Any other details, statements, information or references pertinent to the subject
matter of such applicant which shall be required or requested by the council, or by any
provision of any other ordinance of the city and of its charter;
E. An application fee in the sum of two hundred fifty dollars, which shall be in the form of
cash, certified or cashier's check, or money order, to pay the costs of studying,
investigating, and otherwise processing such application, and which shall be in
consideration thereof and not returnable or refundable in whole or in part, except to the
extent that such fee exceeds the actual costs incurred by the city in studying,
investigation and otherwise processing the application; provided, that the applicant who
shall deliver to the city clerk a written withdrawal of or cancellation of any application
hereunder, not later than the seventh day next following the day such application is
received by the city clerk, shall be entitled to have returned and refunded the sum of
one hundred fifty dollars less any actual costs or expenses incurred by the city by
reason of such application.
(Ord. 11-79 § 1(a)-(d), 1979.)
33
5.32.030 Application-Referral-Report.
Upon receipt of any application for franchise, the council shall refer the same to the city
manager, who shall prepare a report and make his recommendations respecting such
application, and cause the same to be completed and filed with the council within thirty
days. (Ord. 11-79 § 1(f), 1979.)
5.32.040 Application-Criteria for consideration.
A. In making any determination hereunder as to any application the council may give
due consideration to the quality of the service proposed, rates to subscriber, income to
the city, experience, character, background, and financial responsibility of any applicant,
and its management and owners, technical and performance quality of equipment,
willingness and ability to meet construction and physical requirements, and to abide by
policy conditions, franchise limitations and requirements, and any other considerations
deemed pertinent by the council for safeguarding the interests of the city and the public.
The council, in its discretion, shall determine the award of any franchise on the basis of
such considerations and without competitive bidding.
B. If the council determines to reject such application, such determination shall be final
and conclusive, and the same shall be deemed rejected.
(Ord. 11-79 § 1(g), 1979.)
5.32.050 Council consideration.
If the council determines to further consider the application, the following shall be done:
A. The council shall decide and specify the terms and conditions of any franchise to be
granted hereunder and as herein provided;
B. The council shall pass its resolution of intention to consider the granting of such a
franchise, giving notice of receipt of the application, and describing the character of the
franchise desired, stating the name of the proposed grantee, the character of the
franchise, the terms and conditions upon which such franchise is proposed to be
granted, that copies of the proposed franchise may be obtained at the office of the city
clerk, fixing and setting forth a day, hour, and place certain when and where any
persons having any interest therein or objection to the granting thereof may file written
protests and appear before the council and be heard, and directing the city clerk to
publish said resolution at least once within ten days of the passage thereof in a
newspaper of general circulation with the city.
(Ord. 11-79 § 1(h), 1979.)
5.32.060 Hearing-Council decision.
At the time set for the hearing, or at any adjournment thereof, the council shall proceed
to hear all written protests. Thereafter, the council shall make one of the following
determinations:
A. That such franchise be denied; or
34
B. That such franchise be granted upon the terms and conditions as specified in the
resolution of intention to grant the same; or
C. That such franchise be granted, but upon the terms and conditions different from
those specified in the resolution of intention to grant the same.
(Ord. 11-79 § 1(i), 1979.)
5.32.070 Granting or denial.
A. If the council determines that a franchise be denied such determination shall be
expressed by resolution and shall be final and conclusive.
B. If the council determines that a franchise be granted upon the terms and conditions
as specified in the resolution of intention to consider granting the same, such
determination shall be expressed by ordinance granting a franchise to the applicant.
C. If the council determines upon granting a franchise upon terms and conditions
different from those specified in the resolution of intention to consider granting the
same, then such determination shall be expressed by resolution adopted prior to
granting a franchise by ordinance.
(Ord. 11-79 § 1(j), 1979.)
Chapter 5.36
BUSINESS RECYCLING REQUIREMENTS
(ORD. 05, 2013)
5.36.00 PURPOSE
The purpose of the business recycling requirement is to provide an opportunity for
businesses to work with local governments to provide recycling education, to create a
consistent standard throughout the region, and to increase recycling, thereby assisting
the region in meeting recovery goals, conserving natural resources, and reducing
greenhouse gas emissions.
5.36.10 DEFINITIONS
As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined as follows:
Business: Any person or persons, or any entity, corporate or otherwise, engaged in
commercial, professional, charitable, political, industrial, educational or other activity
that is non-residential in nature, including public bodies. The terms shall not apply to
businesses whose primary office is located in a residence, conducted as a home
occupation. A residence is the place where a person lives.
Source Separate: To separate recyclable material from other solid waste.
35
5.36.20 APPLICABILITY
The requirements of this chapter shall apply to all businesses within the city, except any
business activity exempt from a Business License, as defined in Sandy Municipal Code
5.04.
5.36.30 BUSINESS RECYCLING REQUIREMENTS
A. Businesses shall source separate from other solid waste all recyclable paper,
cardboard, glass and plastic bottles and jars, and aluminum and tin cans for reuse or
recycling.
B. Businesses shall ensure the provision of recycling containers for internal
maintenance or work areas where recyclable materials may be collected, stored, or
both.
C. Businesses shall post accurate signs where recyclable materials are collected,
stored or both, that identify the material that the business must source separate for
reuse or recycling and that provide recycling instructions.
D. Persons and entities that own, manage or operate premises with Business tenants,
and that provide garbage collection service to those Business tenants shall provide
recycling collection systems adequate to enable the Business tenants to comply with
the requirement of this section.
5.36.40 CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS
A. A Business that is required to have a business license pursuant to Chapter 5.04 of
this Code shall certify to the City in writing, in a form approved by the city manager,
upon application for an initial business license and with each annual application for
renewal of a business license, that the business is in compliance with the
requirements of Sandy Municipal Code 5.36.
B. Failure to submit a certification as required by Subsection (1) of this Section shall be
grounds for denial of issuance or renewal of a business license.
C. A Business that is not required to have a business license pursuant to Sandy
Municipal Code 5.04, or that is exempt from the business license requirement by
state law, shall certify to the City in writing at least once each calendar year, in a
form approved by the city manager, that it is in compliance with the requirements of
Sandy Municipal Code 5.36.
1
TITLE 6
ANIMALS
Chapter 6.04 ANIMAL CONTROL1 ....................................................................................... 1
Chapter 6.08 APIARIES, LIVESTOCK AND FOWL2 ......................................................... 3
Chapter 6.04
ANIMAL CONTROL1
6.04.010 Enforcement of Oregon Revised Statutes (ORS) Chapter 609
The City of Sandy will enforce ORS Chapter 609 – Dogs; Exotic Animals, Dealers, for
the purpose of maintaining a safe, healthy and animal friendly community. In addition,
the City regulates animals through this chapter as follows.
(Ord. 15-74 § 1, 1974, Ord. 02, 2016.)
6.04.020 Enforcement.
The Sandy City Police Department or its authorized agent may enforce the provisions of
this chapter and any applicable laws as described under Chapter 609 of the Oregon
Revised Statute. (Ord. 15-74 § 2, 1974 Ord.02, 2016.)
6.04.030 Nuisance.
It is determined as a matter of policy that any dog running at large in the city is a
nuisance per se. (Ord. 15-74 § 3, 1974.)
6.04.035 Animal waste.
Any person in physical possession or control of any animal in a public place shall
remove excrement or other solid waste deposited by the animal in any public area not
designed to receive those wastes, including but not limited to streets, sidewalks, parking
strips and public parks. It is a violation of this ordinance to allow any animal to defecate
on any private property other than property owned or under the control of the animal’s
owner. (Ord. 2-95 § 1, 1995, Ord. 02, 2016.)
6.04.040 Dogs not to be at large.
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation being the owner or keeper of any dog to
permit any such dog to run at large, as defined in this chapter, upon any public street,
highway or public place, or upon private property owned by a person or persons other
than the owner or keeper of the dogs, within the city limits. (Ord. 15-74 § 4, 1974.)
6.01.045 Dangerous or Aggressive Animals. (Removed with Ord.02, 2016)
2
6.04.050 Licensing. (Removed with Ord. 02, 2016)
6.04.060 Impounding.
Any member of the police department is authorized to impound any dog found running
at large as defined in this chapter or found to be unlicensed, or pursuant to any other
violation of ORS, Chapter 609, where impoundment is authorized. (Ord. 15-74 § 6,
1974, Ord. 02, 2016.)
6.04.070 Seizing certain dogs.
A dog found biting a person or which has bitten any person may be summarily seized by
any Sandy City Police Department or its authorized agent, or any person who assumes
the risks associated with seizing a biting dog and does so for the purpose of public
safety and promptly delivered to any member of the Sandy police department for
impounding. (Ord. 15-74 § 7, 1974, Ord. 02, 2016.)
6.04.080 Killing rabid dogs. (Removed Ord. 02, 2016)
6.04.090 Pound regulations.
Dogs impounded under the authority of this chapter or under the authority of ORS
Chapter, 609 except in the event of an injured or sick dog pursuant to this chapter, shall
be taken to the Clackamas County dog facility and such impoundment shall be subject
to the pound regulations of Clackamas County. (Ord. 12-84 § 1, 1984: Ord. 15-74 § 9,
1974, Ord. 02, 2016)
6.04.110 Interference with officer.
It is unlawful for any person to interfere in any way with any police officer or dog control
officer of the city engaged in seizing or impounding any dog under authority of this
chapter. (Ord. 15-74 § 11, 1974.)
6.04.120 Injured or sick dogs.
A. The Sandy Police Department shall make diligent effort to locate the owner or
keeper of a dog in need of medical attention before authorizing such medical attention
or disposal of said dog. (Ord. 02, 2016)
B. Should the member of the police department authorize the necessary medical
attention, then and in that event the owner or keeper of said dog shall be liable for the
costs of the medical treatment rendered to said animal. (Ord. 02, 2016)
C. The member of the Sandy City Police Department who impounds any dog that is in
need of medical attention may in his/her discretion: (Ord. 15-74 § 12, 1974, Ord. 02,
2016.)
1. Authorize the necessary medical attention, or
2. Have the dog humanely euthanized.
3
6.04.130 Violation—Penalty.
Violation of this chapter is deemed to be a Class C infraction. (Ord. 12-84 § 3, 1984:
Ord. 15-74 § 13, 1974.)
Chapter 6.08
APIARIES, LIVESTOCK AND FOWL2
6.08.010 Keeping prohibited-Exception.
It is unlawful for any person to keep, maintain, possess or harbor on any property within
the city any apiary, livestock or fowl such as, but not limited to horses, mules, donkeys,
burros, cattle, sheep, goats, swine, chickens, geese, ducks, doves or pigeons unless
the owner or possessor provides facilities which will reasonably assure the city that the
premises will be maintained in a sanitary condition, free from offensive odors, excessive
noise or any other conditions which constitute a public nuisance as defined in Title 8 of
this code.
It is unlawful for any person to keep peacocks/peahens, turkeys, or roosters (male
chicken).
It is unlawful for anyone to maintain any apiary, livestock or fowl that interferes with the
reasonable and comfortable use of the property of others. (Ord. 8-74 § 1, 1974.) Ord.
17, 2012.)
6.08.020 Apiaries.
It is unlawful for any person to keep, maintain, possess or harbor on any property within
the city any apiary unless the following requirements are met:
1. Persons responsible for the apiaries must notify all neighbor’s property owners
within 150 feet of the apiary or proposed facility.
2. Apiaries must be a minimum of 15 feet away from "any public walkway, street or
road, or any public building, park or recreation area, or any residential dwelling,
not including any residential dwelling located on the property." (Not including your
own).
3. Apiaries that are also less within 150 feet from any streets, parks, houses,
dwelling, or other structure, must be protected by a six-foot hedgerow, partition,
fence or similar enclosure. (Ord. 17, 2012.)
6.08.030 Nuisances designated.
Any barn, pen, corral, coop, yard, kennel or other enclosure or appurtenance thereof in
which any animal, livestock or fowl shall be kept, or any other place within the city in
which manure or other discharges of animals, livestock or fowl shall accumulate, and
which is maintained in an unsanitary condition, allowing an offensive odor to escape
therefrom, or providing an insect or rodent attractant, is deemed a nuisance and
prohibited. (Ord. 8-74 § 3, 1974; Ord. 17, 2012.)
4
6.08.040 Violation-Penalty.
A person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
guilty of a Class A infraction and subject to the penalties provided in Chapter 1.18
Prosecution of civil infraction under this chapter may be in addition to or in lieu of any
other remedies or enforcement measures provided by law or ordinance. (Ord. 8-74 § 4,
1974.)2017-12)
6.08.050 Continuing violations.
Each day's violation of a provision of this chapter constitutes a separate offense. (Ord.
8-74 § 5, 1974.)
Footnotes:
For statutory provisions regarding dog licensing and control, see ORS 609.010 et seq.
2. For further provisions regarding animal nuisances, see Chapter 8.08 of this code.
1
TITLE 8
HEALTH AND SAFETY
Chapter 8.04 NUISANCES GENERAL PROVISIONS1 ..................................................... 1
Chapter 8.08 NUISANCES ANIMALS AND FOWL2 ........................................................... 2
Chapter 8.12 NUISANCES AFFECTING PUBLIC HEALTH ............................................. 2
Chapter 8.16 NUISANCES AFFECTING PUBLIC SAFETY3 ........................................... 3
Chapter 8.20 NUISANCES AFFECTING PUBLIC PEACE ............................................... 5
Chapter 8.22 CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTIES ......................................................... 9
Chapter 8.24 NUISANCES ABATEMENT PROCEDURES ............................................ 14
Chapter 8.28 NUISANCES PENALTY ................................................................................ 16
Chapter 8.32 NUISANCES EXPLOSIVES ......................................................................... 17
Chapter 8.34 SANDY GRAFFIT CODE .............................................................................. 21
Chapter 8.35 CAMPING PROHIBITED .............................................................................. 29
Chapter 8.36 OUTDOOR BURNING ................................................................................. 29
Chapter 8.04
NUISANCES GENERAL PROVISIONS1
8.04.010 Definitions.
Except where the context indicates otherwise:
A. "Junk vehicles" means any vehicle which has no engine, no working engine, missing
doors or windows or is missing any tire or wheel or which is in any way disabled or not
immediately capable of operation or any trailer that is missing doors or windows,
missing any tire or wheel or which is in any way disabled and not immediately capable
of its designed purpose.
B. "Person in charge of property" means an agent, occupant, lessee, contract purchaser
or person, other than the owner, having possession or control of the property.
C. "Public place" means a building, place or accommodation, whether publicly or
privately owned, open and available to the general public.
D. "Weeds or noxious growth" means grass over ten inches in height, tansy ragwort,
milkweed, and all thistles and blackberries. This definition also includes any vegetation
which creates a fire hazard, obstructs visibility of motorists or causes injury to persons.
(Ord. 12-87 § 2, 1987; Ord. 4-86 § 1, 1986; Ord. 1-73 § 1, 1973.)
2
8.04.020 Declaration of nuisance.
A. The acts, conditions or objects specifically enumerated and defined in Chapters 8.08
through 8.20 are declared to be public nuisances and such acts, conditions or objects
may be abated by any of the procedures set forth in Chapter 8.24.
B. In addition to those nuisances specifically enumerated within Chapters 8.08 through
8.20, every other thing, substance or act which is determined by the council to be
injurious or detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare of the city is declared to be
a nuisance and may be abated as provided in Chapter 8.24.(Ord. 1-73 § 18, 1973.)
Chapter 8.08
NUISANCES ANIMALS AND FOWL2
8.08.010 Communicable disease.
No person may permit an animal or bird owned or controlled by him to be at large within
the city if the animal or bird is afflicted with a communicable disease. (Ord. 1-73 § 2,
1973.)
8.08.020 Dangerous animals.
No person may permit his wild or domesticated dangerous animal to run at large. (Ord.
1-73 § 3, 1973.)
8.08.030 Livestock and poultry.
A. No person may maintain a pigsty, slaughterhouse or tannery, or permit livestock or
poultry owned by him to run at large within the city. This section shall not apply to cats,
dogs or other household pets.
B. Livestock, poultry and other animals and fowl running at large in the city shall be
taken up and impounded by a police officer and disposed of in accordance with the
procedure provided by ordinance for the disposition of abandoned vehicles.
(Ord. 1-73 § 4, 1973.)
8.08.040 Removal of carcasses.
No person may permit any fowl or animal carcass owned by him or under his control to
remain upon the public streets or places, or to be exposed on private property for a
period of time longer than is reasonably necessary to remove or dispose of such
carcass. (Ord. 1-73 § 5, 1973.)
Chapter 8.12
NUISANCES AFFECTING PUBLIC HEALTH
8.12.010 Designated.
No owner or person in charge of property may permit or cause a nuisance affecting
3
public health. The following are nuisances affecting the public health and may be
abated as provided in Chapter 8.24:
A. Privies. An open vault or privy constructed and maintained within the city, except
those constructed or maintained in connection with construction projects in accordance
with the Oregon State Board of Health regulations;
B. Debris on Private Property. Accumulations of debris, rubbish, manure and other
refuse located on private property that are not removed within a reasonable time and
that affect the health, safety or welfare of the city;
C. Stagnant Water. Stagnant water which affords a breeding place for mosquitoes and
other insect pests;
D. Water Pollution. Pollution of a body of water, well, spring, stream or drainage ditch by
sewage, industrial wastes or other substances placed in or near such water in a manner
that will cause harmful material to pollute the water;
E. Food. Decayed or unwholesome food which is offered for human consumption;
F. Odor. Premises which are in such a state or condition as to cause an offensive odor
or which are in an unsanitary condition;
G. Surface Drainage. Drainage of liquid wastes from private premises.
(Ord. 1-73 § 6, 1973.)
Chapter 8.16
NUISANCES AFFECTING PUBLIC SAFETY3
8.16.010 Abandoned iceboxes.
No person may leave in a place accessible to children an abandoned, unattended or
discarded icebox, refrigerator or similar container which has an airtight door with a snap
lock, lock or other mechanism which may not be released for opening from the inside,
without first removing such lock or door from such icebox, refrigerator or similar
container. (Ord. 1-73 § 7, 1973.)
8.16.020 Attractive nuisances.
A. No owner or person in charge of property may permit:
1. Unguarded machinery, equipment or other devices on such property which are
attractive, dangerous and accessible to children;
2. Lumber, logs or piling placed or stored on such property in a manner so as to be
attractive, dangerous and accessible to children;
4
3. An open pit, quarry, cistern or other excavation without erecting adequate safeguards
or barriers to prevent such places from being used by children.
B. This section shall not apply to authorized construction projects if during the course of
construction reasonable safeguards are maintained to prevent injury or death to playing
children.
(Ord. 1-73 § 8, 1973.)
8.16.030 Snow and ice removal.
No owner or person in charge of property, improved or unimproved, abutting on a public
sidewalk may permit snow and ice to accumulate and remain on the sidewalk which
constitutes danger to passersby. Such person(s) shall have an obligation to remove
dangerous snow and ice on the sidewalk to assure safe travel by pedestrians. (Ord. 13-
86 § 1, 1986: Ord. 1-73 § 9, 1973.)
8.16.040 Weeds and noxious growth.
No owner or person in charge of property may permit weeds or other noxious vegetation
to grow upon his property. It shall be the duty of an owner or person in charge of
property to cut down or to destroy weeds or other noxious vegetation as often as
needed in order to prevent the weeds or noxious vegetation from becoming unsightly,
from becoming a fire hazard, from maturing or from going to seed. (Ord. 1-73 § 10,
1973.)
8.16.050 Scattering rubbish.
No person may throw, dump or deposit upon public or private property an injurious or
offensive substance or any kind of rubbish, trash, debris, refuse or any substance that
would mar the appearance, create a stench, detract from the cleanliness or safety of
such property, or would be likely to injure an animal, vehicle or person traveling upon a
public way. (Ord. 1-73 § 11, 1973.)
8.16.060 Trees.
A. No owner or person in charge of property that abuts upon any street or sidewalk may
permit trees or bushes on his property to interfere with street or sidewalk traffic. It shall
be the duty of an owner or person in charge of property that abuts upon a street or
sidewalk to keep all trees and bushes on his premises and on the adjoining parking strip
trimmed to a height of not less than eight feet above the sidewalks and not less than ten
feet above the streets.
B. No owner or person in charge of property may allow to stand any dead or decaying
tree that is a hazard to the public or to persons or property on or near the property.
(Ord. 1-73 § 12, 1973.)
8.16.070 Fences.
A. No person may construct or maintain a barbed-wire fence or allow barbed wire to
5
remain as a part of a fence along a sidewalk, unless such wire is placed not less than
six inches above the top of a fence which is not less than six feet high.
B. No person may install, maintain or operate an electric fence along a sidewalk.
(Ord. 1-73 § 13, 1973.)
8.16.080 Surface waters—Drainage.
A. No owner or person in charge of any building or structure may suffer or permit
rainwater, ice or snow to fall from such building or structure on to a street or public
sidewalk or to flow across such sidewalk.
B. The owner or person in charge of property shall install and maintain in a proper state
of repair adequate drainpipes or a drainage system so that any overflow water
accumulating on the roof or about such building is not carried across or upon the
sidewalk.
(Ord. 1-73 § 14, 1973.)
8.16.100 Junk accumulation.
Unless specifically authorized by permit or license, no person shall store or permit to be
stored scrap building supplies, junk, furniture, plumbing supplies or fixtures, electrical
supplies or fixtures, appliances, junk vehicles, recyclables or water products in any
manner so as to expose it to view to persons from a street, sidewalk or public right-ofway
adjoining the premises for a period of more than fourteen days. (Ord. 12-87 § 1,
1987.)
8.16.110 Unimproved lots.
Unimproved lots in commercial areas must either:
a. Be landscaped with grass or a combination of native species of ground cover and
shrubs; or
b. Be screened from view from public rights-of-way by a sight-obscuring wood fence
at least six feet high. Such fences must comply with City design standards and
building codes.
Unimproved lots shall not be used for vehicle parking unless they have been approved
for that use through a design review process (Chapter 17.90).
Chapter 8.20
NUISANCES AFFECTING PUBLIC PEACE
8.20.010 Radio and television interference.
A. No person may operate or use an electrical, mechanical or other device, apparatus,
instrument or machine that causes reasonably preventable interference with radio or
television reception, provided that the radio or television receiver interfered with is of
good engineering design.
6
B. This section does not apply to electrical and radio devices licensed, approved and
operated under the rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission.
(Ord. 1-73 § 15, 1973.)
8.20.020 Unnecessary noise.
(Note: For statutory provisions regarding excessive noise, see ORS 467.010 et seq.; for
provisions prohibiting unnecessary muffler noise in motor vehicles, see ORS 483.448.)
A. No person may make, assist in making, continue or cause to be made any loud,
disturbing or unnecessary noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the
comfort, repose, health, safety or peace of others.
B. Loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this section include, but are
not limited to the following:
1. The keeping of any bird or animal which by causing frequent or long-continued noise
shall disturb the comfort and repose of any person in the vicinity;
2. The attaching of a bell to an animal or allowing a bell to remain on an animal;
3. The use of a vehicle or engine, either stationary or moving, so out of repair, loaded or
operated as to create any loud or unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise;
4. The sound of a horn or signaling device on a vehicle on a street, public place or
private place, except as a necessary warning of danger;
5. The blowing of a steam whistle attached to a stationary boiler, except to give notice of
the time to begin or stop work, as a warning of danger, or upon request of proper city
authorities;
6. The use of a mechanical device operated by compressed air, steam or otherwise,
unless the noise thereby created is effectively muffled;
7. Any excavation or construction, including but not limited to: erection, repair, alteration
or demolition of a building or structure other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, or between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on
weekends. However, site clearing, tree falling, earth moving, installation or construction
of underground utilities, paving of streets and sidewalks, framing, and foundation
pouring, roofing and structure framing shall be entirely prohibited on Sundays.
Exceptions may be granted by the city manager in cases of urgent necessity in the
interest of the public welfare and safety, by permit for a period not to exceed ten days.
Such permit may be renewed for periods of five days while such emergency continues
to exist. Exceptions may also be granted by the city council, by application before or
during the progress of the work, upon a determination by the council that the public
health, safety and welfare will not be impaired and that loss or inconvenience would
result to any person unless such exception were granted.
7
The owner of property may do work on property actually occupied by him between the
hours of 7 a.m. and 10 p.m. weekdays, and from 8 a.m. to 10 p.m. weekends, without
obtaining a permit as herein required (Ord. 2007-11);
8. The use of a gong or siren upon a vehicle, other than police, fire or other emergency
vehicle;
9. The creation of excessive noise on a street adjacent to a school, institution of
learning, church or court of justice, while the same are in use, or on a street adjacent to
a hospital, nursing home or other institution for the care of the sick or infirm, which
unreasonably interferes with the operation of such institution or disturbs or unduly
annoys patients;
10. The discharge in the open air of the exhaust of a steam engine, internal combustion
engine, motorboat or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will
effectively prevent loud or explosive noises and the emission of annoying smoke;
11. The use or operation of an automatic or electric piano, phonograph, gramophone,
victrola, radio, television, loudspeaker or any instrument for sound producing or any
sound-amplifying device so loudly as to disturb persons in the vicinity thereof or in such
a manner as renders the use thereof a nuisance. However, upon application to the
council, permits may be granted to responsible persons or organizations for the
broadcast or amplification of programs of music, news, speeches or general
entertainment as a part of a national, state or city event, public festivals, or outstanding
events of a noncommercial nature. The broadcast or amplification shall not be audible
for a distance of more than one thousand feet from the instrument, speaker or amplifier
and in no event shall a permit be granted where any obstruction to the free and
uninterrupted traffic, both vehicular and pedestrian, will result;
12. The making of a noise by crying, calling or shouting or by means of a whistle, rattle,
bell, gong, clapper, horn, hammer, drum, musical instrument or other device for the
purpose of advertising goods, wares or merchandise, attracting attention, or inviting
patronage of a person to a business. However, newsboys may sell newspapers and
magazines by public outcry;
13. The conducting, operating or maintaining of a garage within one hundred feet of a
private residence, apartment, rooming house or hotel in such manner as to cause loud
or disturbing noises to be emitted therefrom between the hours of eleven p.m. and
seven a.m. (Ord. 1-73 § 16, 1973. Ord. 2007-11)
8.20.025 Public nuisance-Unlawful activities.
A. It is a public nuisance for any person in charge of property to permit or any person to
cause to exist any public place where patrons, employees, residents or occupants
engage in a pattern of behavior in the neighborhood involving the commission of three
or more of the following offenses:
8
1. Furnish Liquor to Intoxicated Person: ORS 471.410
2. Furnish Alcohol to a Minor; ORS 471.410
3. Prostitution; ORS 167.007
4. Patronizing Prostitution; ORS 167.008
5. Promoting Prostitution; ORS 167.012
6. Noise, SMC Section 8.20.020;
7. Assault, ORS 163.160, 163.165, 163.175 or 163.185;
8. Sexual abuse, ORS 163.415, 163.425 or 163.427;
9. Public indecency, ORS 163.465;
10. Criminal trespass, ORS 164.245 or 164.255;
11. Criminal mischief, ORS 164.345, 164.354 or 164.365;
12. Disorderly conduct, ORS 166.025;
13. Harassment, ORS 166.065;
14. Minor in possession of alcohol, ORS 471.430; or
15. Unlawful manufacture, delivery or possession of a controlled substance, ORS
475.992;
B. For purposes of this section, "pattern of behavior in the neighborhood" means one or
more patrons, employees, residents or occupants of the place or business having been
arrested or issued a citation for violation of three or more of any of the offenses
specified in subsection A of this section that occur over any six month period at the
place or business or within three hundred (300) feet thereof.
C. It is unlawful for any place or business to be a public nuisance or to be used as a
public nuisance. If any place or business is found to be a public nuisance or to be used
as such, it shall be subject to closure for a period of up to one year.
D. Public nuisance closure will be subject to the abatement procedures provided in
SMC Sections 8.24.010 and 8.24.030. (Ord. 3-97 § 1, 1997.)
8.20.030 Notices and advertisements.
A. No person may affix or cause any placard, bill, advertisement or poster to be affixed
upon real or personal property, public or private property, without first securing
permission from the owner or person in control of the property. This section shall not be
construed as an amendment to or a repeal of any regulation now or hereafter adopted
by the city regulating the use of and the location of signs and advertising.
B. No person, either as principal or agent, may scatter, distribute or cause any placards,
advertisements or other similar material to be scattered or distributed on public or
private property.
C. This section does not prohibit the distribution of advertising material during a parade
or approved public gathering.
(Ord. 1-73 § 17, 1973.)
9
8.20.040 Illegal signs.
No person may erect or maintain any sign or any abandoned sign in violation of the
provisions of Chapter 15.32 of this code. (Ord. 4-88 § 15, 1988.)
Chapter 8.22
CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTIES
(Ord. 03, 2011)
8.22.10 Definitions
A. Chronic Nuisance Property.
1. Property on which three or more Nuisance Activities exist or have occurred during
any thirty day period; or
2. Property on which or within 200 feet of which any person associated with the property
has engaged in three or more Nuisance Activities during any thirty day period; or
3. Property that, upon request for execution of a search warrant, has been the subject of
a determination by a court that probable cause that possession, manufacture, or
delivery of a controlled substance or related offenses as defined in ORS 167.203, ORS
475.005 through 475.285 and/or 475.940 through 475.995 has occurred within the
previous thirty days, and the Chief of Police has determined that the search warrant was
based on evidence of continuous or repeated Nuisance Activities at the property; or
4. Property on which continuous or repeated Nuisance Activities as defined in
Subsection C below exist or have occurred
B. Control. The ability to regulate, restrain, dominate, counteract or govern property, or
conduct that occurs on a property.
C. Nuisance Activities. Any of the following activities, behaviors or conduct:
1. Harassment as defined in ORS 166.065(1)(a).
2. Intimidation as defined in ORS 166.155 through 166.165.
3. Disorderly conduct as defined in ORS 166.025
4. Assault or menacing as defined in ORS 163.160 through 163.190.
5. Sexual abuse, contributing to the delinquency of a minor, or sexual misconduct
as defined in ORS 163.415 through 163.445.
6. Public indecency as defined in ORS 163.465.
7. Prostitution or related offenses as defined in ORS 167.007 through 167.017.
8. Alcoholic liquor violations as defined in ORS Chapter 471.105 through
471.482.
10
9. Offensive littering as defined in ORS 164.805.
10. Criminal trespass as defined in ORS 164.243 through 164.265.
11. Theft as defined in ORS 164.015 through 164.140.
12. Arson or related offenses as defined in ORS 164.315 through 164.335.
13. Possession, manufacture, or delivery of a controlled substance or related
offenses as defined in ORS 167.203, ORS 475.005 through 475.285, and/or
475.940 through 475.995.
14. Illegal gambling as defined in ORS 167.117, and/or ORS 167.122 through
ORS 167.127.
15. Criminal mischief as defined in ORS 164.345 through 164.365.
16. Any attempt to commit (as defined in ORS 161.405), and/or conspire to
commit (as defined in ORS 161.450), any of the above activities, behavior or
conduct.
17. Fire or discharge of a firearm as defined in ORS 166.
18. Disorderly conduct as defined in 9.02.1 or ORS 166.023 and 166.025.
D. Person. Any natural person, agent, association, firm, partnership, corporation or
other entity capable of owning, occupying or using property in the City of Sandy.
E. Person Associated With. Any person who, on the occasion of a nuisance activity, has
entered, patronized, visited, or attempted to enter, patronize or visit, or waited to enter,
patronize, or visit a property or person present on a property, including without limitation
any officer, director, customer, agent, employee, or any independent contractor of a
property, person in charge, or owner of a property.
F. Person in Charge. Any person, in actual or constructive possession of a property,
including but not limited to an owner or occupant of property under his or her ownership
or control.
G. Property. Any property, including land and that which is affixed, incidental or
appurtenant to land, including but not limited to any business or residence, parking
area, loading area, landscaping, building or structure or any separate part, unit or
portion thereof, or any business equipment, whether or not permanent. For property
consisting of more than one unit, property may be limited to the unit or the portion of the
property on which any nuisance activity has occurred or is occurring, but includes areas
of the property used in common by all units of property including without limitation other
structures erected on the property and areas used for parking, loading, and
landscaping.
(Ord. 16, 2014.)
11
8.22.20 Violation.
A. Any property determined by the chief of police to be chronic nuisance property is in
violation of this Chapter and subject to its remedies.
B. Any person in charge of property determined by the chief of police to be a chronic
nuisance property is in violation of this chapter and subject to its remedies.
8.22.30 Procedures.
When the chief of police receives two or more police reports documenting the
occurrence of nuisance activities on or within two hundred feet of a property, the chief of
police shall independently review such reports to determine whether they describe the
activities, behaviors or conduct enumerated under SMC 8.22.10 (l--19). Upon such a
finding, the chief of police may notify the person in charge in writing that the property is
in danger of becoming chronic nuisance property. The notice shall contain the following
information:
1. The street address or a legal description sufficient for identification of the
property.
2. A statement that the chief of police has information that the property may be
chronic nuisance property, with a concise description of the nuisance activities
that exist, or that have occurred. The chief of police shall offer the person in
charge an opportunity to propose a course of action that the chief of police
agrees will abate the nuisance activities giving rise to the violation.
3. Demand that the person in charge respond to the chief of police within ten
days to discuss the nuisance activities.
B. When the chief of police receives a police report documenting the occurrence of
additional nuisance activity on or within two hundred feet of a property after notification
as provided by subsection (A) of this section; or, in the case of chronic nuisance
property as defined in SMC 8.22.10(3) or (4), for which notice under subsection (A) of
this section is not required, the chief of police shall notify the person in charge in writing
that the property has been determined to be a chronic nuisance property. The notice
shall contain the following information:
1. The street address or a legal description sufficient for identification of the
property.
2. A statement that the chief of police has determined the property to be chronic
nuisance property with a concise description of the nuisance activities leading to
his/her determination.
3. Demand that the person in charge respond within ten days to the chief of
police and propose a course of action that the chief of police agrees will abate
the nuisance activities giving rise to the violation.
4. Service shall be made either personally or by first class mail, postage prepaid,
return receipt requested, addressed to the person in charge at the address of the
property determined to be a chronic nuisance property, or such other place which
12
is likely to give the person in charge notice of the determination by the chief of
police.
5. A copy of the notice shall be served on the owner at the address shown on the
tax rolls of the county in which the property is located, and/or the occupant at the
address of the property, if these persons are different than the person in charge,
and shall be made either personally or by certified first class mail, postage
prepaid.
6. The chief of police or his delegate shall prepare an affidavit of mailing for any
mailing of notice required under this subsection.
C. If the person in charge fails to respond as required by subsection (B)(3) of this
section, the chief of police may refer the matter to the city attorney. Prior to referring the
matter to the city attorney, the notice required by subsection (B) of this section shall also
be posted at the property.
D. If the person in charge responds as required by subsection (B)(3) of this section and
agrees to abate nuisance activities giving rise to the violation, the chief of police may
postpone referring the matter to the city attorney. If an agreed course of action does not
result in the abatement of the nuisance activities within sixty days; or, if no agreement
concerning abatement is reached within sixty days, the chief of police may refer the
matter to the city attorney.
E. When a person in charge makes a response to the chief of police as required by
subsections (A)(3) or (B)(3) of this section, any conduct or statements made in
connection with the furnishing of that response shall not constitute an admission that
any nuisance activities have occurred or are occurring. This subsection does not require
the exclusion of any evidence that is otherwise admissible or offered for any other
purpose.
F. The failure of any person to receive notice as provided by subsections (A)(3) or (B)(3)
of this section shall not invalidate or otherwise affect the proceedings under this
chapter.
8.22.40 Commencement of Actions; Remedies; Burden of Proof.
A. The city attorney may commence legal proceedings in any court of competent
jurisdiction, including Sandy Municipal Court and Clackamas Circuit Court, to abate
chronic nuisance property and to seek closure, the imposition of civil penalties against
any or all of the persons in charge thereof, and, any other relief deemed appropriate.
B. If the court determines property to be chronic nuisance property, the court shall order
that the property be closed and secured against all unauthorized access, use and
occupancy for a period of not less than six months, nor more than one year. The order
shall be entered as part of the final judgment. The court shall retain jurisdiction during
any period of closure.
C. If the court determines a property to be chronic nuisance property, the court may
impose a civil penalty of up to two hundred dollars per day for each day nuisance
activities occurred on the property, following notice pursuant to SMC 8.22.30 (B); or, the
13
cost to the city to abate the nuisance activities at the property whichever is greater. The
amount of the civil penalty shall be assessed against the person in charge and/or the
property and may be included in the city’s money judgment.
D. If satisfied of the good faith of the person in charge, the court shall not award civil
penalties if the court finds that the person in charge at all material times could not, in the
exercise of reasonable care or diligence, determine that the property had become
chronic nuisance property.
E. In establishing the amount of any civil penalty, the court may consider any of the
following factors and shall cite those found applicable:
1. The actions taken by the person in charge to mitigate or correct the nuisance
activities at the property;
2. The financial condition of the person in charge;
3. Repeated or continuous nature of the problem;
4. The magnitude or gravity of the problem;
5. The cooperation of the person in charge with the city;
6. The cost to the city of investigating and correcting or attempting to correct the
nuisance activities;
7. Any other factor deemed relevant by the court.
8. The city shall have the initial burden of proof to show by a preponderance of the
evidence that the property is chronic nuisance property.
G. Evidence of a property’s general reputation and/or the reputation of persons residing
in or frequenting it shall be admissible.
8.22.50 Summary Closure.
Any summary closure proceeding shall be based on evidence showing that nuisance
activities exist or have occurred on the property and that emergency action is necessary
to avoid an immediate threat to public welfare and safety. Proceedings to obtain an
order of summary closure shall be governed by the provisions of ORCP 79 for obtaining
temporary restraining orders. In the event of summary closure, the city is not required to
comply with the notification procedures set forth in SMC 8.22.30.
8.22.60 Enforcement.
A. The court may authorize the city to physically secure the property against all
unauthorized access, use or occupancy in the event that the person in charge fails to do
so within the time specified by the court. In the event the court authorizes the city to
secure the property, the city shall recover all costs reasonably incurred by the city to
physically secure the property as provided by this section. The city shall prepare a
statement of costs incurred in physically securing the property and the city shall
thereafter submit that statement to the court for its review as provided by ORCP 68.
14
B. The person in charge shall pay reasonable relocation costs of a tenant as defined by
ORS 90.100(28), if, without actual notice, the tenant moved into the property after
either:
1. A person in charge received notice of the determination of the chief of police pursuant
to SMC 8.22.30(B); or
1. A person in charge received notice of an action brought pursuant to SMC 8.22.50.
C. A lien shall be created against the property for the amount of the city’s money
judgment. In addition, any person who is assessed penalties under 8.22.40(C) and/or
costs under SMC 8.22.60(A) shall be personally liable for payment thereof to the city.
Judgments imposed by this chapter shall bear interest at the statutory rate.
8.22.70 Attorney Fees
The court may, in its discretion, award attorneys’ fees to the prevailing party.
Chapter 8.24
NUISANCES ABATEMENT PROCEDURES
8.24.010 Abatement notice.
A. Upon determination by the City Manager or designee that a nuisance as defined in
Chapters 8.04 through 8.20 or any other ordinance of the city exists, the City Manager
or designee shall forthwith cause a notice to be posted on the premises where the
nuisance exists, directing the owner or person in charge of the property to abate such
nuisance.
B. At the time of posting, the city recorder shall cause a copy of such notice to be
forwarded by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, to the owner or person in
charge of the property at the last known address of such owner or other person.
C. The notice to abate shall contain:
1. A description of the real property, by street address or otherwise, on which such
nuisance exists;
2. A direction to abate the nuisance within ten days from the date of notice;
3. A description of the nuisance;
4. A statement that unless such nuisance is removed, the city may abate the nuisance
and the cost of abatement shall be a lien against the property;
5. A statement that the owner or other person in charge of the property may protest the
abatement by giving notice to the city recorder within ten days from the date of the
notice.
15
D. Upon completion of the posting and mailing, the person posting and mailing the
notice shall execute and file a certificate stating the date and place of such mailing and
posting.
E. An error in the name or address of the owner or person in charge of the property or
the use of a name other than that of the owner or other person shall not make the notice
void and in such a case the posted notice shall be sufficient.
(Ord. 1-73 § 19, 1973, Ord. 16, 2014.)
8.24.020 Abatement by the owner.
A. Within ten days after the posting and mailing of the notice as provided in Section
8.24.010, the owner or person in charge of the property shall remove the nuisance or
show that no nuisance exists.
B. The owner or person in charge protesting that no nuisance exists shall file with the
city recorder a written statement which shall specify the basis for so protesting.
C. The statement shall be referred to the council as a part of the council's regular
agenda at the next succeeding meeting. At the time set for consideration of the
abatement, the owner or other person may appear and be heard by the council, and the
council shall thereupon determine whether or not a nuisance in fact exists and such
determination shall be entered in the official minutes of the council. Council
determination shall be required only in those cases where a written statement has been
filed as provided.
D. If the council determines that a nuisance does in fact exist, the owner or other person
shall, within ten days after such council determination, abate such nuisance.
(Ord. 1-73 § 20, 1973.)
8.24.030 Abatement by the city.
A. If, within the time allowed, the nuisance has not been abated by the owner or person
in charge of the property, the City Manager or designee may cause the nuisance to be
abated.
B. The officer charged with abatement of such nuisance shall have the right at
reasonable times to enter into or upon property to investigate or cause the removal of a
nuisance.
C. The city recorder shall keep an accurate record of the expense incurred by the city in
abating the nuisance and shall include therein a charge of twenty percent of the
expense for administrative overhead.
(Ord. 1-73 § 21, 1973, Ord.16, 2014.)
8.24.040 Assessment of costs.
A. The city recorder, by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, shall forward to the
owner or person in charge of the property a notice stating:
16
1. The total cost of abatement including the administrative overhead;
2. That the cost as indicated will be assessed to and become a lien against the property
unless paid within thirty days from the date of notice;
3. That if the owner or person in charge of the property objects to the cost of the
abatement as indicated, he may file a notice of objection with the city recorder not more
than ten days from the date of notice.
B. Upon the expiration of ten days after the date of the notice, the council, in regular
course of business, shall hear and determine any properly filed objections to the costs
to be assessed.
C. If the costs of the abatement are not paid within thirty days from the date of the
notice, an assessment of the costs as stated or as determined by the council shall be
made by resolution and shall thereupon be entered in the docket of city liens and, upon
such entry being made, shall constitute a lien upon the property from which the
nuisance was removed or abated.
D. The lien shall be enforced in the same manner as liens for street improvements are
enforced and shall bear interest at the rate of nine percent per year. Such interest shall
accrue from date of the entry of the lien in the lien docket.
E. An error in the name of the owner or person in charge of the property shall not void
the assessment nor will a failure to receive the notice of the proposed assessment
render the assessment void, but it shall remain a valid lien against the property.
(Ord. 10-86 § 1, 1986; Ord. 1-73 § 22, 1973, Ord 16, 2014.)
8.24.050 Summary abatement.
The procedure provided by Chapters 8.04 through 8.28 is not exclusive but is in addition
to procedures provided by other ordinances, and the city manager or the chief of police
may proceed summarily to abate a health or other nuisance which unmistakably exists
and from which there is imminent danger to human life or property. (Ord. 7-91 § 1,
1991: Ord. 1-73 § 23, 1973.)
Chapter 8.28
NUISANCES PENALTY
8.28.010 Violation--Penalty.
A person violating any of the provisions of Chapters 8.04 through 8.24 shall, upon
conviction thereof, be guilty of a Class A infraction and subject to the penalties provided
in Chapter 1.18. (Ord. 2-80 § 3 (part), 1980.)
8.28.020 Continuing violation.
A. Each day's violation of a Chapters 8.04 through 8.24 provision of constitutes a
separate offense.
17
B. The abatement of a nuisance is not a penalty for violating Chapters 8.04 through
8.24 but is an additional remedy. The imposition of a penalty does not relieve a person
of the duty to abate a nuisance.
(Ord. 1-73 § 25, 1973.)
Chapter 8.32
NUISANCES EXPLOSIVES
8.32.010 Chapter purpose.
It is the intention of the council that this chapter shall supplement and shall be uniformly
interpreted with the laws and regulations of the United States and the state of Oregon,
so far as possible, to avoid an undue burden on commerce. (Ord. 16-75 § 1, 1975.)
8.32.020 Definitions.
As used in this title, the singular includes the plural and the masculine includes the
feminine and neuter. Except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the
following words shall mean:
A. "Explosives" means chemical compounds, mixtures or devices, the primary or
common purpose of which is to function by explosion with substantially instantaneous
release of gas or heat, including, but not limited to class A and class B explosives as
classified by the Interstate Commerce Commission, nitro-carbo-nitrates and fireworks
as defined by ORS 480.110, but excluding dangerous articles such as flammable
liquids, flammable solids, compressed flammable or nonflammable gases, oxidizing
materials, corrosive liquids, poisonous liquids or gases, radioactive materials and small
arms ammunition.
The Interstate Commerce Commission classifies explosives as follows:
1. CLASS A. Explosives having detonating or otherwise maximum hazard such as
dynamite, nitroglycerin, picric acid, lead azide, fulminate of mercury, black powder,
blasting caps, and detonating primers;
2. CLASS B. Explosives having flammable hazard, such as propellant explosives
(including some smokeless powders), photographic flash powders, and some special
fireworks;
3. CLASS C. Explosives including certain types of manufactured articles which contain
class A or class B explosives, or both, as components but in restricted quantities, such
as small arms ammunition, common fireworks, cordeau detonant and explosive rivets.
(Ord. 16-75 § 2, 1975.)
8.32.030 Applicability.
A. Except as this chapter may conflict with the regulations, laws and constitution of the
United States and the state of Oregon, it shall apply to interstate and intrastate
commerce.
18
B. This chapter shall not apply to:
1. The armed forces of the United States or the militia of any state;
2. The use of explosives in Sandy.
(Ord. 16-75 § 3, 1975.)
8.32.040 Storage—Permit required.
No person may store any explosives unless a permit is first obtained from the city
council. A revocable permit valid for one year may be issued by the city council. (Ord.
16-75 § 4, 1975.)
8.32.050 Application for permit and renewal.
Written application for a permit or for renewal of a permit to store explosives shall be
made to the recorder. The application shall be accompanied by a permit fee of ten
dollars which shall be returned to the applicant if the application is denied. The recorder
shall refer the application to the city council at the next regular council meeting. (Ord.
16-75 § 5, 1975.)
8.32.060 Consideration of application.
The council may either grant or deny the application for a permit, taking into
consideration:
A. The congestion of persons, the type of buildings, the volume of vehicular traffic, and
the topography in the vicinity of the storage area;
B. The condition and construction of the structure or magazine used or to be used for
storage of explosives and the applicable fire zone regulations;
C. The adequacy of water supply in the storage area;
D. "The American Table of Distances for Storage of Explosives," published by the
Institute of Makers of Explosives, September 30, 1955;
E. Any other factors relevant to public safety. (Ord. 16-75 § 6, 1975.)
8.32.070 Issuance of permit.
In granting a permit, the council may limit the quantity of explosives which may be
stored by the applicant and may prescribe in the permit the terms and conditions the
council considers necessary for the protection of the public from the dangers of
explosion. The recorder shall issue the permit as directed by the council. (Ord. 16-75 §
7, 1975.)
8.32.080 Overnight storage.
No permit may be granted to store or keep over fifty pounds of explosives or over five
19
hundred blasting caps any place within the city between the hours of six p.m. and seven
a.m. on the following day. (Ord. 16-75 § 8, 1975.)
8.32.090 Revocation of permit.
The council may revoke a permit:
A. If conditions considered in granting the permit change at the storage area or in the
vicinity and the public is endangered by the storage of explosives as authorized by the
permit;
B. If the permittee is convicted of a violation of this chapter;
C. If the permittee is convicted for violation of federal or state laws or regulations
relating to safety in storing and transporting explosives.
(Ord. 16-75 § 9, 1975.)
8.32.100 Hearing on denial or revocation of permit.
Before denying or revoking a permit, the council shall give written notice of its proposed
action to the applicant or permittee. If, within ten days after the date of such notice, a
hearing is requested by the applicant or permittee, the council shall fix a time within the
next thirty days in which it shall hear the objections of the applicant or permittee to the
denial or revocation of the permit. Thereafter the decision of the council shall be final.
(Ord. 16-75 § 10, 1975.)
8.32.110 Inspections.
It shall be the duty of the fire marshal to enforce the provisions of this chapter relating to
storage, and he shall regularly inspect buildings where explosives are stored to
determine whether storage practices conform to the provisions of this chapter and the
limitations imposed by the permit. (Ord. 16-75 § 11, 1975.)
8.32.120 Transportation regulations—General applicability.
Every motor vehicle transporting explosives shall be operated in compliance with this
chapter unless federal or state laws and regulations impose a greater affirmative
obligation or a greater restraint, or unless compliance with this chapter would prevent
full compliance with federal or state laws or regulations by persons subject thereto.
(Ord. 16-75 § 12, 1975.
8.32.130 Operation of the vehicle.
Persons shall operate motor vehicles transporting explosives with the highest degree of
care to decrease the probability of danger to life and property in the following manner:
A. The vehicle shall not be driven into the following designated area:
B. The vehicle shall be driven only upon Highway 26 and Highway 211 passing through
the city of Sandy, except when delivering or receiving explosives off said highways, in
which event the vehicle shall be driven upon a route prearranged with the chief of police
20
to avoid, whenever possible, congested streets, heavy traffic, bus routes, viaducts,
dangerous crossings, and any dwellings, buildings or places where persons work,
congregate or assemble;
C. Except when passing, the vehicle shall be kept at least three hundred feet behind
other motor vehicles transporting explosives moving in the same direction;
D. The vehicle shall not be driven near fires of any kind burning on or near a street until
passage can be made safely.
(Ord. 16-75 § 13, 1975.)
8.32.140 Competent person to attend vehicle.
When transporting explosives the vehicle shall be attended by a competent person
whose primary duty is to attend the vehicle. Such person shall be within sight of and in
close proximity to the vehicle and shall have on his person the appropriate keys for
starting the vehicle. Vehicles are deemed unattended when left in care of a person on
duty in the regular course of another business such as service station attendants, motel
operators or merchant patrolmen. The police are authorized to move unattended
vehicles to a safe place, and to enter premises at any time to remove an unattended
vehicle loaded with explosives. (Ord. 16-75 § 14, 1975.)
8.32.150 Parking and stopping restricted.
A. Except as provided in this section, no person may park a vehicle loaded with
explosives in the city for any purpose, and no person may stop such vehicle for any
reason except momentarily to comply with moving traffic laws.
B. A person may park an attended vehicle for the sole purpose of, and while physically
engaged in, loading or unloading explosives from the vehicle, or changing drivers.
C. No person may refuel a vehicle within the city except in extreme emergency and then
only with enough fuel to enable it to proceed to the first refueling point beyond the city.
The engine of the vehicle shall be stopped during refueling.
(Ord. 16-75 § 15, 1975.)
8.32.160 Disabled vehicles.
A. If a vehicle transporting explosives is disabled, the driver shall immediately cause
notice to be given to the police and fire departments.
B. The fire chief of the local fire district shall determine whether or not the vehicle may
be moved, and where it may be repaired when loaded.
C. If the disabled vehicle is moved when loaded with explosives, it shall be moved with
a police escort to a location where repairs can be made without endangering life or
property.
21
D. If transfer of the explosives is imperative, persons making the transfer shall employ
adequate safety measures under the supervision of the fire and police departments.
(Ord. 16-75 § 16, 1975.)
8.32.170 Violation—Penalty.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall upon conviction be
punished by imprisonment for not to exceed ten days, or by a fine not to exceed three
hundred dollars, or both. (Ord. 16-75 § 17, 1975.)
Chapter 8.34
SANDY GRAFFITI CODE
(Ord. 05, 2012)
8.34.010 Short Title.
SMC Chapter 8.34 may be cited as the Sandy Graffiti Code.
8.34.020 Declaration of Purpose.
A. It is the purpose and intent of this Chapter to establish procedures for the prompt
removal of graffiti from buildings, walls, structures and items of personal property in
order to reduce social deterioration within the City, enhance its appearance and
promote public safety and health.
B. The City Manager may adopt procedures, forms, and written policies for
administering and implementing the provisions of this Chapter.
8.34.030 Graffiti Nuisance Property.
A. Any property, building, structure or item of personal property within the City of Sandy
that becomes a graffiti nuisance property is in violation of this Chapter and is subject to
its remedies.
B. Any owner, occupant, responsible party or other person who permits property under
their control to become a graffiti nuisance property shall be in violation of this Chapter
and subject to its remedies.
8.34.040 Definitions.
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
Abate. To remove the graffiti by such means, in such manner, and to such extent as to
remove it from public view.
Aerosol Paint Container. Any aerosol container adapted or made for spraying paint.
Etching Device. A glass cutter, awl or any device capable of scratching or etching the
surface of any structure or personal property.
22
Felt Tip Marker. Any indelible marker or similar implement with a tip which, at its
broadest width is greater than one-fourth inch.
Graffiti. Any inscription, word, figure, or design that is marked, etched, scratched,
drawn; or, painted on any surface with paint, ink, chalk, dye or other similar substance;
regardless of content, which is visible from premises open to the public, such as public
rights of way or other publicly owned property, and that has been placed upon any real
or personal property such as buildings, fences, and structures without authorization
from the owner or responsible party.
Graffiti Implement. An Aerosol Paint Container, a Felt Tip Marker, an Etching Device,
or a Graffiti Stick.
Graffiti Nuisance Property. Property upon which graffiti has been placed and such
graffiti has been permitted to remain for more than ten days after the property owner of
record or occupant has been issued written notification
Graffiti Stick. A device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or other
similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by pressure, and upon
application, leaving a mark at least one-fourth of an inch in width.
City Manager. The City Manager is the City official who is responsible for the
administration of the Graffiti Nuisance Abatement program under this Chapter. The City
Manager may appoint such officers, employees and agents as shall be authorized and
necessary to enforce the provisions of this Chapter.
Occupant. Any person, tenant, sub lessee, successor or assignee who has possession
of or control over property.
Offense. Conduct for which a sentence requiring payment of a fine is provided by this
Code or an ordinance of the city.
Owner. Any person, agent, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in a
property and includes but is not limited to:
1 A mortgagor in possession in whom is vested all or part of the legal title to the
property or all or part of the beneficial ownership and a right to present use and
enjoyment of the premises; or
2. An occupant who has control over the property and/or premises; or
3. A person, agent, firm or corporation that owns or exercises control over items of
property such as utility poles, drop boxes, postal collection boxes, and other types of
containers
23
Permit. Knowingly to suffer, allow, or acquiesce by any failure, refusal or neglect to
abate.
Premises Open To The Public. All public spaces, including but not limited to streets,
alleys, sidewalks, parks, rights of way and public open space, as well as private
property onto which the public is regularly invited or permitted to enter for any purpose.
Property. Any real or personal property and that which is affixed incidental or
appurtenant to real property but not limited to any premises, house, building, fence,
structure or any separate part thereof, whether permanent or not. Property also includes
items of machinery, drop boxes and other waste containers, utility poles and post office
collection boxes.
Responsible Party. An owner, or an entity or person acting as an agent for owner by
agreement, who has authority over the property or is responsible for the property's
maintenance or management, irrespective of any arrangement to the contrary with any
other party. Each owner shall be a responsible party for the purposes of this Chapter.
There may be more than one responsible party for a particular property.
Unauthorized. Without the consent of the owner, occupant or responsible party.
8.34.050 Graffiti Prohibited.
It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and to be unlawful for any person to place or put,
by any means, any drawing, inscription, figure, symbol, or mark or any type commonly
known graffiti on any public or private property without the permission of the owner of
the premises on which the property is located, or upon any natural surfaces such as
rocks or trees, or any other surface whatsoever. It shall be unlawful for any person to
solicit or command another person to apply graffiti. It shall be unlawful for any person to
aid or abet or agree to aid or abet another person to plan to apply or apply graffiti.
8.34.060 Possession of graffiti implement prohibited.
No person may possess, with the intent to unlawfully apply graffiti on any real or
personal property of another, any graffiti implement, aerosol paint container, felt tip
marker, etching device, or graffiti stick. Unlawfully possessing a graffiti implement is a
violation.
8.34.070 Violation of chapter.
A. Any property located in the City of Sandy that becomes a graffiti nuisance property is
in violation of this Chapter and is subject to its remedies.
B. Every responsible party who permits a property to become a graffiti nuisance
property is in violation of this Chapter and subject to its remedies.
C .Any person who applies graffiti or who aids, abets, or agrees to aid or abet another
person to apply graffiti is in violation of this Chapter and subject to its remedies.
24
8.34.080 Unlawfully Applying Graffiti; Possessing Graffiti Implement; Seizure;
Minimum Fine; Community Service.
A. Unlawfully Applying Graffiti.
1. Applying graffiti in violation of this Chapter is a Class B violation.
Under\ORS 153.018, a Class B violation is punishable by a maximum fine not to exceed
three hundred sixty dollars.
2. Each day on which a violation occurs or continues is a separate and distinct offense.
B. Unlawfully Possessing Graffiti Implement.
1. No person may possess any graffiti implement, with the intent to use it in violation of
subsection 8.34.080 (1) above.
2. Unlawfully possessing a graffiti implement is a Class D violation. Under ORS
153.018, a Class D violation is punishable by a maximum fine not to exceed ninety
dollars.
C. Each day on which a violation occurs or continues is a separate and distinct offense.
D. In addition to any citation issued, a graffiti implement used or possessed in violation
of this section may be immediately seized and impounded by the police
department. The court, upon disposition of the issued citation, shall determine whether
the instrument shall be returned to the defendant or deemed contraband subject to
destruction under Oregon Law.
E. Minimum Fine.
1. Upon conviction for unlawfully applying graffiti the court shall impose a minimum fine
of at least one hundred dollars.
2. Upon conviction for unlawfully possessing graffiti implement, the court shall
impose a minimum fine of at least fifty dollars.
F. Community Service. In lieu of any fine that may be imposed for violation of this
section, the court may order community service. The period of community service
required by the court shall be performed under the supervision of a community service
provider approved by the court. Reasonable effort shall be made to assign the subject
person to a type of community service that is reasonably expected to have the most
rehabilitative effect on the person. To the extent that the offense giving rise to the offer
of community service constitutes a violation of this section, reasonable effort shall be
made by the court to assign the person to community service which constitutes in
significant part the removal of the graffiti.
8.34.090 Graffiti Removal; Abatement Notice; Abatement Procedures.
A. Required Graffiti Removal by Property Owner or Occupant. The owner or occupant
25
of any property in the City must remove any graffiti from such property within ten days of
the graffiti’s appearance.
B. Notification
1. Whenever the City Manager determines that graffiti exists on any property in the City
of Sandy, the City Manager may issue an abatement notice.
2. The City Manager shall cause the notice to be served upon the property owner and
any occupant. The owner or occupant shall have ten days after the date of service of
the notice in which to remove the graffiti. The City Manager shall have the sole
discretion to grant the property owner the option of giving the City written permission to
enter on the
3. Service shall be accomplished by addressing the notice to the owner and occupant
and either delivering it by personal service, by mailing it as registered mail or certified
mail. Service on the owner and occupant may also be accomplished by posting the
notice in a clearly visible location on the subject property.
4. If graffiti is not removed within ten days after the date of service of the notice to
remove the graffiti, the costs of removal may be assessed to the owner and will become
a lien on the affected property. For each instance of graffiti abatement, the City
Manager shall keep an accurate account for each abatement of all expenses incurred,
including an overhead charge of 25 percent for program administration, in addition to
any administrative enforcement fees imposed under the Sandy Municipal Code. If not
paid within ten days after written notice is provided of the actual costs incurred for
abatement, an assessment of these costs shall be made by resolution and shall be
entered in the docket of city liens and recorded with Clackamas County. When entry is
recorded in the city lien docket, the assessment shall constitute a lien upon the property
subject to the abatement.
C. Appeal
1. Within ten days of the receipt of the notice to remove/abate the graffiti in 8.34.090(2),
the property owner or occupant may appeal the notice from the City Manager by
submitting a written request for hearing to the City Manager.
2. Upon receipt of the appeal request, the City Manager shall assign a Hearings Officer
to hear and decide the appeal, and set the matter for hearing within ten business days.
Upon request, the Hearings Officer shall have the authority to postpone the hearing
when reasonable grounds exist. If the Hearings Officer finds the property to be a Graffiti
Nuisance Property, and the owner or responsible party has been given notice, the
Hearings Officer shall specify when and under what conditions the graffiti shall be
abated.
D. Removal of Graffiti by the City
26
1. The City Manager may immediately cause to be removed any graffiti on any utility
poles and cabinets, on exterior walls and fences immediately abutting public streets or
property, or on any public property, including but not limited to traffic signs and lights.
2. Whenever the City Manager has reasonable cause to believe that there exists upon
any building or structure any graffiti requiring abatement under this Chapter, the City
Manager may enter upon the graffiti nuisance property at all reasonable times to
perform any duty imposed on the City Manager under this Chapter, and to enforce the
provisions of this Chapter.
3. Upon the failure to comply with the notice of abatement by the designated
compliance date, and if the property owner or occupant has not appealed the notice as
provided under 8.34.090, the following steps may be taken if the graffiti nuisance
property is plainly enclosed to create privacy and prevent access by unauthorized
persons:
a. If the graffiti nuisance property is occupied, the City Manager shall first present
proper credentials and demand entry to cause the graffiti to be abated. If entry is
refused, the City Manager may attempt to secure entry by any legal means.
b. If the graffiti nuisance property is unoccupied, the City Manager shall first make a
reasonable attempt to locate the owner or occupant and demand entry. Such demand
may be included in the initial notice sent to the owner or occupant under this Chapter. If
entry is refused, the City Manager may attempt to secure entry by any legal means.
8.34.100 Graffiti Abatement Warrant; Grounds for Issuance of Graffiti Abatement
Warrants; Affidavit.
A. If graffiti is not removed or abated by the owner or occupant within the specified time
after issuance of a graffiti abatement notice, the City Manager may cause the graffiti to
be removed and abated upon issuance of a graffiti abatement warrant.
B. The City Manager may request the assistance of any Sandy Police Officer to contact
the Sandy Municipal Court and seek the issuance of a graffiti abatement warrant
whenever entry onto private property is necessary to remove and abate any graffiti. No
person other than a Sandy Police Officer may seek or obtain the issuance of a graffiti
abatement warrant.
C. A graffiti abatement warrant shall be issued only upon cause, supported by affidavit,
particularly describing: the applicant's status in applying for the warrant; the ordinance
or regulation requiring or authorizing the removal and abatement of the graffiti; the
building or property to be entered; the basis upon which cause exists to remove or
abate the graffiti, and a statement of the graffiti to be removed or abated.
D. Cause shall be deemed to exist if there is reasonable belief that a graffiti violation
exists, as defined in this Chapter, with respect to the designated property, and that the
27
property owner has been given notice and an opportunity to abate the graffiti, and has
not responded in a timely fashion.
E. Procedure for Issuance of a Graffiti Abatement Warrant.
1. Examination. Before issuing a graffiti abatement warrant, the municipal judge may
examine the applicant and any other witness under oath and shall be satisfied of the
existence of grounds for granting such application.
2. Issuance. If the judge is satisfied that cause for the removal and abatement of any
graffiti nuisance exists and that the other requirements for granting the application are
satisfied, the judge shall issue the graffiti abatement warrant, particularly describing the
person or persons authorized to execute the warrant, the property to be entered, and a
statement of the general types and estimated quantity of the items to be removed or
conditions abated. The warrant shall contain a direction that it be executed on any day
of the week between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., or where the judge has
specially determined upon a showing that it cannot be effectively executed between
those hours, that it be executed at any additional or other time of the day or night.
3. Police Assistance. In issuing a graffiti abatement warrant, the judge may authorize
any peace officer, as defined in Oregon Revised Statutes, to enter the described
property to remove any person or obstacle and to assist in any way necessary to enter
the property and, remove and abate the graffiti.
F. Execution of Graffiti Abatement Warrants.
1 Occupied Property: In executing a graffiti abatement warrant, the person authorized
to execute the warrant shall, before entry into the occupied premises, make a
reasonable effort to present the person's credentials, authority and purpose to an
occupant or person in possession of the property designated in the warrant and show
the occupant or person in possession of the property the warrant or a copy thereof upon
request. A copy of the warrant shall be left with the occupant or the person in
possession.
2. Unoccupied Property. In executing graffiti abatement warrant on unoccupied
property, the person authorized to execute the warrant need not inform anyone of the
person's authority and purpose, but may promptly enter the designated property if it is at
the time unoccupied or not in the possession of any person or at the time reasonably
believed to be in such condition. In such case a copy of the graffiti abatement warrant
shall be conspicuously posted on the property.
3. Return. A graffiti abatement warrant must be executed within ten working days of its
issue and returned to the judge by whom it was issued within ten working days from its
date of execution. After the expiration of the time prescribed by this subsection, the
warrant unless executed is void.
4. If the City Manager has first obtained a graffiti abatement warrant to secure entry
onto the graffiti nuisance property to abate the graffiti, no owner or occupant shall
28
refuse, fail or neglect, after proper request, to promptly permit entry by the City Manager
to abate the graffiti. It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant to refuse to permit
entry by the City Manager to abate graffiti under this Chapter after a graffiti abatement
warrant has been obtained. Any violation of this Subsection is punishable upon
conviction by a fine of not more than $500.
5. Graffiti Abatement Consent Forms.
a. The City Manager shall develop consent forms allowing the City Manager to enter
onto property to abate the graffiti. The City Manager shall make these consent forms
available to the public.
b. Property owners and occupants may request and sign consent forms for allowing
graffiti abatement. The City Manager shall have the final authority to decide whether or
not to enter onto property to abate graffiti in each particular case
8.34.110 Failure to Abate Graffiti Nuisance Property.
A. It is a violation of this chapter for any owner, occupant or responsible party of any
property to fail to abate graffiti nuisance property within ten days after receiving an
abatement notice from the City Manager, unless a timely appeal is made.
B. If a timely appeal of an abatement notice is made after receipt of the abatement
notice from the City Manager, it shall be a violation of this chapter for any owner,
occupant, or responsible party to fail to abate graffiti nuisance property in accordance
with the requirements imposed in the appeal by a city hearings officer.
C. Violation of this chapter is a Class A violation.
D. Each day on which a violation occurs or continues is a separate and distinct offense.
E. Fines imposed for violation of this chapter are intended to be in addition to any and
all other remedies, fines, fees or costs that may be provided.
8.34.120 Parental Responsibility; Parental Civil Liability.
A. Parental Responsibility.
1. No parent, guardian, or other person having the legal custody of an un-emancipated
minor person under the age of eighteen may allow or permit the minor to be in violation
of this Article.
2. Upon a subsequent violation by an un-emancipated minor person, the parent,
guardian or person having legal custody shall be served with a subpoena to appear
before the court with the minor and show cause why this chapter has been violated a
second time.
3. Violating parental responsibility under this section is a Class B violation.
29
B. Parental Civil Liability. In addition to any other remedy provided by law, the parent or
parents of an un-emancipated minor child shall be liable for actual damages to person
or property in connection with the removal of graffiti caused by said child in accordance
with the provisions of ORS 30.765. In any case in which the City Manager has elected
to enter onto graffiti nuisance property to perform abatement activities, the actual costs
incurred in connection with the removal of graffiti caused by an un-emancipated child
shall be recoverable by the City against the parent or parents of said child.
Chapter 8.35
CAMPING PROHIBITED
8.35.010 Camping Prohibited.
(A) It is unlawful to camp in or upon any sidewalk, street, alley, lane, public right-of-way,
public park or any other place to which the general public has access.
(B) “To camp” is defined as setting up or remaining at a campsite.
(C) “Campsite” is defined as any place where any bedding, sleeping bag or other
sleeping matter, or any stove, or fire is placed, established or maintained, whether or
not such a place incorporates the use of any tent, lean-to, shack or any other structure,
or any vehicle or part thereof, for the purpose of maintaining a temporary place to live.
(D) It shall be an affirmative defense to this section that the individual charged had
written consent of the person or other authority owning or entitled to possession of the
location where the campsite was located. (Ordinance 2008-08 §1, 2008)
(E) Violation of Sandy Municipal Code 8.35.010 – “Camping Prohibited” is a Class B
Violation and is subject to the penalties provided in Chapter 1.18.(Ordinance2018-30)
Chapter 8.36
OUTDOOR BURNING
(Ord. 06, 2005)
8.36.010 Outdoor Burning
A. No person shall kindle, maintain or allow to be maintained, an outdoor fire, bonfire,
rubbish fire or garbage fire; nor shall any person kindle, maintain or allow to be
maintained a fire for the purpose of burning grass, hay or straw, tree limbs and
trimmings; nor shall any person maintain or allow to be maintained a fire for land
clearing operations, or commercial burning; nor shall any person kindle, maintain or
allow to be maintained any other type of open burning with the following exceptions:
(1) Outdoor recreation fire no larger than 3 feet by 3 feet used for cooking with the fire in
a fireplace, barbecue set, or outdoor fire pit.
30
(2) Fires set and maintained by the fire district for firefighting training or training fire
protection personnel.
(3) In cases of fire hazard that cannot in the judgment of the fire district be removed or
disposed of in any other practical manner, a fire may be allowed by written permit only.
Said permit is to be issued by the fire district.
(4) Burning of cut or limbed brush and yard debris on lots larger than ¼ acre, provided
such burning complies with all requirements and restrictions of the Sandy Fire District
(including permits, when required). Outdoor burning within the Sandy Fire District is
prohibited at certain times of the year due to fire hazard or air pollution constraints; any
person maintaining or allowing to be maintained an outdoor fire under section
8.36.010(4) shall contact the Sandy Fire District before starting the fire.
Footnotes:
1. For statutory provisions regarding the designation of nuisances by cities, see ORS
221.915.
2. For further provisions regarding apiaries, livestock and fowl, see Chapter 6.08 of this
code.
3. For the statutory offense of creating a hazard, see ORS 176.810.
4. For statutory provisions regarding excessive noise, see ORS 467.010 et seq.; for
provisions prohibiting unnecessary muffler noise in motor vehicles, see ORS 483.448.
For provisions regarding the abatement of dangerous buildings, see Chapter 15.08.
5. For general provisions regarding right of entry for inspection, see Chapter 1.12 of this
code.
1
TITLE 9
PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE
Chapter 9.01 Social Hosting ........................................................................................ 1
Chapter 9.02.01 Disorderly Conduct ............................................................................ 4
Chapter 9.03.01 Theft 3RD Degree ............................................................................... 5
Chapter 9.04.01 Trespass 2nd Degree ........................................................................ 5
Chapter 9.06 Prohibiton On Marijuana Facilites .......................................................... 5
Chapter 9.07 Alarm Permit .......................................................................................... 6
Chapter 9.12.020 Prohibits the Sale and Use of Tobacco and Vapor Products by
Minors .......................................................................................................................... 9
Chapter 9.01
SOCIAL HOSTING
9.01.01 Purpose
The purpose of this Chapter is to prevent the disruption of the peace of the residents of
the City of Sandy, the danger posed to persons attending the gathering and other persons
in the vicinity, the detraction from the livability of neighborhoods and the devaluation of
properties located near an unruly gathering.
9.01.02 Definitions
Alcoholic liquor: An alcoholic beverage containing more than one-half of one percent of
alcohol by volume.
Host: To invite or to receive persons to a social gathering on property of which one has
control as owner, lessee, tenant or licensee.
Organize: To encourage attendance (at an unruly gathering).
Response costs: The costs associated with responses by law enforcement, fire and other
emergency response providers to unruly gatherings, including but not limited to:
(a) Salaries and benefits of law enforcement, fire or other emergency response personnel
for the amount of time spent responding to, remaining at, or otherwise dealing with unruly
gatherings, and the administrative costs attributable to such response(s);
(b)The cost of any medical treatment to or for any law enforcement, fire or other
emergency response personnel injured while responding to, remaining at or leaving the
scene of an unruly gathering.
(c) The cost of repairing any city equipment or property damaged, and the cost of the use
of any such equipment, in responding to, remaining at or leaving the scene of an unruly
gathering.
Juvenile: Any person under eighteen years of age.
2
Minor: Any person under twenty-one years of age.
Unruly gathering: A party or gathering of more than five persons where alcohol is served
or consumed, and where any two or more of the following behaviors occur on the property
where the gathering takes place or on adjacent property:
(a) Any violation of state or city of Sandy laws relating to the sale, service, possession or
consumption of alcoholic liquor;
(b) Assault, as defined by ORS 163.185, 163.175,163.165 or 163.160;
(c) Menacing, as defined by ORS 163.190;
(d) Harassment, as defined by ORS 166.065 or 166.170;
(e) Intimidation, as defined by ORS 166.165 or 166.155;
(f) Disorderly conduct, as defined by ORS 166.023 or 166.125;
(g) Noise disturbance, as defined by SMC 8.20.020;
(h) Criminal mischief, as defined by ORS 164.305;
and
(i) Littering, as defined by ORS 164.805.
Owner: The person or entity listed as the owner in the Clackamas County property tax
records.
Property:
(a) Any dwelling unit or group of dwelling units at a single street number address, including
but not limited to a house, duplex, triplex, apartment(s), condominiums) or other
structure(s) with one or more dwelling units, hotel or motel room(s);
(b) A hall, meeting room or other structure that serves as a gathering place;
(c) Any private real property adjacent to, and under the same ownership as, the location
of a structure described in section (a) or (b) of this definition;
(d) Public right-of-way.
“Property” does not include a restaurant, bar or tavern.
Twelve-month period: The twelve months immediately preceding the most recent citation.
9.01.03 Unruly gatherings – Provisions
(1) No person shall organize or host an unruly gathering if the person knows or reasonably
should know that it is an unruly gathering.
(2) It is an affirmative defense to a citation issued for a violation of subsection (1) of this
section that the person who organized or hosted an unruly gathering contacted the police
as soon as any of the violations or offenses listed in the definition of “unruly gathering”
occurred.
(3) A person who violates subsection (1) of this section shall be subject to a fine
prescribed by subsection (1) of section 2 of this code. In addition, a person who is
convicted of violating subsection (1) of this section for a second time, and for any
3
additional time, within a twelve- month period shall pay an administrative civil penalty in
the amount of response costs, regardless of whether the offense occurred at the same or
a different property, as provided in subsection (5) of section _____ of this code.
(4) After an unruly gathering occurs at a private property, and after any future occurrence
of an unruly gathering at the same property, city staff will notify the owner(s) of the
property. The notice shall include a copy of this ordinance and a description of the owner’s
potential liability for response costs under subsection (4) of this section.
(5) If a juvenile violates subsection (1) of this section or is the owner of the property and
the juvenile is or, but for the juvenile’s age would be, responsible for payment of response
costs under this section, the person’s parent(s) or legal guardian(s) are responsible for
response costs.
(6) Appeals
(a) If a civil penalty is imposed upon a property owner as provided in this code, the
property owner or property manager may appeal the determination that a violation
occurred or amount of the penalty to the city manager.
(b) In an appeal under this section, when determining to what extent, if any, the owner
should be responsible for response costs, the city manager shall consider evidence of the
following actions on the part of the property owner to prevent or abate the nuisance, even
if unsuccessful:
1. On the first occurrence of an unruly gathering, the owner or owner’s agent issued a
written warning that future violations may result in initiation of eviction proceedings.
2. On the second occurrence of an unruly gathering, the owner or owner’s agent issued
a written notice that termination of the rental agreement will be initiated for the tenant(s)
responsible for any future unruly gatherings.
3. On the third occurrence of an unruly gathering, the owner or owner’s agent initiated
eviction proceedings against the tenant(s) responsible for the unruly gathering.
4. Prior to the fourth occurrence of an unruly gathering, new tenants replaced those who
committed the previous violations, and the owner or owner’s agent implemented
reasonable precautions to deter or prevent any additional unruly gatherings.
9.01.04 Penalties - Specific
(1) Violation of the following sections is punishable by fine not to exceed $1,000 or
confinement in jail, or both, up to the amounts indicated opposite each. In addition, the
court may order any treatment, related to the violation, deemed necessary for
rehabilitation of the offender and the safety of the community.
Administrative Civil Penalty
9.01.05 Second and subsequent violations of subsection (1) of section 9.01.03 of this
code within a twelve-month period are subject to the imposition of response costs as
defined in section 1 of this code.
4
9.01.06 Upon fourth and any subsequent violation of subsection (1) of section 9.01.03 of
this code within a twelve-month period, at a property as defined in section 9.01.02 of this
code, the owner of the property is subject to the imposition of response costs as defined
in section of this code.
9.01.07 Enforcement and Penalties
(1) Violations of any of the provisions of this Chapter are declared civil violations and
shall be enforced pursuant to the provisions of Sandy Municipal Code 1.18. Prosecution
of civil violations may be in addition to or in lieu of any other remedies or enforcement
measures provided by law or ordinance, including without limitation enforcement by civil
action as provided in ORS 30.315.
(2) Fines for violations of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be in the amounts
specified.
Chapter 9.02.01
DISORDERLY CONDUCT
A. A person commits the violation of disorderly conduct if, with intent to cause public
inconvenience, annoyance or alarm, or recklessly creating a risk thereof, the person:
1. Engages in fighting or in violent, tumultuous or threatening behavior;
2. Makes unreasonable noise;
3. Disturbs any lawful assembly of persons without lawful authority;
4. Obstructs vehicular or pedestrian traffic on a public way;
5. Congregates with other person in a public place and refuses to comply with a lawful
order of the police to disperse;
6. Initiates or circulates a report, knowing it to be false, concerning an alleged or
impending fire, explosion, crime, catastrophe or other emergency;
7. Creates a hazardous or physically offensive condition by any act which the person is
not licensed or privileged to do; or
8. Urinates or defecates in public;
Disorderly Conduct is a Class A Violation as defined by ORS 153.012 and carries the
same fine as defined by ORS 153.018
5
Chapter 9.03.01
THEFT 3RD DEGREE
A. A person commits the violation of theft in the 3rd Degree if;
1. By means other than extortion, the person commits theft as defined in ORS 164.015;
and
2. The total value of the property in a single or an aggregate transaction is less than
$100.
Theft 3rd Degree is a Class A Violation as defined by ORS 153.012 and carries the
same as defined by ORS 153.018.
Chapter 9.04.01
TRESPASS 2ND DEGREE
A. A person commits the violation of criminal trespass in the 2nd Degree if the person
enters or remains unlawfully in a motor vehicle or in or upon premises.
Trespass 2nd Degree is a Class A Violation as defined by ORS 153.012 and carries the
same fine as defined by ORS 153.018.
Chapter 9.06
PROHIBITION ON MARIJUANA FACILITIES
A. Prohibition. No person, business or entity may establish a marijuana facility
within city limits. The establishment, maintenance, or operation of a
marijuana facility by a person, business or any other entity within the city in
violation of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance.
B. Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter and in accordance with HB 3400,
a “marijuana facility” includes:
1. Marijuana processing sites registered with the Oregon Health Authority;
2. Medical marijuana dispensaries registered with the Oregon Health
Authority;
3. Marijuana producers licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission;
4. Marijuana processors licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission;
5. Marijuana wholesalers licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control
Commission; and
6. Marijuana retailers licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission.
C. Violations and Enforcement.
6
1. The establishment, maintenance or operation of a marijuana facility
by a person, business or any other entity within the city in violation
of the requirements of this chapter will be subject to any and all
enforcement remedies available to the city under law and/or the
Sandy Municipal Code including but not limited to enforcement
pursuant to Chapter 8.24 of the Sandy Municipal Code and/or the
filing of an appropriate action and pursuit of an appropriate remedy
in a court of competent jurisdiction.
2. The city may abate a nuisance under this chapter either pursuant to
Chapter 8.24 of the Sandy Municipal Code or it may pursue any
other remedies available to it, including but not limited to an action
seeking declaratory relief and/or injunctive relief.
3. If the city brings an action in either law or equity in any of the courts
of this state (including the U.S. District Court for the District of
Oregon) other than its municipal court for the enforcement of this
Chapter, the city shall be entitled to the award of its reasonable
attorney fees in the event it is the prevailing party.(Ord. 08,2015)
Chapter 9.07
ALARM PERMIT
9.07.010 Purpose
A. The purpose of this chapter is to protect the efficient use of emergency law
enforcement services and to protect the public from unreasonable alarm noise and
disturbance.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the Sandy Police
Department and shall apply only to Alarm Systems operated within the city limits of
Sandy, unless otherwise permitted by law.
9.07.020 Definitions
A. ALARM BUSINESS means a business by any individual, partnership, corporation
or other entity, that sells, leases, maintains, services, repairs, alters, replaces, moves or
installs any Alarm System in or on any building, structure, dwelling or facility.
B. ALARM SYSTEM means any single device or assembly of equipment designed to
signal the occurrence of illegal or unauthorized entry or other illegal activity requiring
immediate attention and to which law enforcement is required to respond, but does not
include motor vehicle or boat alarms, fire alarms, domestic violence alarms, or alarms
designed to elicit a medical response.
C. ALARM USER means the person(s), firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, organization of any kind, or public entity in control of any building, structure,
dwelling or facility wherein an Alarm System is maintained.
7
D. AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE means a device, which is interconnected to a
telephone line and is programmed to select a predetermined telephone number and
transmit by voice message or chapter signal an emergency message indicating a need
for emergency response.
E. FALSE ALARM means an alarm signal eliciting a response by emergency services
when a situation requiring a response does not in fact exist. False Alarm does not
include an alarm signal caused by uncontrollable conditions of nature or other
extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the Alarm Business or
Alarm User.
F. POLICE means the Sandy Police Department.
9.07.030 Fines and Fees
A. Fines and fees associated with this chapter shall be set by resolution of the City of
Sandy Council.
B. Fees must be paid upon demand and fines must be paid within 14 days of the date
of notice that a fine is due or the fine will double.
9.07.040 Alarm Permit Requirements; Violation; Suspension of Police Emergency
Services/Response
A. No Alarm System shall be operated without an alarm permit issued by the Police
Department. Application for an alarm permit shall be made with the Sandy Police and
the applicant shall be the responsible party for purposes of enforcing this chapter.
B. A permit shall be issued to the property address of the Alarm System and bear the
signature of the Chief or designee. The permit shall be valid for one-year from the date
issued unless suspended pursuant to this chapter.
C. An alarm permit shall be kept physically upon the premises using the Alarm
System and shall be available for inspection by the police upon request.
D. An alarm permit fee is not required upon proof that a residential applicant is over
65 and id a primary resident unless a commercial business is conducted in or on the
premises. A permit application must still be completed and displayed pursuant to items
A-C above.
E. An alarm permit is not required when the Alarm User is a public entity and the
permit issued shall not be subject to suspension.
F. It shall be a violation of this chapter to operate an Alarm System without a permit
except as provided by this chapter. Within 14 days of a Notice of Violation an Alarm
8
User must submit a permit application, and applicable fees and fines to the Police.
Failure to comply may suspend further emergency law enforcement alarm response to
the subject address without further notice.
9.07.050 Automatic Dialing Device: Certain Interconnections Prohibited
A. It is a violation of this chapter for any person to program an Automatic Dialing
Device to select a telephone line assigned to the City.
B. It is a violation of this chapter to fail to disconnect or to reprogram an Automatic
Dialing Device which is programed to select a telephone line assigned to the city within
twelve hours of notice that it is so programmed.
9.07.060 False Alarms and Permit Suspension
A. It shall be a violation of this chapter for an Alarm User to incur a False Alarm at the
permit address during the alarm permit year. The fourth False Alarm in a permit year
shall be cause to suspend the alarm permit for one year from the date of the last False
Alarm.
B. Following a fourth False Alarm within the permit year, the Sandy Police Department
will mail the permit applicant a Notice of Suspension which unless appeared in
accordance with this chapter will be effective and final on the date of the mailing without
further notice.
C. The Sandy Police Department may suspend law enforcement emergency response
to an alarm at the permit address for the period of the suspension or until a new permit
is issued.
D. An alarm permit suspended under this chapter will prohibit reapplication at permit
address for the term of the suspension period and until all fines have been paid, except
upon new application and proof of transfer of ownership of the property.
09.07.070 Appeal of Notice of Suspension
A. An appeal of Notice of Suspension of an alarm permit may be made by a permit
applicant and must be received by the Sandy Police Department within 14 days from
the date of mailing of the notice. It must set forth an explanation why the permit should
not be suspended, an explanation if any for the False Alarms to include supporting or
mitigating information, and describe actions taken to eliminate a future False Alarm.
B. The Chief or designee will review a timely appeal and issue a written final
determination setting fourth reason supporting the determination within 14 days from the
date of receipt of the appear. The final determination will be effective on the date
issued and shall include information on the right of appeal.
9
C. Appeal of a final determination may be taken exclusively by writ of review in the
manner set forth in ORS 34.040 or ORS 34.100.
09.07.080 Continuous Alarm as Public Nuisance; Disconnection of Alarm
Any bell, horn, or siren used in conjunction with an Alarm System which can be heard
outside a building, structure, dwelling or facility for more than fifteen minutes
continuously or intermittently and the Alarm User is not readily available for able to
silence the deice, is a public nuisance and may be disconnected or otherwise silenced
by responding law enforcement personnel. Disconnection may be made by such
means as is reasonably necessary to silence the alarm. The Alarm User shall be solely
responsible for property damage associated with disconnecting or silencing the alarm,
and costs to reconnect.
Repealed Chapters 9.10.010-9.10.030 (Ord. 09, 2015)
Chapter 9.12.020
PROHIBITS THE SALE AND USE OF TOBACCO AND VAPOR PRODUCTS BY
MINORS
ORS 163.575. (Ord. 10, 2014.)
Removed Section 9.12.020 with Ordinance 2018-38
City will follow ORS 167.775 and 167.760
1
TITLE 10
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 10.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS..................................................................... 1
Chapter 10.08 DEFINITIONS ...................................................................................... 2
Chapter 10.12 ADMINISTRATION .............................................................................. 4
Chapter 10.16 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES........................................................... 5
Chapter 10.20 GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS ................................................. 6
Chapter 10.24 PARKING5 ........................................................................................... 8
Chapter 10.28 BICYCLES1 ........................................................................................ 11
Chapter 10.30 SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES, ETC. ON PUBLIC SIDEWALKS
................................................................................................................................... 13
Chapter 10.32 PEDESTRIANS.................................................................................. 14
Chapter 10.34 PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY OBSTRUCTIONS................................... 14
Chapter 10.36 TRAFFIC OFFENSES ON OTHER PROPERTY OPEN TO PUBLIC
TRAVEL..................................................................................................................... 15
Chapter 10.40 ENFORCEMENT ............................................................................... 16
Chapter 10.44 PENALTIES ....................................................................................... 17
Chapter 10.48 COMMERCIAL VEHICLE SIZE AND WEIGHT LIMITS2.................... 18
Chapter 10.52 ABANDONED VEHICLES3 ................................................................ 19
Chapter 10.56 AUTO WRECKING AND DISMANTLING4 ......................................... 25
Chapter 10.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
10.04.010 Short title.
Chapters 10.04 through 10.44 may be cited as "Sandy uniform traffic ordinance." (Ord.
13-73 § 1, 1973.)
10.04.020 Applicability of state traffic laws.
Violation of Oregon Revised Statutes, Chapters 481, 482, 483, 484 and 485 as now or
hereafter constituted shall be an offense against this city. (Ord. 13-73 § 2, 1973.)
10.04.030 ORS 483.343 adopted.
Oregon Revised Statute 483.343, as now or hereafter constituted, is adopted by the city
and a violation shall be an offense against the city. (Ord. 13-73 § 2A, 1973.)
2
Chapter 10.08
DEFINITIONS
10.08.010 Generally.
In addition to those definitions contained in the ORS chapters referred to in Chapter
10.04, the words or phrases defined in this chapter, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning, shall have the meaning as set out herein. (Ord. 13-73 §
3(1) (part), 1973.)
10.08.020 Bicycle.
"Bicycle" means a nonmotorized vehicle designed to be ridden, propelled by human
power, and having two or more wheels the diameter of which are in excess of ten
inches or having two or more wheels where any one wheel has a diameter in excess of
fifteen inches. (Ord. 13-73 § 3(l)(a), 1973.)
10.08.030 Bus stop.
"Bus stop" means a space on the edge of a roadway designated by sign for use by
buses loading or unloading passengers. (Ord. 13-73 § 3(1)(b), 1973.)
10.08.040 City manager.
"City manager" means the city manager or his authorized representative. (Ord. 14-74 §
3 (part), 1974; Ord. 13-73 § 3(1)(c), 1973.)
10.08.050 Holiday.
"Holiday" means Sunday and legal holidays. (Ord. 13-73 § 3(l)(d), 1973.)
10.08.060 Loading zone.
"Loading zone" means a space on the edge of a roadway designated by sign for the
purpose of loading or unloading passengers or materials during specified hours of
specified days. (Ord. 13-73 § 3(l)(3), 1973.)
10.08.070 Motor vehicle.
"Motor vehicle" means every vehicle that is self-propelled, including tractors, fork-lift
trucks, motorcycles, road building equipment, street cleaning equipment and any other
vehicle capable of moving under its own power, notwithstanding that the vehicle may be
exempt from licensing under the motor vehicle laws of Oregon. (Ord. 13-73 § 3(l)(f),
1973.)
10.08.080 Park or parking.
"Park or parking" means the condition of:
A. A motor vehicle that is stopped while occupied by its operator with the engine turned
off;
B. A motor vehicle that is stopped while unoccupied by its operator whether or not the
engine is turned off. (Ord. 13-73 § 3(1)(g), 1973.)
3
10.08.090 Pedestrian.
"Pedestrian" means a person on the public right-of-way except:
A. The operator or passenger of a motor vehicle or bicycle;
B. A person leading, driving or riding an animal or animal-drawn conveyance.
(Ord. 13-73 § 3(l)(h), 1973.)
10.08.100 Stand or standing.
"Stand or standing" means the stopping of a motor vehicle while occupied by its
operator with the engine running except stopping in obedience to the instructions of a
traffic officer or traffic control device or for other traffic. (Ord. 13-73 § 3(l)(j), 1973.)
10.08.110 Stop.
Stop means complete cessation of movement. (Ord. 13-73 § 3(l)(k), 1973.)
10.08.120 Street and other property open to public travel.
A. Street. The terms "highway," "road," and "street," when used in Chapters 10.04
through 10.44, or in the ORS chapters incorporated herein, shall be considered
synonymous unless the context precludes such construction. "Street," as defined
herein, and the ORS chapters incorporated by reference herein, includes alleys,
sidewalks and parking areas and access-ways owned or maintained by the city.
B. "Other property open to public travel" means property, whether publicly or privately
owned and whether publicly or privately maintained, upon which the public operates
motor vehicles either by express or implied invitation other than streets as defined in
subsection A of this section. "Other property open to public travel" includes but is not
limited to parking lots, service station lots, shopping center and supermarket parking
lots, and other access-ways and parking areas open to general vehicular traffic, whether
or not periodically closed to public use.
(Ord. 13-73 § 3(l)(l), 1973.)
10.08.130 Taxicab stand.
"Taxicab stand" means a space on the edge of a roadway designated by sign for use by
taxicabs. (Ord. 13-73 § 3(l)(m), 1973.)
10.08.140 Traffic control device.
"Traffic control device" means a device to direct vehicular or pedestrian traffic, including
but not limited to a sign, signaling mechanism, barricade, button or street or curb
marking installed by the city or other authority. (Ord. 13-73 § 3(l)(n), 1973.)
10.08.150 Traffic lane.
"Traffic lane" means that area of the roadway used for the movement of a single line of
traffic. (Ord. 13-73 § 3(l)(o), 1973.)
4
10.08.160 Vehicle.
"Vehicle," as used in subsequent sections of Chapters 10.12 through 10.44, includes
bicycles. (Ord. 13-73 § 3(i)(p), 1973.)
Chapter 10.12
ADMINISTRATION
10.12.010 Powers of the council.
A. Subject to state laws, the city council shall exercise all municipal traffic authority for
the city except those powers specifically and expressly delegated herein or by another
ordinance.
B. The powers of the council shall include, but not be limited to:
1. Designation of through streets;
2. Designation of one-way streets;
3. Designation of truck routes;
4. Designation of parking meter zones;
5. Restriction of the use of certain streets by any class or kind of vehicle to protect the
streets from damage;
6. Authorization of greater maximum weights or lengths for vehicles using city streets
than specified by state law;
7. Initiation of proceedings to change speed zones;
8. Revision of speed limits in parks.
(Ord. 13-73 § 4, 1973.)
10.12.020 Duties of the city manager.
The city manager or his designate shall exercise the following duties:
A. Implement the ordinances, resolutions and motions of the council and his own orders
by installing traffic control devices. Such installations shall be based on the standards
contained in the Oregon Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and
Highways;
B. Establish, maintain, remove or alter the following classes of traffic controls:
1. Crosswalks, safety zones and traffic lanes,
5
2. Intersection channelization and areas where drivers of vehicles shall not make right,
left or U-turns and the time when the prohibition applies,
3. Parking area and time limitations, including the form of permissible parking (e.g.
parallel or diagonal);
C. Issue oversize or overweight vehicle permits.
(Ord. 14-74 § 3 (part), 1974; Ord. 13-73 § 5, 1973.)
10.12.030 Public danger.
Under conditions constituting a danger to the public, the city manager or his designate
may install temporary traffic control devices deemed by him to be necessary. (Ord. 14-
74 § 3 (part), 1974; Ord. 13-73 § 6, 1973.)
10.12.040 Standards.
The regulations of the city manager or his designate shall be based upon:
A. Traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations;
B. Standards, limitations and rules promulgated by the State Highway Commission;
C. Other recognized traffic control standards.
(Ord. 14-74 § 3 (part), 1973; Ord. 13-73 § 7, 1973.)
10.12.050 Authority of police and fire officers.
A. It shall be the duty of police officers to enforce the provisions of Chapters 10.04
through 10.44.
B. In the event of a fire or other public emergency, officers of the police and fire
departments may direct traffic as conditions require, notwithstanding the provisions of
Chapters 10.04 through 10.44 of this code. (Ord. 13-73 § 8, 1973.)
Chapter 10.16
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
10.16.010 Obedience to and alteration of control devices.
A. No person shall disobey the instruction of a traffic officer or a traffic control device.
B. No unauthorized person shall install, move, remove, obstruct, alter the position of,
deface or tamper with a traffic control device.
(Ord. 13-73 § 9, 1973.)
6
10.16.020 Evidence.
The existence of a traffic control device shall be prima facie evidence that the device
was lawfully authorized and installed. (Ord. 13-73 § 10, 1973.)
10.16.030 Existing control devices.
Traffic control devices installed prior to November 19, 1973, are lawfully authorized.
(Ord. 13-73 § 11, 1973.)
Chapter 10.20
GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
10.20.010 Rules of the road.
In addition to state law, the following shall apply to the operation of vehicles upon the
streets of the city:
A. The operator of a vehicle shall not back the vehicle unless the movement can be
made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic, and shall yield the
right-of-way to moving traffic and pedestrians.
B. The operator of a vehicle in the traffic lane shall have the right-of-way over an
operator of a vehicle departing from a parking space.
C. No operator of a vehicle shall pull away from a curb or other parking area without
giving an appropriate turn signal when other traffic may be affected.
D. Where a stop sign is erected at or near the entrance to an intersection, the operator
of a vehicle approaching shall bring the vehicle to a stop before crossing a stop line or
crosswalk; or, if none, then before entering the intersection. Stopping at a point which
does not yield an unobstructed view of traffic on the intersecting street shall not
constitute compliance with the requirements of this section.
E. Notwithstanding an indication by a traffic control device to proceed:
1. No operator of a vehicle shall enter an intersection unless there is sufficient space on
the opposite side of the intersection to accommodate his vehicle without obstructing the
passage of other vehicles;
2. No operator of a vehicle shall enter a marked crosswalk, whether or not at an
intersection, unless there is sufficient space on the opposite side of the crosswalk to
accommodate his vehicle without obstructing the passage of pedestrians.
(Ord. 13-73 § 12, 1973.)
10.20.020 Crossing private property.
No operator of a vehicle shall proceed from one street to an intersecting street by
crossing private property. This provision shall not apply to the operator of a vehicle who
7
stops on the property for the purpose of procuring or providing goods or services. (Ord.
13-73 § 13, 1973.)
10.20.030 Emerging from vehicle.
No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle into a traffic lane without first
ascertaining that it can be done in safety. (Ord. 13-73 § 14, 1973.)
10.20.040 Unlawful riding.
A. No operator shall permit a passenger and no passenger shall ride on a vehicle upon
a street except on a portion of the vehicle designed or intended for the use of
passengers. This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary
discharge of a duty, or to a person riding within a truck body in space intended for
merchandise.
B. No person shall board or alight from a vehicle while the vehicle is in motion upon a
street. (Ord. 13-73 § 15, 1973.)
10.20.050 Clinging to vehicles.
No person riding upon a bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or other device
shall attach the device or himself to a moving vehicle upon a street. Nor shall the
operator of a vehicle upon a street knowingly allow a person riding on any of the above
vehicles or devices to attach himself, the vehicle, or the device to his vehicle. (Ord. 13-
73 § 16, 1973.)
10.20.060 Sleds on streets.
No person shall use the streets for traveling on skis, toboggans, sleds or similar
devices, except where authorized. (Ord. 13-73 § 17, 1973.)
10.20.070 Damaging sidewalks and curbs.
A. The operator of a vehicle shall not drive upon a sidewalk or roadside planting strip
except to cross at a permanent or temporary driveway.
B. No unauthorized person shall place dirt, wood or other material in the gutter or space
next to the curb of a street with the intention of using it as a driveway.
C. No person shall remove a portion of a curb, or move a motor vehicle, or device
moved by a motor vehicle, upon a curb or sidewalk without first obtaining authorization
and posting bond, if required. A person who causes damage shall be held responsible
for the cost of repair.
(Ord. 13-73 § 18, 1973.)
10.20.080 Obstructing streets.
A. No unauthorized person shall obstruct the free movement of vehicles or pedestrians
using the streets.
8
B. No person shall park or stand a vehicle in such a manner or location that it
constitutes a hazard to public safety or an obstruction on the street.
(Ord. 13-73 § 19, 1973.)
10.20.090 Removing glass and debris.
A party to a vehicle accident or a person causing broken glass or other debris to be
upon a street shall remove the glass and other debris from the street. (Ord. 13-73 § 20,
1973.)
10.20.100 Funeral processions.
A. A permit shall not be required to conduct a funeral procession.
B. The procession shall proceed to the place of interment by the most direct route which
is both legal and practicable.
C. The procession shall be accompanied by adequate escort vehicles for traffic control
purposes.
D. All motor vehicles in the procession shall be operated with their lights turned on.
E. No person shall unreasonably interfere with a funeral procession.
F. No person shall operate a vehicle that is not a part of the procession between the
vehicles of a funeral procession. (Ord. 13-73 § 40, 1973.)
Chapter 10.24
PARKING5
10.24.010 Method of parking.
A. No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a street other than parallel with the edge of
the roadway, headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement, and with the curbside
wheels of the vehicle within twelve inches of the edge of the curb, except where the
street is marked or signed for angle parking.
B. Where parking space markings are placed on a street, no person shall stand or park
a vehicle other than in the indicated direction and, unless the size or shape of the
vehicle makes compliance impossible, within a single marked space.
C. The operator who first begins maneuvering his motor vehicle into a vacant parking
space on a street shall have priority to park in that space, and no other vehicle operator
shall attempt to deprive him of his priority or block his access.
D. Whenever the operator of a vehicle discovers that his vehicle is parked close to a
building to which the fire department has been summoned, he shall immediately remove
the vehicle from the area, unless otherwise directed by police or fire officers. (Ord. 13-
73 § 22, 1973.)
9
10.24.020 Prohibited parking and standing.
In addition to those areas designated in ORS 811.550, no person shall stop, park or
leave standing any vehicle, trailer or portion thereof whether attended or unattended,
except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
directions of a peace officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:
A. A vehicle upon a bridge, viaduct or other elevated structure used as a street or within
a street tunnel unless authorized as in Section H;
B. A vehicle in an alley other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of persons or
materials but in no case for a period in excess of thirty consecutive minutes;
C. A truck, motor truck, semi-truck, or semi-trailer as defined in ORS Chapter 801 on
any public street excepting on weekdays between the hours of 6 a.m. and 4 p.m. when
adjacent to a business or industry normally operating a regular work shift during these
hours while loading/unloading such trailers or vehicles in conjunction with the operation
of said business for a period not to exceed 2 hours;
D. Upon a parkway, planter strip, sidewalk, traffic circle or median, unless authorized as
in section H;
E. A vehicle that obstructs the entrance of any post office or postal station, or is within
ten feet of a private mailbox during the hours of 9:00AM to 5:00PM, Monday through
Saturday.
F. Parking of unattached semi-trailers is prohibited on any public street unless
authorized as in section H;
G. A motor vehicle that is required by state law to be registered that is not registered,
whose registration has expired or that does not have a current permit in lieu of
registration, or fails to display current registration.
H. Permits authorizing limited duration parking of vehicles described in this section on
public streets may be issued at the sole discretion of the City Manager or their
designee.
(Ord. 13-73 § 23, 1973, Ord. 2001-05, 2001, Ord. 2011-07, 2011)
10.24.030 Prohibited parking.
No operator shall park and no owner shall allow a vehicle to be parked upon a street for
the principal purpose of:
A. Displaying the vehicle for sale;
B. Repairing or servicing the vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency;
10
C. Displaying advertising from the vehicle;
D. Selling merchandise from the vehicle, except when authorized;
E. Parking or storing a motor vehicle, two-wheel trailer, utility trailer, boat, mobile trailer,
camper trailer, camper or recreational vehicle more than seventy-two consecutive
hours;
F. Parking restrictions pursuant to ORS 483.364, prohibiting parking on sidewalks,
parkways, near fire hydrants, private drives, within intersections, crosswalks, doubleparking
or parking in violation of posted regulatory signs;
G. Parking in a manner which causes a traffic hazard to any normal flow of traffic.
(Ord. 13-73 § 24, 1973.)
10.24.040 Use of loading zone.
No person shall stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time, other than for
the expeditious loading or unloading of persons or materials, in a place designated as a
loading zone when the hours applicable to that loading zone are in effect. In no case
when the hours applicable to the loading zone are in effect shall the stop for loading and
unloading of materials exceed the time limits posted. If no time limits are posted, then
the use of the zone shall not exceed thirty minutes. (Ord. 13-73 § 25, 1973.)
10.24.050 Leaving unattended vehicle.
No operator or person in charge of a motor vehicle shall park it or allow it to be parked
on a street, on other property open to public travel, or on a new or used car lot without
first stopping the engine, locking the ignition, removing the ignition key from the vehicle
and effectively setting the brake. If the vehicle is attended, the ignition key need not be
removed. (Ord. 13-73 § 26, 1973.)
10.24.060 Action by police officer.
Whenever a police officer finds a motor vehicle parked unattended with the ignition key
in the vehicle in violation of Section 10.24.050, the police officer is authorized to remove
the key from the vehicle and deliver the key to the person in charge of the police station.
(Ord. 13-73 § 27, 1973.)
10.24.070 Standing or parking of buses and taxicabs regulated.
The operator of a bus or taxicab shall not stand or park the vehicle upon a street in a
business district at a place other than a bus stop or taxicab stand, respectively, except
that this provision shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from temporarily stopping
his vehicle outside a traffic lane while loading or unloading passengers. (Ord. 13-73 §
28, 1973.)
10.24.080 Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands.
No person shall stand or park a vehicle other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, or a bus
11
in a bus stop, except that the operator of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop for
the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers, when
stopping does not interfere with a bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter the
restricted space. (Ord. 13-73 § 29, 1973.)
10.24.090 Lights on parked vehicle.
No lights need be displayed upon a vehicle that is parked in accordance with Chapters
10.04 through 10.44 upon a street where there is sufficient light to reveal a person or
object at a distance of at least five hundred feet from the vehicle. (Ord. 13-73 § 30,
1973.)
10.24.100 Posted time limited parking.
Maximum time limited parking for certain streets in downtown Sandy and within the
Heritage Square Parking Lot shall be regulated as established by resolution. (Ord.
2013-08, 2013.)
10.24.110 Extension of parking time.
Where maximum parking time limits are designated by sign, movement of a vehicle
within a block shall not extend the time limits for parking. (Ord. 13-73 § 31, 1973.)
10.24.120 Parking violation.
Violation of Sections 10.24.010 to 10.24.130 is punishable by fine as set by resolution.
(Ord. 2013-08, 2013.)
10.24.130 Exemption.
The provisions of Chapters 10.04 through 10.44 regulating the parking or standing of
vehicles shall not apply to a vehicle of the city, county or state or public utility while
necessarily in use for construction or repair work on a street, or a vehicle owned by the
United States while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of mail. (Ord. 13-
73 § 32, 1973.)
Chapter 10.28
BICYCLES1
10.28.010 Equipment.
A bicycle operated upon the streets shall be equipped as required by state law. In
addition, a bicycle shall be equipped with a brake capable of sliding at least one tire
when applied on dry, level, clean pavement. No bicycle shall be equipped with a siren or
whistle. (Ord. 13-73 § 33, 1973.)
10.28.020 Rules for operation.
In addition to observing all other applicable provisions of Chapters 10.04 through 10.44
and state law, a rider of a bicycle upon a street shall:
A. Not ride upon a sidewalk within a business district;
12
B. Yield the right-of-way to pedestrians on sidewalks;
C. On a two-way street, ride to the extreme right except when preparing for a left turn.
On a one-way street, ride to the extreme curb side of the traffic lane and with the
direction of travel designated for that lane. If the curb lane is designated for left turn or
right turn only, and the operator is not intending to turn, he shall operate in the through
lane;
D. Not carry a package, bundle or article which prohibits him from having full control of
the bicycle and unhindered vision;
E. Not ride abreast of another bicycle or in any manner other than single file, except on
designated bicycle paths;
F. Not operate a bicycle in a careless or reckless manner which endangers or would be
likely to endanger himself, another, or any property. Racing or trick riding are included in
this offense;
G. Not leave a bicycle, except in a bicycle rack. If no rack is provided, he shall leave the
bicycle so as not to obstruct any roadway, sidewalk, and driveway or building entrance.
Nor shall he leave the bicycle in violation of the provisions relating to the parking of
motor vehicles.
(Ord. 13-73 § 34, 1973.)
10.28.030 Impounding.
A. It is unlawful to leave a bicycle on public or private property without the consent of
the person in charge or the owner thereof.
B. A bicycle left on public property for a period in excess of twenty-four hours may be
impounded by the police department.
C. In addition to any citation issued, a bicycle parked in violation of Chapters 10.04
through 10.44 may be immediately impounded by the police department.
D. If a bicycle impounded under Chapters 10.04 through 10.44 is licensed, or other
means of determining its ownership exist, the police shall make reasonable efforts to
notify the owner.
E. A bicycle impounded under Chapters 10.04 through 10.44 which remains unclaimed
shall be disposed of in accordance with the city's procedures for disposal of abandoned
or lost personal property.
(Ord. 13-73 § 35, 1973.)
13
Chapter 10.30
SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES, ETC. ON PUBLIC SIDEWALKS
10.30.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined in this section.
"Careless manner" means a manner that endangers or that could reasonably be
expected to endanger persons or property, including, but not limited to, the use of
portable ramps, modification of sidewalk surfaces, or jumping.
"Sidewalk" means any public right-of-way not open to public vehicular traffic except for
city parks.
"Use of a skateboard, roller skates, in-line skates, coaster, toy vehicle or similar device"
means the act of operating, riding or propelling such device. (Ord. 98-14 § 1 (part),
1998.)
10.30.020 Use of public sidewalks and property.
A. Any person using a skateboard, roller skates, in-line skates, coaster, toy vehicle or
similar device upon a sidewalk, where not otherwise prohibited shall do so at such
person's own risk and shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians.
B. A person commits the offence of unlawful use of public sidewalks and property if the
person uses or permits the use of a skateboard, roller skates, in-line skates, coaster, toy
vehicle or other device:
1. Within city buildings or on city property, except where designated;
2. Upon a public sidewalk in a careless manner;
3. On private property within any commercial or industrial district where the owner or
owner's representative has requested that violators be prosecuted.
C. Unlawful use of public sidewalks and property is a Class B infraction.
D. Any skateboard, roller skates, in-line skates, coaster, toy vehicle or similar device
used to violate this section may be impounded by any police officer and held until the
person using the device at the time of impoundment is acquitted or provides proof that
bail or the fine upon conviction has been paid, unless otherwise ordered by the Sandy
Municipal Court or other court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 98-14 § 1 (part), 1998.)
14
Chapter 10.32
PEDESTRIANS
10.32.010 Use of sidewalks.
A pedestrian shall not use a roadway for travel when a sidewalk is available. (Ord. 13-
73 § 36, 1973.)
10.32.030 Right angles.
A pedestrian shall cross a street at a right angle, unless crossing with a crosswalk. (Ord.
13-73 § 38, 1973.)
10.32.040 Obedience to traffic lights.
At an intersection where a pedestrian control light is in operation, no pedestrian shall
start to cross the street except when the walk signal is illuminated. Where only vehicle
control lights are in operation, no pedestrian shall start to cross the street except when
the green light is illuminated. (Ord. 13-73 § 39, 1973.)
Chapter 10.34
PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY OBSTRUCTIONS
10.34.010 Unlawful street obstruction.
A. A person commits the offence of unlawful street obstruction if the person obstructs
the free movement of vehicles or pedestrians using the public right-of-way.
B. Section 10.34.010 does not apply to city, county, state or public utility employees
engaged in their lawful duties, or persons engaged in construction work pursuant to a
development or building permit.
C. Unlawful street obstruction is a Class B infraction.
(Ord. 98-15 § 1 (part), 1998.)
10.34.020 Unlawful street marking.
A. A person commits the offence of unlawful street marking if the person paints or
marks any public street, except for persons authorized to install or maintain traffic
control markings, maintain roads, identify the location of utilities, or investigate traffic
and/or crime scenes.
B. Unlawful street marking is a Class A infraction.
(Ord. 98-15 § 1 (part), 1998.)
15
Chapter 10.36
TRAFFIC OFFENSES ON OTHER PROPERTY OPEN TO PUBLIC TRAVEL
10.36.010 Careless driving.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle on other property open to public travel in a
careless manner. As used in this section, "a careless manner" means in a manner that
endangers or would be likely to endanger any person or property. (Ord. 13-73 § 41,
1973.)
10.36.020 Reckless driving.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle on other property open to public travel
carelessly and heedlessly in willful or wanton disregard of the rights or safety of others.
(Ord. 13-73 § 42, 1973.)
10.36.030 Driving under the influence of intoxicating liquor, dangerous drugs or
narcotic drugs.
A. No person shall operate a motor vehicle on other property open to public travel while
under the influence of intoxicating liquor, dangerous drugs or narcotic drugs.
B. A person charged with an offense under this section shall be advised that he has a
right to a chemical test of his blood, saliva or urine at his expense or chemical test of his
breath without expense; that he is not required to submit to any such test and that his
refusal will not result in suspension of his driving privileges and that his refusal to submit
or failure to request chemical testing cannot be used against him in any criminal
proceeding.
C. As used in this section, "intoxicating liquor," "dangerous drugs," and "narcotic drugs"
mean the same as those terms are defined by state law.
(Ord. 13-73 § 43, 1973.)
10.36.040 Duties at an accident.
A. The operator of a motor vehicle involved in an accident on other property open to
public travel which results in injury or death to a person or causes damage to another
occupied vehicle shall stop immediately at the scene of the accident, or as close thereto
as possible, and shall remain at the scene of the accident until he has fulfilled the
following requirements:
1. Rendered to a person injured in the accident reasonable assistance, including the
conveying or the making of arrangements for the conveying of the person to a physician
or hospital for medical treatment, if it is apparent that treatment is necessary, or if the
injured person requests conveyance;
2. Given to the occupant of the other vehicle his name and address and the names and
addresses of any other occupants of the vehicle he is operating.
16
B. The operator of a motor vehicle on other property open to public travel which collides
with an unattended vehicle or damages other property, public or private, shall make a
reasonable effort to locate and notify the owner of the damaged property. If, after
reasonable effort, the operator cannot locate the owner, he shall leave in a conspicuous
place a note containing his name and address and a brief description of the
circumstances and promptly report the accident to police.
C. A witness to the accident shall furnish to the operators or occupants of the vehicles,
or injured persons, his name and address.
(Ord. 13-73 § 44, 1974.)
10.36.050 Enforcement.
A. The violation of a provision of Chapters 10.04 through 10.44 relating to the operation
of a motor vehicle on other property open to public travel shall be a municipal offense
and shall subject the violator to arrest by a police officer or a private citizen if the
violation takes place in the presence of the officer or citizen or by a police officer acting
under authority of a municipal court warrant.
B. ORS 133.310(3) and 484.105 shall not apply to offenses on other property open to
public travel. The Oregon Uniform Traffic Citation and Complaint Form shall not be used
and convictions for offenses occurring on other property open to public travel shall not
be reported to the Department of Motor Vehicles.
C. A misdemeanant citation may be issued in lieu of custody.
(Ord. 13-73 § 45, 1973.)
Chapter 10.40
ENFORCEMENT
10.40.010 Citation on illegally parked vehicle.
Whenever a vehicle without an operator is found parked in violation of a restriction
imposed by Chapters 10.04 through 10.44, the officer finding the vehicle shall take its
license number and any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify
its owner and shall conspicuously affix to the vehicle a traffic citation for the operator to
answer to the charge against him or pay the penalty imposed within five days during the
hours and at a place specified in the citation. (Ord. 13-73 § 46, 1973.)
10.40.020 Failure to comply with traffic citation.
If the operator does not respond to a traffic citation affixed to such vehicle within a
period of five days, the chief of police may send to the owner of the vehicle to which the
traffic citation was affixed, a letter informing him of the violation and warning him that in
the event the letter is disregarded for a period of five days, a warrant for his arrest will
be issued. (Ord. 13-73 § 47, 1973.)
10.40.030 Owner responsibility.
The owner of a vehicle placed in violation of a parking restriction shall be responsible for
17
the offense, except where the use of the vehicle was secured by the operator without
the owner's consent. (Ord. 13-73 § 48, 1973.)
10.40.040 Registered owner presumption.
In a prosecution of a vehicle owner, charging a violation of a restriction on parking, proof
that the vehicle at the time of the violation was registered to the defendant constitutes a
presumption that he was then the owner in fact. (Ord. 13-73 § 49, 1973.)
10.40.050 Impoundment of vehicles.
A. Whenever a vehicle is placed in a manner or location that constitutes an obstruction
to traffic or a hazard to public safety, a police officer shall order the owner or operator of
the vehicle to remove it. If the vehicle is unattended, the officer may cause the vehicle to
be towed and stored at the owner's expense. The owner shall be liable for the costs of
towing and storing, notwithstanding that the vehicle was parked by another or that the
vehicle was initially parked in a safe manner, but subsequently became an obstruction
or hazard.
B. The disposition of a vehicle towed and stored under authority of this section shall be
in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 10.52, relating to impoundment and
disposition of vehicle abandoned on the city streets.
C. The impoundment of a vehicle will not preclude the issuance of a citation for violation
of a provision of Chapters 10.04 through 10.44.
D. Stolen vehicles may be towed from public or private property and stored at the
expense of the vehicle owner.
E. Whenever a police officer observes a vehicle parked in violation of a provision of
Chapters 10.04 through 10.44, if the vehicle has four or more unpaid parking violations
outstanding against it, the officer may, in addition to issuing a citation, cause the vehicle
to be impounded. A vehicle so impounded shall not be released until all outstanding
fines and charges have been paid. Vehicles impounded under authority of this
subsection shall be disposed of in the same manner as provided in subsection B of this
section.
(Ord. 13-73 § 50, 1973.)
Chapter 10.44
PENALTIES
10.44.010 Designated.
A. Except as may be limited by Charter, violations of ORS provisions made offenses
against this city are punishable to the same extent provided in the statutes.
B. Violation of Sections 10.12.030 through 10.12.050 and Chapters 10.16 and 10.20
(except Section 10.20.100 thereof), is punishable by fine not to exceed one hundred
18
dollars, or confinement in the city or county jail not to exceed ten days, or both fine and
imprisonment.
C. Violation of Chapter 10.28 through 10.32 and Section 10.20.100 is punishable by fine
not to exceed fifty dollars.
D. Except as may be limited by Charter, violations of Chapter 10.36 are punishable by
confinement in the city or county jail, or by a fine or by both, not to exceed the maximum
penalties which could be imposed under state law for similar violations occurring on
highways.(Ord. 13-73 § 51, 1973.)
Chapter 10.48
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE SIZE AND WEIGHT LIMITS2
10.48.010 Load restrictions upon commercial vehicles exceeding fourteen
thousand pounds gross weight.
A. By reason of the construction of certain streets and their weight bearing capacity, it
has been determined that gross weight exceeding fourteen thousand pounds will cause
serious damage to such streets.
B. All vehicles exceeding fourteen thousand pounds, originating outside the boundary of
the city and terminating outside of the city shall use the streets hereinafter designated
as forming a part of the city's truck route.
(Ord. 7-75 § 1, 1975.)
10.48.020 Truck routes designated.
City streets forming a part of the city truck route are designated as follows:
A. Highway 26 (including Proctor Boulevard and Pioneer Boulevard) from east city limits
to west city limits;
B. Highway 211 from south city limits
10.48.030 Truck access routes.
All trucks exceeding fourteen thousand pounds gross weight, originating within or
without the city limits and terminating within the city limits, traveling to or from a
recognized truck service center, or making local deliveries, shall use the most direct
route possible to utilize the designated truck routes. (Ord. 7-75 § 3, 1975.)
10.48.040 Parking of trucks restricted.
Except for loading and unloading purposes in connection with local deliveries, no truck
weighing in excess of fourteen thousand pounds gross weight shall park on any city
street within the city except along designated truck routes. (Ord. 7-75 § 4, 1975.)
10.48.050 Liability for damage to streets.
Any person operating any vehicle or moving any object or conveyance upon any street
19
or public way shall be liable for all damages thereto as a result of any illegal operation of
such vehicle or the moving of any such object or conveyance weighing in excess of the
legal weight limits allowed by law. (Ord. 7-75 § 5, 1975.)
10.48.060 Violation—Penalty.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall upon conviction be fined
a sum not to exceed five hundred dollars or by imprisonment not to exceed six months,
or by both fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 7-75 § 6, 1975.)
Chapter 10.52
ABANDONED VEHICLES3
10.52.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise:
A. "Abandoned" means left unoccupied and unclaimed or in a damaged or dismantled
condition upon the streets or alleys of the city.
B. "Chief of police" includes any authorized law enforcement officer of the city.
C. "City" means the city of Sandy.
D. "Costs" means the expense of removing, storing, and selling an impounded vehicle.
E. "Owner" means any individual, firm, corporation, or unincorporated association with a
claim, either individually or jointly, of ownership or any interest, legal or equitable, in a
vehicle.
F. "Vehicle" means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a public highway, except devices moved by human power
or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracts.
(Ord. 5-77 § 1 (part), 1977.)
10.52.020 Notice of nuisance.
A. It shall be the duty of the police department, whenever a vehicle is found abandoned
upon the streets or alleys in the same position for a period of forty-eight hours, to:
1. Make a routine investigation to discover the owner and request removal of the
vehicle; or
2. Failing to discover the owner by such a process, to make a diligent inquiry as to the
name and address of the owner of the vehicle by examining such vehicle for license
number, I.D. number, make, style, and any other information which will aid in the
identification of the ownership of the vehicle, and transmitting all available information
pertaining to such vehicle to the Department of Motor Vehicles of this state with an
20
inquiry for the name and address of the owner, whenever such vehicle is required by
law to be registered with that office.
3. If the owner is not identified, to place a notice upon the windshield, or some other part
of the vehicle easily seen by the passing public.
B. The notice shall state that the police department will remove and impound the vehicle
under the provisions of this chapter, twenty-four hours after the time of the posting,
unless:
1. The owner removes the vehicle; or
2. Good cause is shown, satisfactory to the chief of police, why such vehicle should not
be removed by the owner or removed and impounded by the city.
(Ord. 5-77 § 1 (part), 1977.)
10.52.030 Impounding nuisance.
A. An abandoned vehicle which remains in the same position for a period of twenty-four
hours after an owner has been requested to remove it or after a notice to remove has
been posted upon the vehicle, and no person has appeared to show good cause why
the vehicle should not be removed, shall constitute a nuisance.
B. Before any abandoned vehicle is taken into custody, an abandoned vehicle notice
must be issued to the legal owner and owner or persons entitled to possession of the
vehicle by posting on the vehicle. The notice shall contain the following information:
1. The name and badge number of the officer issuing the notice;
2. The pertinent laws authorizing removal of the vehicle;
3. That if the vehicle is not removed within twenty-four hours that the officer will cause it
to be taken into custody unless good cause is shown satisfactory to the chief of police,
why such vehicle should not be removed and impounded by the city;
4. That any person who at the request of the city tows an abandoned vehicle shall have
a lien on the vehicle for the just and reasonable towing and storage charges, may retain
possession of the vehicle until the charges are paid, and may have the vehicle sold at
public auction to satisfy the liens;
5. That the legal owner and owner or persons entitled to possession of the vehicle may
request a hearing on the validity of the tow and the creation and amount of the lien; and
6. How and where the legal owner and owner or persons entitled to possession of the
vehicle may get information about the hearing and the location of the towed vehicle.
21
If the legal owner or the owner or persons entitled to possession of the vehicle request a
hearing before the abandoned vehicle is taken into custody, the vehicle shall not be
taken into custody until a hearing is set and held in accordance with the terms of this
chapter.
C. After impoundment, the chief of police shall cause the vehicle to be appraised.
(Ord. 5-80 § 1, 1980; Ord. 5-77 §1 (part), 1977.)
10.52.040 Notice of impoundment and sale.
If the owner is identified, he shall be notified immediately by registered or certified mail
that such vehicle is held by the police department of the city. The notice to the owner
shall also state:
A. The reason for impounding the vehicle;
B. The existing costs charged against the vehicle;
C. An estimate of future costs, including the cost of advertising the vehicle for sale;
D. That unless the owner redeems the vehicle within fifteen days from the day of mailing
the notice and pays all the costs the vehicle will be sold.
(Ord. 5-77 § 1 (part), 1977.)
10.52.050 Notice of impoundment, hearing, and sale.
A. After an abandoned vehicle has been taken into custody and unless a hearing has
already been requested, notice must be provided to the legal owner and owner or
persons entitled to possession of the vehicle indicating the location of the vehicle, that a
lien has arisen on the vehicle in favor of the person who towed the vehicle, that the
vehicle may be sold at a public auction to satisfy the lien, and that a hearing on the
validity of the tow and on the creation and amount of the lien may be held if requested.
Notice is deemed given when a registered or certified letter addressed to the registered
owner of the vehicle and a similar letter addressed to the legal owner, if any, return
receipt requested and postage prepaid thereon, is mailed within twenty-four hours after
the vehicle is taken into possession. If the vehicle is registered in the office of the Motor
Vehicle Division of the state, notice may be addressed to the registered owner and the
legal owner, if any, at the latest respective address of each shown by the records in the
office of the Motor Vehicles Division. If the vehicle is not so registered, reasonable
efforts shall be made to ascertain the names and addresses of the legal owner and
owner or persons entitled to possession of the vehicle so that notice may be mailed, if
reasonably possible within twenty-four hours after the vehicle is taken into possession.
The owner must request a hearing within five days after receipt of the notice. The
request may be made in person or in writing and failure to appear in person or mail a
letter within five days after receipt of the notice shall act as a waiver of the right to
hearing.
22
B. Upon request of the legal owner, or the owner or person entitled to possession of the
vehicle, a hearing shall be held before the hearings officer appointed by the Sandy city
council. The hearing shall be set and conducted within forty-eight hours after receipt of
the request, holidays, Saturdays and Sundays not to be included. The hearing can be
set for a later date if the owner so requests. At the hearing the owner may contest:
1. The validity of the action of the city in taking the abandoned vehicle into custody; and
2. The creation of the amount of the lien attached to the abandoned vehicle.
C. If the hearings officer finds that the action of the city in taking the vehicle into custody
was invalid, the hearings officer shall:
1. Order the vehicle released to the owner,
2. Find that the owner is not liable for any towing or storing charges occasioned by the
taking,
3. Determine that the amount of a just and reasonable towing or storage charge be paid
by the city in order to satisfy the lien.
D. If the action of the city in taking the vehicle into custody was proper the hearings
officer shall determine the amount of a just and reasonable towing and storage charge
which shall be a lien on the vehicle.
E. The actions of the hearings officer is final.
F. If the owner does not appear at the scheduled hearing, the hearings officer may enter
an order supporting the removal and assessment of towing and storage charges against
the owner.
G. The pre-tow notice provisions of this chapter do not apply in situations where the
vehicle is disabled, abandoned, parked or left standing unattended on a road or
highway right- of-way in such a location as to constitute a hazard. In such cases the city
may immediately take the vehicle into custody. In the event of such hazard tow, the post
tow notification provisions of this section must be met.
(Ord. 5-80 § 2, 1980: Ord. 5-77 § 1 (part), 1977.)
10.52.070 Public sale.
A. If the owner cannot be identified or no claim is made by a notified owner as required
by Section 10.52.050, the chief of police shall cause to be published in a newspaper of
general circulation within the city a notice of sale. The notice of sale shall state:
1. The sale is of abandoned property in the possession of the city;
23
2. A description of the vehicle, including the type, make, motor number, serial number
and any other information which would aid and accurately identify the vehicle;
3. The terms of the sale; and
4. The date and time and place of the sale.
B. The vehicle shall be sold to the highest and best bidder, providing that if no bids are
entered, or those bids which are entered are less than the costs incurred by the city, the
chief of police may enter a bid on behalf of the city in an amount equal to such costs.
C. At the time of payment of the purchase price, the chief of police shall execute a
certificate of sale, in duplicate, the original of which shall be delivered to the purchaser,
and the copy thereof filed with the recorder of the city.
D. The certificate of sale shall be substantially as follows:
"CERTIFICATE OF SALE
"This is to certify that under the provisions of Ordinance No ________________
entitled, `An Ordinance for the Impounding and Disposition of Abandoned Vehicles' and
pursuant to due notice of the time and place of sale, I did on the ______________ day
of ________,20________, sell at public auction to _________ for the sum of $
__________ cash, he being the highest and best bidder, and that being the highest and
best sum bid therefor, the following described personal property, to-wit:
(Brief description of the property)
"And in consideration of the payment of the said sum of $_________, receipt whereof is
hereby acknowledged, I have this day delivered to said purchaser the foregoing
property.
"Dated this ____________ day of __________ 20_________
__________________"
Note: The city assumes no responsibility as to the condition of title of the property
described above. In case this sale is for any reason invalid, the liability of the city is
limited to the return of the purchase price.
(Ord. 5-80 § 4, 1980; Ord. 5-77 § 1 (part), 1977.)
10.52.080 Redemption before sale.
A. An owner may redeem a vehicle impounded under the provisions of this chapter,
before a sale or disposition has taken place, by applying to the police department,
whereupon he shall:
24
1. Submit evidence of his ownership or interest in the vehicle, satisfactory to the chief of
police, that such claim is rightful; and
2. Pay the costs due and owing at the time the application to redeem is made.
B. Upon compliance with subsection A of this section, the chief of police shall execute a
receipt for the owner and cause the vehicle to be returned to him.
(Ord. 5-77 § 1 (part), 1977.)
10.52.090 Sale and proceeds.
A. Upon a sale being consummated, the chief of police shall deliver the vehicle and the
certificate of sale to the purchaser. The sale and conveyance shall be without
redemption.
B. The proceeds of a sale shall be applied:
1. To the payment of cost incurred by the city;
2. To the payment of services rendered by a private garage; and
3. The balance, if any, shall be transferred to the city treasurer of the city to be credited
to the general fund.
(Ord. 5-77 § 1 (part), 1977.)
10.52.100 Application.
This chapter shall apply to all abandoned vehicles now in the possession of the city as
well as to abandoned vehicles that are hereafter impounded. (Ord. 5-77 § 1 (part),
1977.)
10.52.110 Private garages.
A. The city shall not be liable for services rendered by a private garage from any source
other than such amounts as may be collected from the owner on redemption, or from a
purchaser upon sale, after the city shall have deducted its expenses, unless the city is
the purchaser of the vehicle.
B. The vehicle shall not be released from the private garage except upon a receipt,
signed by the chief of police, proffered by the purchaser.
(Ord. 5-77 § 1 (part), 1977.)
To Highway 26;
C. TenEyck Road from east city limits to Highway 26.
(Ord. 7-75 § 2, 1975.)
25
Chapter 10.56
AUTO WRECKING AND DISMANTLING4
10.56.010 State code adopted.
The city adopts by reference Sections 481.345 through 481.370 of the Oregon Revised
Statutes as now or hereafter constituted, and violation of any provision thereof shall be
an offense against the city. (Ord. 8-75 § 4, 1975.)
10.56.020 Locations prohibited along state highways.
No business of wrecking, dismantling, disassembling or substantially altering the form of
any motor vehicle can be established within one thousand one hundred feet of the
nearest edge of any state highway, unless:
The business is hidden or adequately screened by the terrain or other natural objects,
or by plantings, fences or other appropriate means, so as not to be visible from the main
traveled highway, and is approved for this location by both the state and the city. (Ord.
8-75 § 1, 1975.)
10.56.030 Conditional use.
This type of business is permitted by conditional use only as provided for in Section
17.44.090. (Ord. 8-75 § 2, 1975.)
10.56.040 Violation-Penalty.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall upon conviction be fined
a sum not to exceed five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment not to exceed six months,
or by both fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 8-75 § 3, 1975.)
Footnotes:
1. For statutory provisions regarding bicycle equipment standards, see ORS 483.404;
for provisions subjecting bicycle operators to motor vehicle statutes, see ORS 483.034
2. For the statutory authority of cities to prohibit the operation of any or all vehicles or
any class or kind of vehicle within the city limits, and to impose limits as to gross vehicle
weight or any vehicle dimension, see ORS 483.532.
3. For statutory provisions regarding abandoned motor vehicles, see ORS 483 .380 et
seq. Prior ordinance history: Ord. 12-73.
4. For statutory provisions regarding auto wrecking, see ORS 481.345 et seq.
5. For provisions regarding systems development charges for off-street parking
facilities, see Ch. 15.28 of this code.
1
TITLE 12
STREETS, SIDEWALKS, AND PUBLIC PROPERTY
Chapter 12.02 UTILITY FACILITIES IN PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY ............................... 1
Chapter 12.04 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT PROCEDURES1 ............................................ 19
Chapter 12.08 SIDEWALK, CURB AND DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION2 ................... 26
Chapter 12.10 SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE ..................................................................... 29
Chapter 12.12 PUBLIC PARKS ........................................................................................... 31
Chapter 12.14 ADVANCE FINANCING OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS ...................... 34
Chapter 12.16 REGULATIONS GOVERNING CONDUCT ON CITY OF SANDY
PUBLIC TRANSIT .................................................................................................................. 38
Chapter 12.18 STREET TREES .......................................................................................... 45
Chapter 12.02
UTILITY FACILITIES IN PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY
12.02.010 Title.
The ordinance codified in this Chapter shall be known and may be referenced as the utility
facilities in public rights of way ordinance.
12.02.020 Purpose and Intent.
The purpose and intent of this Chapter is to:
A. Permit and manage reasonable access to the rights of way of the City for utility
purposes and conserve the limited physical capacity of those rights of way held in trust
by the City consistent with applicable state and federal law;
B. Assure that the City’s current and ongoing costs of granting and regulating access to
and the use of the rights of way are fully compensated by the persons seeking such
access and causing such costs;
C. Secure fair and reasonable compensation to the City and its residents for permitting
use of the rights of way;
D. Assure that all utility companies, persons and other entities owning or operating
facilities and/or providing services within the City register and comply with the ordinances,
rules and regulations of the City;
E. Assure that the City can continue to fairly and responsibly protect the public health,
safety and welfare of its citizens;
2
F. Encourage the provision of advanced and competitive utility services on the widest
possible basis to businesses and residents of the City; and
G. Comply with applicable provisions of state and federal law.
12.02.030 Jurisdiction and Management of the Public Rights of Way.
A. The City has jurisdiction and exercises regulatory management over all rights of way
within the City under authority of the City charter and state law.
B. The City has jurisdiction and exercises regulatory management over each right of
way whether the City has a fee, easement, or other legal interest in the right of way, and
whether the legal interest in the right of way was obtained by grant, dedication,
prescription, reservation, condemnation, annexation, foreclosure or other means.
C. The exercise of jurisdiction and regulatory management of a right of way by the City
is not official acceptance of the right of way, and does not obligate the City to maintain or
repair any part of the right of way.
D. The provisions of this Chapter are subject to and will be applied consistent with
applicable state and federal laws, rules and regulations, and, to the extent possible, shall
be interpreted to be consistent with such laws, rules and regulations.
12.02.040 Regulatory Fees and Compensation Not a Tax.
A. The fees and costs provided for in this Chapter, and any compensation charged and
paid for use of the rights of way provided for in this Chapter, are separate from, and in
addition to, any and all other federal, state, local, and City charges as may be levied,
imposed, or due from a utility operator, its customers or subscribers, or on account of the
lease, sale, delivery, or transmission of utility services.
B. The City has determined that any fee or tax provided for by this Chapter is not subject
to the property tax limitations of Article XI, Sections 11 and 11b of the Oregon
Constitution. These fees or taxes are not imposed on property or property owners.
C. The fees and costs provided for in this Chapter are subject to applicable federal and
state laws.
12.02.050 Definitions.
For the purpose of this Chapter the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations
shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used
in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular
number and words in the singular number include the plural number. The words “shall”
and “will” are mandatory and “may” is permissive.
3
“Cable service” is to be defined consistent with federal laws and means the one-way
transmission to subscribers of: (i) video programming, or (ii) other programming service;
and subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video
programming or other programming service.
“City” means the City of Sandy, an Oregon municipal corporation, and individuals
authorized to act on the City’s behalf.
“City Council” means the elected governing body of the City of Sandy, Oregon.
“City facilities” means City or publicly-owned structures or equipment located within the
right of way or public easement used for governmental purposes.
“Communications services” means any service provided for the purpose of transmission
of information including, but not limited to, voice, video, or data, without regard to the
transmission protocol employed, whether or not the transmission medium is owned by
the provider itself and whether or not the transmission medium is wireline.
Communications service includes all forms of telephone services and voice, video, data
or information transport, but does not include: (1) cable service; (2) open video system
service, as defined in 47 C.F.R. 76; (3) private communications system services provided
without using the public rights of way or private communications system services that use
the public rights of way without imposing any additional burden on the public rights of
way; (4) over-the-air radio or television broadcasting to the public-at-large from facilities
licensed by the Federal Communications Commission or any successor thereto; and (5)
direct-to-home satellite service within the meaning of Section 602 of the
Telecommunications Act.
“Force majeure” means an act, event or occurrence caused by fire, riot, war, acts of God,
nature, sovereign, or public enemy, strikes or freight embargoes where such act, event
or occurrence and the facts or circumstances leading to the event are completely outside
the utility operator’s control.
“License” means the authorization granted by the City to a utility operator pursuant to this
Chapter.
“Person” means and includes any individual, firm, sole proprietorship, corporation,
company, partnership, co-partnership, joint-stock company, trust, Limited Liability
Company, association or other organization, including any natural person or any other
legal entity.
“Private communications system” means a system, including the construction,
maintenance or operation of the system, for the provision of a service or any portion of a
service which is owned or operated exclusively by a person for their use and not for
resale, directly or indirectly. “Private communications system” includes services provided
by the state of Oregon pursuant to ORS 190.240 and 283.140.
“Public utility easement” means the space in, upon, above, along, across, over or under
an easement for the constructing, reconstructing, operating, maintaining, inspecting, and
4
repairing of utilities facilities. This definition applies only to easements the City has
authority to manage or authority to grant utility operators licenses to occupy and use for
utility facilities. “Public utility easement” does not include an easement solely for the
constructing, reconstructing, operating, maintaining, inspecting, and repairing of City
facilities, or where the proposed use by the utility operator is inconsistent with the terms
of any easement granted to the City.
“Right of way” means and includes, but is not limited to, the space in, upon, above, along,
across, over or under the public streets, roads, highways, lanes, courts, ways, alleys,
boulevards, bridges, trails, paths, sidewalks, bicycle lanes, public utility easements and
all other public ways or areas, including the subsurface under and air space over these
areas, but does not include parks, parkland, or other City property not generally open to
the public for travel. This definition applies only to the extent of the City’s right, title,
interest and authority to grant a license to occupy and use such areas for utility facilities.
“State” means the state of Oregon.
“Utility facility” or “facility” means any physical component of a system, including but not
limited to the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, cables, wires, transmitters, plant,
equipment and other facilities, located within, under or above the rights of way, any portion
of which is used or designed to be used to deliver, transmit or otherwise provide utility
service.
“Utility operator” or “operator” means any person who owns, places, operates or maintains
a utility facility within the City.
“Utility service” means the provision, by means of utility facilities permanently located
within, under or above the rights of way, whether or not such facilities are owned by the
service provider, of electricity, natural gas, communications services, cable services,
water, sewer, and/or storm sewer to or from customers within the corporate boundaries
of the City, and/or the transmission of any of these services through the City whether or
not customers within the City are served by those transmissions.
“Work” means the construction, demolition, installation, replacement, repair, maintenance
or relocation of any utility facility, including but not limited to any excavation and
restoration required in association with such construction, demolition, installation,
replacement, repair, maintenance or relocation.
12.02.060 Licenses.
A. License Required.
1. Except those utility operators with a valid franchise agreement from the City, every
person shall obtain a license from the City prior to conducting any work in the rights
of way.
2. Every person that owns or controls utility facilities in the rights of way as of the
effective date of this Chapter shall apply for a license from the City within forty-five
5
days of the later of: (1) the effective date of this Chapter, or (2) the expiration of a
valid franchise from the City, unless a new franchise is granted by the City pursuant
to subsection E of this section12.02.070.
B. License Application. The license application shall be on a form provided by the City,
and shall be accompanied by any additional documents required by the application to
identify the applicant, its legal status, including its authorization to do business in Oregon,
a description of the type of utility service provided or to be provided by the applicant, and
the facilities over which the utility service will be provided, and other information
reasonably necessary to determine the applicant’s ability to comply with the terms of this
Chapter.
C. License Application Fee. The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
application fee or deposit set by resolution of the City Council in an amount sufficient to
fully recover all of the City’s costs related to processing the application for the license.
D. Determination by City. The City shall issue, within a reasonable period of time, a
written determination granting or denying the license in whole or in part. If the license is
denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for denial. The license shall
be evaluated based upon the provisions of this Chapter, the continuing capacity of the
rights of way to accommodate the applicant’s proposed utility facilities and the applicable
federal, state and local laws, rules, regulations and policies.
E. Franchise Agreements. If the public interest warrants, the City and utility operator
may enter into a written franchise agreement that includes terms that clarify, enhance,
expand, waive or vary the provisions of this Chapter, consistent with applicable state and
federal law. The franchise may conflict with the terms of this Chapter with the review and
approval of City Council. The franchisee shall be subject to the provisions of this Chapter
to the extent such provisions are not in conflict with any such franchise.
F. Rights Granted.
1. The license granted hereunder shall authorize and permit the licensee, subject to
the provisions of the City code and other applicable provisions of state or federal
law, to construct, place, maintain, repair and operate utility facilities in the rights of
way for the term of the license.
2. Any license granted pursuant to this Chapter shall not convey equitable or legal
title in the rights of way, and may not be assigned or transferred except as
permitted in subsection K of this section.
3. Neither the issuance of the license nor any provisions contained therein shall
constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any governmental right or power, police
power nor regulatory power of the City as may exist at the time the license is issued
or thereafter obtained.
6
G. Term. Subject to the termination provisions in subsection M of this section, the license
granted pursuant to this Chapter will remain in effect for a term of five years. The City
shall provide six months’ notice to a licensee prior to the expiration of the license.
H. License Nonexclusive. No license granted pursuant to this section shall confer any
exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the rights of way for
delivery of utility services or any other purpose. The City expressly reserves the right to
grant licenses, franchises or other rights to other persons, as well as the City’s right to
use the rights of way, for similar or different purposes. The license is subject to all
recorded deeds, easements, dedications, conditions, covenants, restrictions,
encumbrances, and claims of title of record that may affect the rights of way. Nothing in
the license shall be deemed to grant, convey, create, or vest in licensee a real property
interest in land, including any fee, leasehold interest or easement.
I. Reservation of City Rights. Nothing in the license shall be construed to prevent the
City from grading, paving, repairing and/or altering any rights of way, constructing, laying
down, repairing, relocating or removing City facilities or establishing any other public
work, utility or improvement of any kind, including repairs, replacement or removal of any
City facilities. If any of licensee’s utility facilities located in a right of way interfere with the
construction, repair, replacement, alteration or removal of any rights of way, public work,
City utility, City improvement or City facility, except those providing utility services in
competition with a licensee, licensee’s facilities shall be removed or relocated as provided
in subsections12.02.090 C, D and E of this Chapter, in a manner acceptable to the City
and consistent with industry standard engineering and safety codes.
J. Multiple Services.
1. A utility operator that provides or transmits or allows the provision or transmission
of utility services and other services over its facilities is subject to the license and
privilege tax requirements of this Chapter for the portion of the facilities and extent
of utility services delivered over those facilities.
2. A utility operator that provides or transmits more than one utility service over its
facilities is not required to obtain a separate license or franchise for each utility
service, provided that it gives notice to the City of each utility service provided or
transmitted and pays the applicable privilege tax for each utility service.
K. Transfer or Assignment. To the extent permitted by applicable state and federal laws,
the licensee shall obtain the written consent of the City prior to the transfer or assignment
of the license. The license shall not be transferred or assigned unless the proposed
transferee or assignee is authorized under all applicable laws to own or operate the utility
system and the transfer or assignment is approved by all agencies or organizations
required or authorized under federal and state laws to approve such transfer or
assignment. If a license is transferred or assigned, the transferee or assignee shall
become responsible for all facilities of the licensee at the time of transfer or assignment.
A transfer or assignment of a license does not extend the term of the license.
7
L. Renewal. At least ninety, but no more than one hundred eighty, days prior to the
expiration of a license granted pursuant to this section, a licensee seeking renewal of its
license shall submit a license application to the City, including all information required in
subsection B of this section and the application fee required in subsection C of this
section. The City shall review the application as required by subsection D of this section
and grant or deny the license within ninety days of submission of the application. If the
City determines that the licensee is in violation of the terms of this Chapter at the time it
submits its application, the City may require that the licensee cure the violation or submit
a detailed plan to cure the violation within a reasonable period of time, as determined by
the City, before the City will consider the application and/or grant the license. If the City
requires the licensee to cure or submit a plan to cure a violation, the City will grant or
deny the license application within ninety days of confirming that the violation has been
cured or of accepting the licensee’s plan to cure the violation.
M. Termination.
1. Revocation or Termination of a License. The City Council may terminate or revoke
the license granted pursuant to this Chapter for any of the following reasons:
a. Material violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter;
b. Material violation of any provision of the license;
c. Misrepresentation in a license application;
d. Failure to pay taxes, compensation, fees or costs due the City after final
determination of the taxes, compensation, fees or costs;
e. Failure to restore the rights of way after construction as required by this
Chapter or other applicable state and local laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations;
f. Failure to comply with technical, safety and engineering standards related to
work in the rights of way; or
g. Failure to obtain or maintain any and all licenses, permits, certifications and
other authorizations required by state or federal law for the placement,
maintenance and/or operation of the utility facilities.
2. Standards for Revocation or Termination. In determining whether termination,
revocation or some other sanction is appropriate, the following factors shall be
considered:
a. The egregiousness of the misconduct;
8
b. The harm that resulted;
c. Whether the violation was intentional;
d. The utility operator’s history of compliance; and/or
e. The utility operator’s cooperation in discovering, admitting and/or curing the
violation.
3. Notice and Cure. The City shall give the utility operator written notice of any
apparent violations before terminating a license. The notice shall include a short
and concise statement of the nature and general facts of the violation or
noncompliance and provide a reasonable time (no less than twenty and no more
than forty days) for the utility operator to demonstrate that the utility operator has
remained in compliance, that the utility operator has cured or is in the process of
curing any violation or noncompliance, or that it would be in the public interest to
impose a penalty or sanction less than termination or revocation. If the utility
operator is in the process of curing a violation or noncompliance, the utility operator
must demonstrate that it acted promptly and continues to actively work on
compliance. If the utility operator does not respond or if the City manager or
designee determines that the utility operator’s response is inadequate, the City
manager or designee shall refer the matter to the City Council, which shall provide
a duly noticed public hearing to determine whether the license shall be terminated
or revoked.
12.02.070 Construction and Restoration.
A. Construction Codes. Utility facilities shall be constructed, installed, operated and
maintained in accordance with the permit conditions and all applicable federal, state and
local codes, rules and regulations. When a utility operator, or any person acting on its
behalf, does any work in or affecting the rights of way, the utility operator shall, at its own
expense, promptly restore the rights of way as directed by the City consistent with the
permit, applicable City codes, rules and regulations.
B. Construction Permits.
1. No person shall perform any work on utility facilities within the rights of way without
first obtaining all required permits. The City shall not issue a permit for the
construction, installation, maintenance or repair of utility facilities unless the utility
operator of the facilities has registered and applied for and received the license
required by this Chapter, or has a current franchise with the City, and all applicable
fees have been paid. Utility operators are not required to obtain a permit for service
drops to customer premises or routine maintenance or repairs where such drops,
repairs or maintenance do not require cutting, digging, breaking of, or damage to,
the right of way.
9
2. In the event of an emergency, a utility operator with a license pursuant to this
Chapter or its contractor may perform work on its utility facilities without first
obtaining a permit from the City, provided that, to the extent reasonably feasible, it
attempts to notify the City prior to commencing the emergency work and in any
event applies for a permit from the City as soon as reasonably practicable, but not
more than two business days after commencing the emergency work. In the event
an act of God, extreme weather or similar circumstances beyond the utility
operator’s control prevents the utility operator from applying for a permit as
required in the previous sentence, the utility operator will not be in violation of this
Chapter so long as it applies for the permit as soon as reasonably practicable. As
used in this subsection, “emergency” means a circumstance involving (a) an
unscheduled outage affecting one or more current customers of the licensee, or
(b) danger to public safety that must be addressed within twenty-four (24) hours in
order to protect the public. Emergency also includes situations where the failure
of licensee to act would result in (a) or (b) within twenty-four (24) hours.
3. Applications for permits to construct utility facilities shall be submitted upon forms
to be provided by the City and shall be accompanied by drawings, plans and
specifications with the level of detail required by the City.
4. Prior to issuance of a construction permit, the applicant shall pay a permit fee in
an amount to be determined by resolution of the City Council.
5. If satisfied that the applications, plans and documents submitted comply with all
requirements of this Chapter, the Public Works Director shall issue a permit
authorizing construction of the utility facilities, subject to such further conditions,
restrictions or regulations affecting the time, place and manner of performing the
work as they may deem necessary or appropriate.
6. Except in the case of an emergency, the permittee shall notify the Public Works
Director not less than two business days in advance of any excavation or
construction in the rights of way.
7. All construction practices and activities shall be in accordance with City
standards, the permit and approved final plans and specifications for the utility
facilities. The Public Works Director and their representatives shall be provided
access to the work site and such further information as they may require to
ensure compliance with such requirements.
8. All work which does not comply with the permit, the approved or corrected plans
and specifications for the work, or the requirements of this Chapter, shall be
removed at the sole expense of the permittee unless otherwise approved by the
Public Works Director. The City is authorized to stop work in order to assure
compliance with the provision of this Chapter unless an emergency or threat to
public safety is deemed to exist, in which case the Public Works Director is
authorized to allow the utility operator to perform such work as he or she deems
10
necessary to remedy the emergency or threat to public safety, after which the
utility operator must stop work.
9. The permittee shall promptly complete all construction activities so as to
minimize disruption of the city rights of way and other public and private property.
All construction work within the rights of way, including restoration, must be
completed by the date specified in the construction permit unless an extension or
an alternate schedule has been approved by the appropriate city official.
C. Performance Surety.
1. The City may require a performance bond or other form of surety acceptable to the
City equal to at least one hundred percent of the estimated cost of the work within
the rights of way of the City be provided before construction is commenced.
2. In the event a performance bond or other form of surety acceptable to the City is
required, it shall:
a. remain in force until one year after substantial completion of the work, as
determined in writing by the City, including restoration of rights of way and other
property affected by the construction; and
b. guarantee, to the satisfaction of the City:
i. Timely completion of the work;
ii. That the work is performed in compliance with applicable plans, permits,
technical codes and standards;
iii. Proper location of the facilities as specified by the City; and
iv. Restoration of the rights of way and other property affected by the work.
D. Injury to Persons or Property. A utility operator shall preserve and protect from injury
or damage other utility operators’ facilities in the rights of way, the public using the rights
of way and any adjoining property, and take other necessary measures to protect life and
property, including but not limited to buildings, walls, fences, trees or facilities that may
be subject to damage from the permitted work. A utility operator shall be responsible for
all injury to persons or damage to public or private property resulting from its failure to
properly protect people and property and to carry out the work.
E. Restoration.
1. When a utility operator, or any person acting on its behalf, does any work in or
affecting any rights of way, it shall, at its own expense, promptly restore such ways
or property to the same or better condition as existed before the work was
undertaken, in accordance with the permit, applicable federal, state and local laws,
codes, ordinances, rules and regulations.
11
2. If weather or other conditions beyond the utility operator’s control do not permit the
complete restoration required by the City, the utility operator shall temporarily
restore the affected rights of way or property. Such temporary restoration shall be
at the utility operator’s sole expense and the utility operator shall promptly
undertake and complete the required permanent restoration when the weather or
other conditions no longer prevent such permanent restoration. Any
corresponding modification to the construction schedule may be subject to
approval by the City.
3. If the utility operator fails to restore rights of way or property as required in this
Chapter, the City shall give the utility operator written notice and provide the utility
operator a reasonable period of time not less than ten days, unless an emergency
or threat to public safety is deemed to exist, and not exceeding thirty days to
restore the rights of way or property. If, after said notice, the utility operator fails
to restore the rights of way or property as required in this Chapter, the City shall
cause such restoration to be made at the expense of the utility operator. To the
extent the restoration requires the City to move, alter or perform any work on or to
the utility operator’s facilities, the City will use qualified personnel or contractors
consistent with applicable state and federal safety laws and regulations.
F. Inspection. Every utility operator’s facilities shall be subject to the right of periodic
inspection by the City to determine compliance with the provisions of this Chapter and all
other applicable state and City codes, ordinances, rules and regulations. Every utility
operator shall cooperate with the City in permitting the inspection of utility facilities upon
request of the City. The utility operator shall perform all testing of compaction and paving,
or permit the City to perform any such testing at the utility operator’s expense, required
by the City to determine that the restoration of the right of way complies with the terms of
this Chapter and applicable state and City codes, ordinances, rules and regulations.
G. Coordination of Construction. All utility operators are required to make a good faith
effort to both cooperate with and coordinate their construction schedules with those of the
City and other users of the rights of way.
1. Prior to January 1st of each year, utility operators shall provide the City with a
schedule of known proposed construction activities for that year in, around or that
may affect the rights of way.
2. Utility operators shall meet with the City annually, or as determined by the City, to
schedule and coordinate construction in the rights of way.
3. All construction locations, activities and schedules within the rights of way shall be
coordinated as ordered by the Public Works Director, to minimize public
inconvenience, disruption, or damages as much as reasonably possible.
12.02.080 Location of Facilities.
12
A. Location of Facilities. Unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the City, whenever any
existing electric utilities, cable facilities or communications facilities are located
underground within a right of way of the City, the utility operator with permission to occupy
the same right of way shall locate its facilities underground at its own expense. This
requirement shall not apply to facilities used for transmission of electric energy at nominal
voltages in excess of 35,000 volts or to pedestals, cabinets or other above-ground
equipment of any utility operator. The City reserves the right to require written approval
of the location of any such above-ground equipment in the right of way.
B. Interference with the rights of way. No utility operator or other person may locate or
maintain its facilities so as to unreasonably interfere with the use of the rights of way by
the City, by the general public or by other persons authorized to use or be present in or
upon the rights of way. All use of the rights of way shall be consistent with City codes,
ordinances, rules and regulations.
C. Relocation of Utility Facilities.
1. A utility operator shall, at no cost to the City, temporarily or permanently remove,
relocate, change or alter the position of any utility facility within a right of way,
including relocation of aerial facilities underground, when requested to do so in
writing by the City.
2. Nothing herein shall be deemed to preclude the utility operator from requesting
reimbursement or compensation from a third party, pursuant to applicable laws,
regulations, tariffs or agreements, provided that the utility operator shall timely
comply with the requirements of this section regardless of whether or not it has
requested or received such reimbursement or compensation.
3. The City shall provide written notice of the time by which the utility operator must
remove, relocate, change, alter or underground its facilities. If a utility operator
fails to remove, relocate, alter or underground any utility facility as requested by
the City and by the date reasonably established by the City, unless such failure is
caused by circumstances that are not in the utility operator’s control, including but
not limited to acts of God, extreme weather, and the failure of another utility
operator to complete work in the necessary time period where such work is a
prerequisite to the utility operator’s removal or relocation activities, the utility
operator shall pay all costs incurred by the City due to such failure, including but
not limited to costs related to project delays, and the City may cause the utility
facility to be removed, relocated, altered or undergrounded at the utility operator’s
sole expense using qualified personnel or contractors consistent with applicable
state and federal safety laws and regulations. Upon receipt of a detailed invoice
from the City, the utility operator shall reimburse the City for the costs the City
incurred within thirty days.
D. Removal of Unauthorized Facilities.
13
1. Unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the City Manager, within thirty days
following written notice from the City or such other time agreed to in writing by the
City, a utility operator and any other person that owns, controls, or maintains any
abandoned or unauthorized utility facility within a right of way shall, at its own
expense, remove the facility and restore the right of way.
2. A utility system or facility is unauthorized under any of the following circumstances:
a. The utility facility is outside the scope of authority granted by the City under the
license, franchise or other written agreement. This includes facilities that were
never licensed or franchised and facilities that were once licensed or franchised
but for which the license or franchise has expired or been terminated. This does
not include any facility for which the City has provided written authorization for
abandonment in place.
b. The facility has been abandoned and the City has not provided written
authorization for abandonment in place. A facility is abandoned if it is not in use
and is not planned for further use. A facility will be presumed abandoned if it is
not used for a period of one year. A utility operator may overcome this
presumption by presenting plans for future use of the facility.
c. The utility facility is not constructed or installed in accordance with the permit
or is in a location not permitted by the construction permit, license, franchise or
this Chapter.
d. The utility operator is in violation of a material provision of this Chapter and
fails to cure such violation within thirty days of the City sending written notice
of such violation, unless the City extends such time period in writing.
E. Removal by City.
1. The City retains the right and privilege to cut or move the facilities of any utility
operator or similar entity located within the rights of way of the City, without notice,
as the City may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to a
public health or safety emergency. The City will use qualified personnel or
contractors consistent with applicable state and federal safety laws and regulations
to the extent reasonably practicable without impeding the City’s response to the
emergency.
2. If the utility operator fails to remove any facility when required to do so under this
Chapter, the City may remove the facility using qualified personnel or contractors
consistent with applicable state and federal safety laws and regulations, and the
utility operator shall be responsible for paying the full cost of the removal and any
administrative costs incurred by the City in removing the facility and obtaining
reimbursement. Upon receipt of a detailed invoice from the City, the utility operator
shall reimburse the City for the costs the City incurred within thirty days. The
obligation to remove shall survive the termination of the license or franchise.
14
3. The City shall not be liable to any utility operator for any damage to utility facilities,
or for any consequential losses resulting directly or indirectly therefrom, by the City
or its contractor in removing, relocating or altering the facilities pursuant to
subsections B, C or D of this section or undergrounding its facilities as required by
subsection A of this section, or resulting from the utility operator’s failure to remove,
relocate, alter or underground its facilities as required by those subsections, unless
such damage arises directly from the City’s negligence or willful misconduct.
F. Plans and Facilities Mapping. Upon request of the City the utility operator shall
provide as-constructed plans in a form acceptable to the City showing the location of all
its utility facilities in the rights of way after initial construction if such plans materially
changed during construction. The utility operator shall provide a utility system plan or
Geographic Information System data depicting utility systems located in public rights-ofway
upon request of the City, but not more than once per year.
12.02.090 Leased Capacity.
A utility operator may lease capacity on or in its systems within the City to others,
provided that, upon request, the utility operator provides the City with the name and
business address of any lessee. A utility operator is not required to provide such
information if disclosure is prohibited by applicable law or a valid agreement between the
utility operator and the lessee.
12.02.100 Maintenance.
A. Every utility operator shall install and maintain all facilities in a manner that complies
with applicable federal, state and local laws, rules, regulations and policies. The utility
operator shall, at its own expense, repair and maintain facilities from time to time as may
be necessary to accomplish this purpose.
B. If, after written notice from the City of the need for repair or maintenance, a utility
operator fails to repair and maintain facilities as requested by the City and by the date
reasonably established by the City, the City may perform such repair or maintenance
using qualified personnel or contractors at the utility operator’s sole expense. Upon
receipt of a detailed invoice from the City, the utility operator shall reimburse the City for
the costs the City incurred within thirty days.
12.02.110 Vacation.
If the City vacates any right of way, or portion thereof, that a utility operator uses,
the utility operator shall, at its own expense, remove its facilities from the right of way
unless the City reserves a public utility easement, which the City shall make a reasonable
effort to do provided that there is no expense to the City, or the utility operator obtains an
easement for its facilities. If the utility operator fails to remove its facilities within thirty
days after a right of way is vacated, or as otherwise directed or agreed to in writing by the
City, the City may remove the facilities at the utility operator’s sole expense. Upon receipt
of an invoice from the City, the utility operator shall reimburse the City for the costs the
City incurred within thirty days.
12.02.120 Privilege Tax.
15
A. Every person that uses utility facilities in the City to provide utility service, whether or
not the person owns the utility facilities used to provide the utility services, shall pay the
privilege tax for every utility service provided using the rights of way in the amount
determined by resolution of the City Council.
B. Privilege tax payments required by this section shall be reduced by any franchise fee
payments received by the City, but in no case will be less than zero dollars.
C. Unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the City, the tax set forth in subsection A of
this section shall be paid quarterly, in arrears, for each quarter during the term of the
license within forty-five days after the end of each calendar quarter, and shall be
accompanied by an accounting of gross revenues, if applicable, and a calculation of the
amount payable. The utility shall pay interest at the rate of nine percent per year for any
payment made after the due date.
D. The calculation of the privilege tax required by this section shall be subject to all
applicable limitations imposed by federal or state law.
E. The City reserves the right to enact other fees and taxes applicable to the utility
operators subject to this Chapter. Unless expressly permitted by the City in enacting such
fee or tax, or required by applicable state or federal law, no utility operator may deduct,
offset or otherwise reduce or avoid the obligation to pay any lawfully enacted fees or taxes
based on the payment of the privilege tax or any other fees required by this Chapter.
12.02.130 Audits.
A. Within thirty days of a written request from the City, or as otherwise agreed to in
writing by the City:
1. Every provider of utility service shall furnish the City with information sufficient to
demonstrate that the provider is in compliance with all the requirements of this
Chapter and its franchise agreement, if any, including but not limited to payment
of any applicable registration fee, privilege tax or franchise fee.
2. Every utility operator shall make available for inspection by the City at reasonable
times and intervals all maps, records, books, diagrams, plans and other
documents, maintained by the utility operator with respect to its facilities within the
rights of way or public utility easements. Access shall be provided within the
Portland metropolitan area unless prior arrangement for access elsewhere has
been made with the City.
B. If the City’s audit of the books, records and other documents or information of the
utility operator or utility service provider demonstrate that the utility operator or provider
has underpaid the privilege tax or franchise fee by three percent or more in any one year,
the utility operator shall reimburse the City for the cost of the audit, in addition to any
interest owed pursuant to subsection 12.02.130.C of this Chapter or as specified in a
franchise.
16
C. Any underpayment, including any interest or audit cost reimbursement, shall be paid
within thirty days of the City’s notice to the utility service provider of such underpayment.
12.02.140 Insurance and Indemnification.
A. Insurance.
1. All utility operators shall maintain in full force and effect the following liability
insurance policies that protect the utility operator and the City, as well as the City’s
officers, agents, and employees:
a. Comprehensive general liability insurance with limits not less than:
i. Three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death to each
person;
ii. Three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) for property damage resulting from
any one accident; and
iii. Three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) for all other types of liability.
b. Motor vehicle liability insurance for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with
a limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for each person and three million
dollars ($3,000,000.00) for each accident.
c. Worker’s compensation within statutory limits and employer’s liability with limits
of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00).
d. Comprehensive form premises-operations, explosions and collapse hazard,
underground hazard and products completed hazard with limits of not less than
three million dollars ($3,000,000.00).
2. The limits of the insurance shall be subject to statutory changes as to maximum
limits of liability imposed on municipalities of the state of Oregon. The insurance
shall be without prejudice to coverage otherwise existing and shall name, or the
certificate of insurance shall name, as additional insureds the City and its officers,
agents, and employees. The coverage must apply as to claims between insureds
on the policy. The policy shall provide that the insurance shall not be canceled or
materially altered without thirty days prior written notice first being given to the City.
If the insurance is canceled or materially altered, the utility operator shall obtain a
replacement policy that complies with the terms of this section and provide the City
with a replacement certificate of insurance. The utility operator shall maintain
continuous uninterrupted coverage, in the terms and amounts required. The utility
operator may self-insure, or keep in force a self-insured retention plus insurance,
for any or all of the above coverage.
17
3. The utility operator shall maintain on file with the City a certificate of insurance, or
proof of self-insurance acceptable to the City, certifying the coverage required
above.
B. Financial Assurance. Unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the City, before a
franchise granted or license issued pursuant to this Chapter is effective, and as necessary
thereafter, the utility operator shall provide a performance bond or other financial security,
in a form acceptable to the City, as security for the full and complete performance of the
franchise or license, if applicable, and compliance with the terms of this Chapter, including
any costs, expenses, damages or loss the City pays or incurs because of any failure
attributable to the utility operator to comply with the codes, ordinances, rules, regulations
or permits of the City. This obligation is in addition to the performance surety required by
subsection 12.02.080.C of this Chapter.
C. Indemnification.
1. Each utility operator shall defend, indemnify and hold the City and its officers,
employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against any and all
liability, causes of action, claims, damages, losses, judgments and other costs and
expenses, including attorney fees and costs of suit or defense (at both the trial and
appeal level, whether or not a trial or appeal ever takes place) that may be asserted
by any person or entity in any way arising out of, resulting from, during or in
connection with, or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, unsafe or
wrongful acts, omissions, failure to act, or other misconduct of the utility operator
or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors, subcontractors, or lessees
in the construction, operation, maintenance, repair, or removal of its facilities, and
in providing or offering utility services over the facilities, whether such acts or
omissions are authorized, allowed, or prohibited by this Chapter or by a franchise
agreement. The acceptance of a license under section 12.02.070 of this Chapter
shall constitute such an agreement by the applicant whether the same is
expressed or not. Upon notification of any such claim the City shall notify the utility
operator and provide the utility operator with an opportunity to provide defense
regarding any such claim.
2. Every utility operator shall also indemnify the City for any damages, claims,
additional costs or expenses assessed against or payable by the City arising out
of or resulting, directly or indirectly, from the utility operator’s failure to remove or
relocate any of its facilities in the rights of way or public utility easements in a timely
manner, unless the utility operator’s failure arises directly from the City’s
negligence or willful misconduct. The City shall attempt to mitigate the damages
for which the utility operator could be responsible under this subsection by
attempting to limit its liability in public contracts for delay damages in the event that
the delay is caused by a force majeure event that prevents a utility operator from
removing or relocating its facilities in accordance with the schedule provided by
the City.
12.02.150 Compliance.
18
Every utility operator shall comply with all federal and state laws and regulations, including
regulations of any administrative agency thereof, as well as all applicable ordinances,
resolutions, rules and regulations of the City, heretofore or hereafter adopted or
established during the entire term of any license granted under this Chapter.
12.02.160 Confidential/Proprietary Information.
If any person is required by this Chapter to provide books, records, maps or information
to the City that the person reasonably believes to be confidential or proprietary (the
“confidential information”), the City shall take reasonable steps to protect the confidential
or proprietary nature of the confidential information, to the extent permitted by Oregon
Public Records Laws, provided that all documents are clearly marked as confidential by
the person at the time of disclosure to the City. The City will provide, prior to the release
of any such confidential information, written notice to the person asserting confidentiality
and allow an opportunity for the person to provide a written response to the request,
provided that such response is given to the City within the time the City is required by law
to respond to the request. The person asserting confidentiality shall bear the burden to
show that part or all of the requested confidential information is exempt from disclosure.
The City shall not be required to incur any costs to protect such document, other than the
City’s routine internal procedures for complying with the Oregon Public Records Law and
the notice requirement in the preceding sentence.
12.02.170 Violation - Penalty
A. Any violation of the provisions of this Chapter or the license shall be a civil infraction
that may be subject to a penalty of not more than Five Hundred Dollars for each offense.
In determining the penalty, the following factors shall be considered:
a. The egregiousness of the violation;
b. The harm that resulted;
c. Whether the violation was intentional;
d. The utility operator’s history of compliance with this Chapter or the license;
and/or
e. The utility operator’s cooperation in discovering, admitting and/or curing the
violation.
A separate and distinct offense shall be deemed committed each day on which a violation
occurs or continues.
B. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as limiting any judicial or other remedies
the City may have at law or in equity, for enforcement of this Chapter.
19
12.02.180 Severability and Preemption.
A. The provisions of this Chapter shall be interpreted to be consistent with applicable
federal and state law, and shall be interpreted, to the extent possible, to cover only
matters not preempted by federal or state law.
B. If any article, section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, term, provision, condition
or portion of this Chapter is for any reason declared or held to be invalid or unenforceable
by any court of competent jurisdiction or superseded by state or federal legislation, rules,
regulations or decision, the remainder of this Chapter shall not be affected thereby but
shall be deemed as a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof, and each remaining section,
subsection, clause, phrase, term, provision, condition, covenant and portion of this
Chapter shall be valid and enforceable to the fullest extent permitted by law. In the event
any provision is preempted by federal or state laws, rules or regulations, the provision
shall be preempted only to the extent required by law and any portion not preempted shall
survive. If any federal or state law resulting in preemption is later repealed, rescinded,
amended or otherwise changed to end the preemption, such provision shall thereupon
return to full force and effect and shall thereafter be binding without further action by the
City.
12.02.190Application to Existing Agreements.
To the extent that this Chapter is not in conflict with and can be implemented
consistent with existing franchise agreements, this Chapter shall apply to all existing
franchise agreements granted to utility operators by the City.
Chapter 12.04
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT PROCEDURES1
12.04.010 Initiation of proceedings.
Whenever the city council shall deem it necessary, upon its own motion or upon the
petition of the owners of at least sixty percent of the property to benefit specifically from
the improvement, to construct, alter, repair, improve, widen or extend any street, alley,
sidewalk, parking, curbing or any part thereof, or to construct, alter or install street
lights, or to construct, improve or repair any sanitary or storm sewer or water line or any
part thereof, or to acquire, establish, construct or reconstruct any off-street motor
vehicle parking facility, or to construct, reconstruct, repair or equip a park, playground or
other recreational facility, or to construct, alter or install broadband infrastructure,
including but not limited to fiber optic facilities, for which it is anticipated that special
assessments will be levied, it shall by motion direct the city engineer or engineer
retained by the city to make an investigation of such project and to submit a written
report with the city administration. Such report shall contain the following:
A. A map or plat showing the general nature, location and extent of the proposed
improvement and the land to be assessed for the payment of any part of the cost
thereof;
20
B. Preliminary plans, specifications and estimates of the work to be done; provided,
however, that where the proposed project is to be carried out in cooperation with any
other governmental agency, the engineer may adopt the plans, specifications and
estimates of such agency;
C. An estimate of the probable cost of the improvement, including any legal,
administrative and engineering costs attributable thereto;
D. An estimate of the unit cost of the improvement to the specially benefited properties;
E. A recommendation as to the method of assessment to be used to arrive at a fair
apportionment of the whole or any portion of the cost of the improvement to the
properties specially benefited;
F. The description and assessed value of each lot, parcel of land, or portion thereof, to
be specially benefited by the improvement, with the names of the owners or reputed
owners thereof and, when readily available, the names of the contract purchasers
thereof;
G. A statement of outstanding assessments against property to be assessed.
(Ord. 7-74 § 1, 1974.)
12.04.020 Action on engineer's report.
After the report from the engineer has been filed with the city manager, the city council
may thereafter by motion approve the report, modify the report and approve it as
modified, require the engineer to supply additional or different information for such
improvement, or it may abandon the improvement. (Ord. 14-74 § 3 (part), 1974; Ord. 7-
74 § 2, 1974.)
12.04.030 Resolution and notice of hearing.
After the city council has approved the engineer's report as submitted or modified, the
council shall, by resolution, declare its intention to make such improvements, provide
the manner and method of carrying out the improvement and shall direct the city
recorder to give notice of such improvements by posting at the city hall and at two
places within the benefited area, and by mailing copies of such notice to the owners to
be assessed for the costs of such improvement. Said notice shall contain the following:
A. A statement describing the proposed improvement, the area to be served, and the
intention of the council to make such an improvement;
B. That the engineer's report is on file at city hall and may be examined during normal
business hours, or other specified times;
C. That the council will hold a public hearing on the proposed improvement on a
specified date, which shall not be earlier than ten days following the mailing of notices,
21
at which time objections and remonstrances to such improvement will be heard by the
council;
D. The estimated total cost of the project or the cost of that portion of the project to be
financed by assessments to benefiting properties.
(Ord. 7-74 § 3, 1974.)
12.04.040 Hearing and action on improvements.
If, prior to or during the hearing regarding the formation of local improvement district for
any reason other than to correct danger to public health, written objections are received
from owners, representing two-thirds of the area to be assessed, the improvement
proceedings shall be abandoned and shall not be subject to a further hearing for at least
three months. If the city council finds, however, that a danger to public health exists
which will be corrected by the creation of a local improvement district, no right of
remonstrance shall exist from owners within the area to be assessed. A "danger to
public health" is defined to mean a condition which is conducive to the propagation of
communicable or contagious disease producing organisms and which presents a
reasonably clear possibility that the public generally is being exposed to disease caused
physical suffering or illness, including a condition such as:
A. Impure or inadequate domestic water;
B. Inadequate installation for the disposal and treatment of sewage, garbage or other
contaminated or putrefying waste;
C. Inadequate improvements for drainage of surface water and other fluid substances.
The council, after receiving objections from owners representing not more than twothirds
of the area to be assessed where a danger to public health is not found, may
adopt or amend the engineer's report and adopt the same by resolution. If the council
finds that a danger to public health exists, it may adopt or amend the engineer's report
and adopt the same by resolution. Having by resolution created a local improvement
district, the council shall direct the city engineer or an engineer retained by the city to
prepare detailed plans, specifications and cost estimates for the proposed improvement.
(Ord. 8-86 § 1, 1986: Ord. 7-74 § 4, 1974.)
12.04.050 Manner of doing work.
The council may provide in the improvement authorizing resolution that the construction
work may be done in whole, or in part, by the city, by a contract, by any other
governmental agency, or by any combination thereof. (Ord. 7-74 § 5, 1974.)
12.04.060 Call for bids.
The city council, in its discretion, may direct the city manager to call for bids for
construction of all, or any part of the improvement project on the basis of the councilapproved
engineer's report at any time after passage of said improvement authorizing
resolution and the contracts shall be let to the lowest responsible bidder, provided that
22
the city council shall have the right to reject all bids when they are deemed
unreasonable or unsatisfactory. Said contracts shall provide for the bonding of all
contractors for the faithful performance of any contract let under its authority, and the
provisions thereof in case of default shall be enforced by action in the name of the city.
If the council finds, upon opening bids for the work of such improvement, that the lowest
responsible bid is fifteen percent in excess of the engineer's estimate, it shall provide for
holding a hearing of objections to proceeding with the improvement on the basis of such
bid, and it shall direct the city recorder to publish one notice thereof in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city. Notice shall state the purpose, date, time and place of
said hearing. After the hearing, the council shall determine whether said bid shall be
accepted or rejected. (Ord. 14-74 § 3 (part), 1974; Ord. 7-74 § 6, 1974.)
12.04.070 Method of assessment and alternative methods of financing.
A. The council, in adopting a method of assessing the cost of the improvement, may:
1. Use any just and reasonable method to determine the extent of an improvement
district consistent with the benefit derived;
2. Use any just and reasonable method of apportioning the sum to be assessed among
the benefited properties;
3. Authorize payment by the city of all or part of the cost of an improvement when in the
opinion of the council the topographical or physical conditions, unusual or excessive
public travel or other character of the work involved warrants only partial payment or no
payment of the cost by the benefited property.
B. Nothing contained in this section shall preclude the council from using other means
of financing improvements, including federal and state grant-in-aid, sewer and/or water
charges or fees, revenue bonds, general obligation bonds or other legal means of
finance. If other means of financing are used, the council may levy special assessments
according to benefits derived to cover any remaining part of the cost.
(Ord. 13-94 § 1 (part), 1994: Ord. 15-75 § 1, 1975: Ord. 7-74 §§ 7, 9, 1974.)
12.04.080 Final assessment ordinance.
A. If the council caused the public improvement to be made and the actual cost has
been determined, upon completion of the project the council shall determine whether
the benefited property shall bear all or a portion of the cost. The actual cost of the
project shall include interim financing costs. The recorder or other person designated by
the council shall prepare the proposed final assessment for each lot within the
assessment district and file the assessments in the recorder's office.
B. Notice of the proposed final assessment shall be published and mailed or personally
delivered to the owner of each lot proposed to be assessed at the address shown on
the Clackamas County tax assessor's rolls. The notice shall state the amount of the
proposed final assessment on the property and fix a date by which time any objections
23
shall be filed with the recorder and the date and time set for the public hearing at which
the council will hear objections. An objection shall state the grounds for the objection.
C. At the hearing the council shall consider the objections and may adopt, correct,
modify or revise the proposed final assessment against each lot in the district according
to special and peculiar benefits accruing to it from the improvement.
(Ord. 13-94 § 1 (part), 1994: Ord. 15-75 § 2, 1975: Ord. 7-74 § 8, 1974.)
12.04.090 Notice of assessment.
A. Within ten days after the ordinance levying final assessments has been passed, the
recorder shall send a notice of final assessment to the owner of the assessed property
by registered or certified mail and publish notice of the assessment twice in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city. The first publication of notice shall be not
later than twenty days after the date of assessment ordinance.
B. The notice of final assessment shall include the name of the property owner, a
description of the assessed property, the amount of the final assessment and the date
of the assessment ordinance and shall state that interest will begin to run on the final
assessment and the property will be subject to foreclosure unless the owner either
makes application to pay the final assessment in installments within ten days after the
date of the first publication of notice or pays the final assessment in full within thirty days
after the date of the assessment ordinance.
(Ord. 13-94 § 1 (part), 1994.)
12.04.100 Lien record and foreclosure proceedings.
A. After passage of the final assessment ordinance, the recorder shall enter into the
docket of liens a statement of the amount assessed on each lot, parcel of land or
portion of land, description of the improvement, names of property owners and the date
of the final assessment ordinance. Upon entry in the lien docket, the amounts shall
become liens and charges on the lots, parcels of land or portions of land that have been
assessed for improvement.
B. Assessment liens of the city shall be superior and prior to all other liens or
encumbrances on property insofar as state law permits.
C. The city may enter a bid on property being offered at a foreclosure sale. The city bid
shall be prior to all bids except those made by persons who would be entitled under
state law to redeem the property.
(Ord. 13-94 § 1 (part), 1994: Ord. 20-80 § 1, 1980: Ord. 6-76 § 1, 1976: Ord. 7-74 § 11,
1974.)
12.04.110 Errors in assessment calculations.
Claimed errors in the calculation of assessments shall be called to the attention of the
recorder, who shall determine whether there has been an error. If there has been an
error, the recorder shall recommend to the council an amendment to the assessment
ordinance to correct the error. On enactment of the amendment, the recorder shall
24
make the necessary correction in the docket of liens and send a correct notice of
assessment by registered or certified mail. (Ord. 13-94 § 1 (part), 1994: Ord. 7-74 § 12,
1974.)
12.04.120 Supplemental assessments.
If a supplemental assessment is required pursuant to Section 12.04.170 of this chapter,
the council may declare the insufficiency by motion and prepare a proposed
supplemental assessment. The council shall set a time for hearing objections to the
supplemental assessment and direct the city recorder to publish one notice in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city. After the hearing, the council shall make a
just and equitable supplemental assessment by ordinance, which shall be entered in the
docket of liens as provided by Section 12.04.100. Notice of the supplemental
assessment shall be published and mailed, and collection of the assessment shall be
made in accordance with Sections 12.04.090 and 12.04.100. (Ord. 13-94 § 1 (part),
1994.)
12.04.130 Rebates.
If a rebate is required pursuant to Section 12.04.170 of this chapter, the council shall
ascertain and declare the excess by ordinance. When declared, the excess amounts
must be entered on the lien docket as a credit on the appropriate assessment. If an
assessment has been paid, the person who paid it or that person's legal representative
shall be entitled to payment of the rebate credit. (Ord. 13-94 § 1 (part), 1994: Ord. 7-74
§ 14, 1974.)
12.04.140 Remedies.
A. Subject to curative provisions of Section 12.04.160 and rights of the city to reassess
as provided in Section 12.04.170, proceedings for writs of review and equitable relief
may be filed not earlier than thirty days nor later than sixty days after filing written
objection as provided by Section 12.04.080.
B. A property owner who has filed a written objection with the recorder before the public
hearing may have the right to apply for a writ of review based on the council's exercising
its functions erroneously or arbitrarily or exceeding its jurisdiction to the injury of a
substantial right of the owner, if the facts supporting the claim have been specifically set
forth in the written objections.
C. A property owner who has filed a written objection with the recorder before the public
hearing may begin an action for equitable relief based on a total lack of jurisdiction on
the part of the city. If notice of the improvement was not sent to the owner and if the
owner did not have actual knowledge of the proposed improvement before the hearing,
the owner may file a written objection alleging lack of jurisdiction with the recorder within
thirty days after receiving notice or knowledge of the improvement.
D. A provision of this section shall not be construed to lengthen the period of
redemption or to affect the running of a statute of limitation. A proceeding on a writ of
review or for equitable relief shall be abated if proceedings are begun and diligently
25
pursued by the council to remedy or cure alleged error or defects.
(Ord. 13-94 § 1 (part), 1994: Ord. 7-74 § 10, 1974.)
12.04.150 Abandonment of proceedings.
The council may abandon proceedings for improvements made under this chapter at
any time before final completion of the improvements. If liens have been placed on
property under this procedure, they shall be canceled, and payments made on
assessments shall be refunded to the person who paid them or to that person's legal
representatives. (Ord. 13-94 § 1 (part), 1994: Ord. 7-74 § 15, 1974.)
12.04.160 Curative provisions.
A. An improvement assessment shall not be rendered invalid by reason of:
1. Failure of the engineer's report to contain all information required by Section
12.04.010;
2. Failure to have all information required in the improvement resolution, assessment
ordinance, lien docket or notices required to be published and mailed;
3. Failure to list the name of or mail notice to an owner of property as required by this
chapter;
4. Any other error, mistake, delay, omission, irregularity or other act, jurisdictional or
otherwise, in the proceedings or steps specified, unless it appears that the assessment
is unfair or unjust in its effect on the person complaining.
B. The council shall have authority to remedy and correct all matters by suitable action
and proceedings.
(Ord. 13-94 § 1 (part), 1994: Ord. 7-74 § 16, 1974.)
12.04.170 Reassessment.
When an assessment, supplemental assessment or reassessment for an improvement
made by the city has been set aside, annulled, declared void, or its enforcement
restrained by a court of this state or by a federal court having jurisdiction, or when the
council doubts the validity of the assessment, supplemental assessment, rebate or any
part of it, the council may make a reassessment in the manner provided by state law.
(Ord. 13-94 § 1 (part), 1994: Ord. 7-74 § 13, 1974.)
12.04.180 Bancroft Act.
The provisions of Oregon Revised Statutes Sections 223.205 through 223.300
commonly known as the "Bancroft Bonding Act," together with amendments or future
amendments thereof, are adopted and made a part hereof by reference. (Ord. 13-94 §
2, 1994; Ord. 7-74 § 17, 1974.)
12.04.190 Segregation of assessments-Fees.
Whenever an application has been made under the provisions of the Bancroft Bonding
26
Act as herein adopted, and the application has been accepted and the payment of the
assessment has been in fact financed by such procedure, the lien of such assessment
may be segregated upon the following terms and conditions:
A. The property for which the segregation is to be made shall have been assessed as a
unit and entered accordingly in the docket of liens;
B. There shall be no delinquent installments of principal or interest on the assessment
of the entire parcel;
C. Written application shall be made to the city in such form as may be required, and
such applications shall be accompanied by the fees established as hereafter provided.
The written application must be submitted by the owner, mortgagee, or lienholder of a
parcel of real property that was formed from the partition or other division of the larger
tract of real property against which the assessment was originally levied. No
apportionment shall be granted unless the applicant filed a true copy of the deed,
mortgage, or instrument creating the new parcel or parcels;
D. Apportionment of the assessment shall be made by the city recorder and approved
by resolution of the city council. In accomplishing apportionment, the installments
remaining unpaid shall be prorated among the smaller parcels so that each parcel shall
be charged with the percentage of the remaining installment payments equal to the
percentage of the unpaid assessment charged to the parcel upon apportionment;
E. In order to help defray the costs of investigation, preparing legal descriptions,
calculating an equitable division of the assessment and making lien docket entries, the
city council may by resolution establish and from time to time amend a schedule of fees
to be paid with any application filed under this section. Such fees shall not be
refundable if the application is disapproved or the applicant withdraws his application.
(Ord. 13-94 § 4, 1994; Ord. 9-84 § 1, 1984.)
Chapter 12.08
SIDEWALK, CURB AND DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION2
12.08.010 Application for permit.
No sidewalk, driveway or curb shall be laid down or constructed without first acquiring a
permit from the city building department. The applicant must present a diagram showing
the description of the contiguous property and the location of the intended construction
in relation thereto, description of adjoining properties, name and address of the
contractor, time of beginning and estimated time of completion of such construction and
such other information as may be required by the city. (Ord. 8-73 § 1, 1973.)
12.08.020 Grade to be established.
No person may construct a sidewalk, driveway or curb until a definite grade therefor has
27
been established. No permit for such construction may be issued until a grade has been
so established. (Ord. 8-73 § 2, 1973.)
12.08.030 Grade level survey.
Upon application for a permit, the building official shall inform the city engineer, who
shall set the grade or approve the grade as set by another registered professional
engineer or registered professional land surveyor. Upon receipt of the approval or upon
the completion of the grade survey, the building official may grant the permit. (Ord. 8-73
§ 3, 1973.)
12.08.040 Cost of survey or approval.
One-half of the cost of a survey or approval of a survey shall be borne by the applicant,
and the other half shall be borne by the city. (Ord. 8-73 § 4, 1973.)
12.08.050 Sidewalk to be constructed in different location.
If, at the time of application, the applicant indicates to the building official that he desires
to construct a sidewalk in a different location in the sidewalk area than is provided for in
this chapter, the building official shall notify the applicant that the matter may be
presented to the planning commission. If the applicant desires to have the matter
presented to the planning commission, he shall file a request for a variance and the
administrative office shall schedule a public hearing before the planning commission.
The administrative office shall notify the applicant of the time and place of hearing
before the planning commission. (Ord. 8-73 § 5, 1973.)
12.08.060 Planning commission consideration of a variance.
If at the hearing the planning commission finds that, by reason of existing construction
of buildings or sidewalks, it would be impractical or undesirable from a planning
viewpoint to require sidewalk to be placed as provided in Sections 12.08.080, 12.08.090
and 12.08.100, the planning commission shall determine that a permit be granted for a
variance. If the planning commission finds that such conditions do not exist, the request
for a variance shall be denied. (Ord. 8-73 § 6, 1973.)
12.08.070 Expense of construction.
All sidewalk, driveway and curb construction pursuant to a permit required by this
chapter shall be made and done at the sole expense of the owner of the property
contiguous to such construction, and such construction shall include the cost of laying
drain pipe in connection with the driveway, and also the reasonable cost and expense of
supervision and inspection by the city. The city shall be held harmless from all such
expenses or any part thereof. Thereafter, such owner shall keep said construction in
good condition and repair. The building official shall have general supervision over
sidewalk construction. (Ord. 8-73 § 7, 1973.)
12.08.080 Sidewalk areas.
Sidewalk areas within the city shall be and are defined and established as being ten feet
in width extending from the property line to the outer edge of the curb. Minimum width of
28
paving in commercial zones shall be six feet, normal paving width in residential zones is
five feet. (Ord. 8-73 § 8, 1973.)
12.08.090 Residential sidewalks.
The sidewalk areas in residential districts of the city are designated and established for
the use of the public in the following manner:
A. Except as provided in subsection B of this section, the first five feet in width outward
from the street line or property line is reserved for the use of the city and other utilities in
laying water, sewer, electric, gas and telephone lines, or such other uses as the city
may determine from time to time. Subject to such use, the area shall be available for
pedestrian travel, beautification of surroundings, or such other use by the owner or
occupant of the abutting property as may be authorized by the city. The next five feet in
width of the sidewalk area is reserved as the portion over which shall be constructed
and laid the main walkway for pedestrian travel.
B. In any block where an existing sidewalk does not conform to the requirements of
subsection A of this section, any additional sidewalk constructed along an extension of
the line of such nonconforming sidewalk in the same block shall be aligned with the
existing sidewalk.
(Ord. 8-73 § 9, 1973.)
12.08.100 Commercial zones.
The entire width of the sidewalk area is designated as the area upon which shall be
constructed the main walkway for pedestrian travel, subject, however, to such other
uses, such as planting strips, as may be determined and authorized by the city from
time to time, with the outer six inches being the curb. (Ord. 8-73 § 10, 1973.)
12.08.110 General specifications.
Sidewalks and curbs shall be composed of a concrete mixture of not less than five and
one-half sacks per yard and shall meet a test of three thousand pounds per square inch
after a twenty-eight day cure. Foundations upon which concrete shall be laid shall be of
a substantial construction, of sufficient depth, and of suitable material to properly carry
the concrete overload intended without sinking or spreading, as determined by the
building official or the city engineer. Expansion joints shall be provided in curbs and
sidewalks at each end of each radius, on each side of each driveway, and otherwise
shall be spanned so as to be no more than fifteen feet apart. (Ord. 8-73 § 11, 1973.)
12.08.120 Method of sidewalk and driveway construction.
Sidewalks shall be concrete with a minimum thickness or depth of four inches and shall
present an even, smooth surface and shall be laid with the necessary joints as to
prevent bulging or cracking by contraction or expansion. Driveways, as heretofore
referred to, shall be a minimum thickness of six inches and shall slope from a grade five
inches below the top grade of the curb, which point shall be one inch above the gutter
line and uniformly back to the property line which shall be a slope of seven and one-half
inches in a width of ten feet. The lateral driveway lines shall slope upward to gradually
29
merge with the plane of the sidewalk and at all such places or merger there shall be
included an expansion joint. Sidewalks shall have a gradual slope of one-fourth inch to
the foot of width with the higher edge thereof being the edge toward the property line
and the lower edge being to the plane of the curb, except where by reason of a variance
a stepped curb is to be built. (Ord. 8-73 § 12, 1973.)
12.08.130 Method of curb construction.
Curbs shall be constructed with the top plane of the curb to be on the same surface
level as the constructed sidewalk, except where by reason of a variance a stepped curb
is to be built. Curbs shall be six inches wide at the top, nine inches wide at the bottom,
and not less than sixteen inches deep. Curbs at driveways and alley crossings shall be
cut away slopingly for a distance of three feet. Curbs shall be cut away to a depth of five
inches from the top line of the curb and the gutter line shall be six inches from the top of
the curb. Curbs at street intersection corners shall be rounded so as to curve on the
basis of a ten-foot minimum radius. (Ord. 8-73 § 13, 1973.)
12.08.140 Driveways and entrances to alleyways.
Driveways and entrances to alleyways for vehicular travel over sidewalk areas may be
constructed and laid down for proper ingress and egress to and from alleys and
property contiguous to the sidewalk area. Such driveways shall slope from the grade of
the sidewalk down gradually to the street gutter grade at the outer line of the street curb.
The lateral driveway lines shall slope upward gradually to merge with the surface plane
of the contiguous sidewalks and curbs. (Ord. 8-73 § 14, 1973.)
12.08.150 City removal of sidewalk.
In addition to any other penalty that may be imposed, sidewalk construction performed
in violation of this chapter may be removed by order of the city council. The adjacent
property owner and any contractor doing the construction shall be jointly and severally
liable for the cost of such removal. (Ord. 8-73 § 15, 1973.)
12.08.160 Violation-Penalty.
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall upon
conviction thereof be punished by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars, or
imprisonment of not to exceed ten days, or both. (Ord. 8-73 § 16, 1973.)
Chapter 12.10
SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE
Section 12.10.010 Responsibility of property owner
It is the responsibility of all property owners in the city to keep the sidewalk, curb,
driveway approach, landscaping, street trees or other improvements located between
the curb and property line in the public right of way City streets, County roads and State
highways thereof adjacent to or abutting on their respective real property in a good state
of repair so as to eliminate the hazard of injuries to pedestrians, cyclists and motorists
using the same.
30
Section 12.10.020 Extent of maintenance responsibility
Real property owners in the city shall maintain and keep in repair all sidewalks, curbs,
driveways, handrails, sidewalk doors, street trees, landscaping and sidewalk lights
located between the curb and property line in the public right-of-way of any City street,
County road or State highway in front of and as are adjacent to or abut on such owner's
or owners' real property. Public street lighting and franchise utilities located in the public
right-of-way shall be maintained by the respective franchise utility.
Section 12.10.030 Report of defect or hazard
Whenever any such sidewalk, curb or other installation as specified in Section
12.10.020 becomes defective or presents a hazard to adjacent pedestrians, cyclists or
motorists, the City Manager or their designee shall notify the owner of the adjacent real
property of the defect and also the kind and nature of repair or remedy required, as is
necessary for the safety of pedestrians, cyclists, motorists and others using the public
right-of-way.
Section 12.10.040 Notice requirements
The City Manager or their designee shall notify such owner or owners in writing through
regular mail and direct the owner or owners to make and complete the required repair or
remedy required in the manner prescribed in such notice within thirty days of the mailing
of such notice. The notice may be mailed to the last known address of the owner or
owners as may be listed in the Clackamas County Assessor records, but if no such
address or record exists, the notice may be mailed to the owner or owners care of
General Delivery at Sandy, Oregon, and such mailing shall be considered sufficient
notice.
Section 12.10.050 Repair specifications
The repairs or remedies performed by or on behalf of the owner or owners shall be in
accordance with the City’s adopted standards and specifications for such work.
Section 12.10.060 City work upon failure to remedy - Costs
In the event such owner or owners fail or refuse to make and complete such repairs or
remedies as directed by the City within said thirty-day period after being notified, then
the City or authorized agents thereof may perform such repair or remedies as are
required. After the repair or remedies made by or on behalf of the City are complete, the
cost for same shall become a lien against the subject real property, and such liens shall
take first position and have priority over all other liens against such property.
Section 12.10.070 Repair lien docket
The City Manager or their designee shall prepare and maintain a lien docket in which
shall be entered all such liens incurred under this chapter, and such lien shall bear
interest at the rate set by the City’s Master Fee Resolution from the date of entry into
the lien docket.(Ord. No. 2007-09 7/16/07)
31
12.10.080 Lien-Foreclosure.
At any time after such lien has been so docketed, a suit to foreclose same may be
brought in the Circuit Court of the state of Oregon for Clackamas County, in the name of
the city, and after the necessary procedure in court, said liens may be foreclosed and
the lands against which said liens were docketed may be sold.
The foreclosure, including sale, shall be analogous to those in a suit for the foreclosure
of real property as provided by the laws of the state of Oregon. (Ord. 21-79 § 8, 1979.)
Chapter 12.12
PUBLIC PARKS
(Amendments to Title 12.12 in its entirety Ord. 09, 2016)
12.12.005 Definitions. for the purposes of this chapter:
“Person” means any person, firm, corporation, but excluding those acting under direct
authority of the city council.
“Public parks” means all property owned or controlled by the city, whether within or
without the city limits, and operated for the use of the public for park purposes.
(Ordinance 2008-08, 2008)
12.12.010 Rules adopted.
The following rules and regulations governing the use of the public parks in the city are
adopted:
Rule 1. No person shall dig up, cut, break, remove or deface any building, structure,
sign, bush or plant belonging to or growing within a public park in the city without written
permission from the city.
Rule 2. No person shall have in his possession or discharge any destructive weapon,
firearm, firecracker, torpedo or fireworks, or throw or place upon the ground any lighted
match, cigar or any burning substance in any public park in the city.
Rule 3. No person shall, within the limits of any public park within the city, threaten,
harass or abuse another person or otherwise engage in any disorderly conduct.
Rule 4. All public parks belonging to the city shall be open to the public at dawn and
shall be closed and visitors excluded therefrom after dusk each day. Special exceptions
can be made by the city.
Rule 5. Use of motorized vehicles (exclusive of wheelchairs) is prohibited in city parks.
Exceptions include special events for the purpose of loading and unloading, emergency
vehicles and service vehicles used by the city.
Rule 6. Horseback riding is prohibited in city parks unless otherwise posted.
Rule 7. Dogs in city parks must be on leash unless otherwise posted.
32
Rule 8. All persons using the park shall at all times obey all lawful orders of any police
officer or lifeguard who may be stationed therein.
Rule 9. The drinking or possession of intoxicating beverages is allowed ONLY by OLCC
permit, special events permit (including rental of facilities through the city) or other
permitted activity. Permits issued allow only for the consumption and possession of
beer and wine by adults 21 years or older. All sales of alcohol are prohibited unless
authorized by OLCC permit. The city manager may impose such conditions upon such
events, and require such financial security in connection therewith, so as to assure that
such events are conducted in a safe manner and consistent with the use of parks by the
public.
All drinking of intoxicating beverages in the Sandy River Park is prohibited.
Rule 10. All refuse, papers and rubbish shall be placed in refuse/recycling containers
provided for that purpose, and everyone who uses park facilities shall keep them and
the premises clean, so as to leave them in orderly condition for the next user.
Rule 11. Use of bicycles, skates, skateboards and other non-motorized, wheeled
vehicles is allowed in designated areas only. Use is not permitted on any brickwork,
ornamental surface, picnic table, tennis court, basketball court, fountain area, wading
pool, planter, or sculpture located on public grounds.
Rule 12. Written permission by the city council is required for organized, promoted
special events in city parks. Approval may include modifications to park rules. (Ord. 98-
17, 1998: Ord. 9-77 § 1, 1977.)
Rule 13. No person shall deposit into a public water feature bubbling agents or dyes, or
any objects or substances that would harm or hinder its function or endanger public
safety. Materials used in the course of maintenance or operations by city staff or
contractors are accepted. Ord. 2006-11.
Rule 14. No person shall hunt, pursue, trap, kill or disturb any animal, or its habitat.
Rule 15. Any group desiring to reserve any portion of a public park for picnics or social
functions shall make written application therefore to the city manager at least one week
prior to the event. An application fee may be required for certain parks and/or areas.
The city manager may impose such conditions upon such events, and require such
financial security in connection therewith, so as to assure that such events are
conducted in a safe manner and consistent with the use of parks by the public.
Rule 16. No person shall engage in, sponsor or conduct: fighting, boxing, wrestling or
similar forms of mutual combat in a public park. However, boxing and wrestling
matches and exhibitions that are regulated and licensed by the Oregon State Boxing
and Wrestling Commission; or boxing and wrestling conducted by organizations
identified in ORS 463.210 as exempt from the licensing and bonding provisions or ORS
33
Chapter 463, may be held in public parks upon the approval of the city manager. The
city manager may impose such conditions upon such events, and require such financial
security in connection therewith, so as to assure that such events are conducted in a
safe manner and consistent with the use of parks by the public. (Ordinance 2008-08 §1,
2008)
Rule 17. It is prohibited for any person to use tobacco, smoke or vape any substance
within any City Park and designated open space. Areas include, but are not limited to,
playgrounds, restrooms, spectator areas, picnic shelters, concession stands, parking
lots, athletic fields, aquatic areas and trails.
12.12.020 Trespass and exclusion from parks.
A. In addition to other measures provided for violation of this code, or any of the laws of
the state, any peace officer, as defined by ORS 133.005(3), as amended, or code
enforcement officer may exclude any person who violates any provision of this code,
any city ordinance, any laws of the state or any rule or regulation duly made and issued
by the City Council from any city park for a period of not more than 30 days.
B. Written notice shall be given to any person excluded from any city park. The notice
shall specify the dates and places of exclusion. It shall be signed by the issuing
party. Warning of the consequences for failure to comply shall be prominently displayed
on the notice.
C. A person receiving the notice may appeal to the Municipal Judge in accordance with
12.12.025 of this chapter to have the written notice rescinded or the period
shortened. The appeal must be filed within 5 days of receipt of the exclusion notice,
unless extended by the Municipal Judge for good cause shown.
D. At any time within the 30 days, a person receiving an exclusion notice may apply in
writing to the city manager for a temporary waiver from the effects of the notice. The
city manager may grant a waiver if good cause exists. (Ord. 08, 2008.)
12.12.025 Appeal.
A. Appeal of an exclusion notice shall be to the municipal judge.
B. Initiation of an appeal of an exclusion notice shall be filed within 5 days from the date
of the exclusion notice with the municipal court clerk. The municipal judge may waive
this requirement for good cause shown.
C. The request for an appeal hearing shall be in writing and shall contain either a copy
or a full and complete description of the notice of exclusion and a statement of the
grounds upon which it is contended that the decision to exclude is invalid, unauthorized
or otherwise improper.
D. Upon receipt of a request for an appeal hearing, the municipal court clerk shall
schedule a hearing before the judge within 14 days after receipt of the request. Notice
34
of the hearing time and date shall be given to the person requesting the hearing and to
the person issuing the exclusion notice.
E. At the hearing, the judge may determine the matter without hearing upon the record.
The judge may sustain, reverse or modify the exclusion notice appealed from in his or
her judgment.
F. The determination of the municipal judge is a quasi-judicial decision and is not
appealable to the city council: appeals from any determination by the municipal judge
shall be by writ of review to the Circuit Court of Clackamas County, Oregon as provided
in ORS 34.010 through 34.100. (Ordinance 2008-08 §2A, 2008)
12.12.030 Violation-Penalty.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished for each
offense, upon conviction thereof, by a fine equivalent to a Class A Violation as listed in
Oregon Revised Statues, or by exclusion from city parks not to exceed 30 days, or by
both such fine and exclusion. (Ordinance 2008-08 §3, 2008)
12.12.040 Criminal Trespass.
A person who knowingly violates an order of exclusion from city parks commits the
crime of Criminal Trespass. (Ordinance 2008-08 §4, 2008)
Chapter 12.14
ADVANCE FINANCING OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
12.14.010 Definitions.
The following are definitions for the purposes of this chapter and for the purposes of any
advance financing agreement entered into pursuant to this chapter and for any actions
taken as authorized pursuant to this chapter or otherwise:
"Advance finance agreement" means an agreement between a developer and the city,
as authorized by the city council, and executed by the city manager, which agreement
provides for the installation of and payment for advance financed public improvements
and which agreement contains improvement guarantees, provisions for reimbursement
by the benefiting property owners who may eventually utilize such improvement,
inspection guarantees, and the like, as determined in the best interest of the public by
the city council.
"Advance financing" means a developer's or the city's payment for the installation of one
or more public improvements installed pursuant to this chapter which benefiting property
owners may utilize upon reimbursing a proportional share of the cost of such
improvement.
"Advance financing resolution" means a resolution passed by the city council and
executed by the city manager designating a public improvement to be an advance
35
finance public improvement and containing provisions for financial reimbursement by
benefiting property owners who eventually utilize the improvement and such other
provisions as determined in the best interest of the public by the city council.
"Benefiting property" means that real property benefiting from an advance financed
public improvement.
"City" means the city of Sandy.
"City council" means the city council of Sandy.
"Developer" means the city, another municipal corporation, an individual, a partnership,
a joint venture, a corporation, a sub-divider, a partitioner of land or any other entity,
without limitation, who will bear, under the terms of this chapter, the expense of
construction, purchase, installation or other creation of a public improvement.
"Development" means that real property being developed by the developer and for
which property the advance financing resolution is passed.
"Owner" means the fee holder of record of the legal title to the real property in question.
Where such real property is being purchased under a recorded land sales contract, then
such purchasers shall also be deemed owners.
"Public improvement" means the following:
1. The construction, reconstruction or upgrading of any water, sanitary, sewer or storm
sewer system improvements;
2. The grading, graveling, paving or other surfacing of any street, or opening, laying out,
widening, extending, altering, and changing the grade for construction of any street;
3. The construction or reconstruction of sidewalks.
(Ord. 98-2 § 1 (part), 1998; Ord. 20-93 § 1 (part), 1993.)
12.14.020 Receipt of application.
The city council will receive application for advance financing from developers, which
applications shall be submitted to the city manager and shall be accompanied by a fee
set by resolution by the city council. The fee will be applied against the cost of
administrative analysis of the proposed advance financing project, for the cost of
notifying the property owners, and for recording costs and the like. When the city is the
developer, the city council shall by motion direct the city manager to submit the
application without fee. (Ord. 20-93 § 1 (part), 1993.)
12.14.030 Utility analysis.
Upon receipt of the advance financing application, the city manager shall make an
analysis of the advance financing proposal and shall prepare a report to be submitted to
36
the city council for review, discussion and public hearing. Such report shall include a
map showing the location and front footage of the development and intervening
property. The report shall also include the city's estimate of the total cost of the advance
financed public improvement. (Ord. 20-93 § 1 (part), 1993.)
12.14.040 Public hearing.
Within a reasonable time after the city manager has completed his analysis, an
informational public hearing shall be held in which all parties and the general public
shall be given the opportunity to express their views and ask questions pertaining to the
proposed advance financed public improvement. Since advance financed public
improvements do not give rise to assessments, the public hearing is for information
purposes only, and is not subject to mandatory termination due to remonstrances. The
city council has the sole discretion after the public hearing to decide whether or not an
advance financing resolution shall be passed. (Ord. 20-93 § 1 (part), 1993.)
12.14.050 Notification.
Not less than ten nor more than thirty days prior to any public hearing being held
pursuant to this chapter, the developer and all benefiting property owners shall be
notified of such hearing and the purpose thereof. Such notification shall be
accomplished by mail, notice shall be made on the date that the letter of notification is
posted. Failure of any owner to be so notified shall not invalidate or otherwise affect any
advance financing resolution or the city council's action to approve or not approve the
same. (Ord. 98-2 § 1 (part), 1998: Ord. 20-93 § 1 (part), 1993.)
12.14.060 Advance financing resolutions and agreements.
After the public hearing, held pursuant to Section 12.14.040, if the city council desires to
proceed with advance financed public improvements, it shall pass an advance financing
resolution accordingly. The resolution shall designate the proposed improvement as an
advance financed improvement and provide for advance finance reimbursement by
benefiting property owners pursuant to this chapter. When the developer is other than
the city, the advance financing resolution shall instruct the city manager to enter into an
agreement between the developer and the city pertaining to the advance financed
improvement, and may, in such agreement, require such guarantee or guarantees as
the city deems best to protect the public and benefiting property owners, and may make
such other provisions as the city council determines necessary and proper. (Ord. 98-2 §
1 (part), 1998: Ord. 20-93 § 1 (part), 1993.)
12.14.070 Advance finance reimbursement.
A. Advance Financed Reimbursement Imposed. An advance financed reimbursement is
imposed on all benefiting property owners at such time as the owners apply for
connection to advance financed water, sanitary sewer and storm sewer, improvements
or connect to and use advance financed street and sidewalk improvements.
B. Rates.
1. Benefiting Property Owners.
37
a. The benefiting property owner shall pay advance financed reimbursement calculated
as follows:
b. The total actual cost of the advance financed public improvement, increased by nine
percent annual simple interest, or such other percentage that the city council may, from
time to time, set by resolution, multiplied by a percentage of front footage owned by the
benefiting property owner of the total front footage of the advance financed public
improvement, or by such other methodology as is approved by the city council. Future
interest rate changes shall not apply ex post facto to previously executed
reimbursement agreements.
c. Advance financing reimbursements for odd shaped lots shall be individually
established and consistent with the benefit received by the lot and the reimbursement
required of other lots in the area. If inequities are created through the strict
implementations of the above formulas, the city council may modify its impact on a
case-by-case basis.
C. Collection. The advance financed reimbursement is immediately due and payable by
the benefiting property owners upon their application for connection to an advance
financed water, sanitary sewer or storm sewer system or their connection and use of
advance financed street and sidewalk improvements. If connection is made without the
above-mentioned permits, then the advance financed reimbursement is immediately
due and payable upon the earliest date that any such permit was required, or in the
case of advance financed and street and sidewalk improvements, when connection and
use is commenced. No permit for connection shall be issued until the advance financed
reimbursement is paid in full. Whenever the full and correct advance financed
reimbursement has not been paid and collected for any reason, the city manager shall
report to the city council the amount of the uncollected reimbursement, the description
of the real property to which the reimbursement was due and the name or name of the
benefiting property owners. The city council, by motion, shall then set a public hearing
and shall direct the city manager to give notice of that hearing to each of those
benefiting property owners, together with a copy of the city manager's report concerning
the unpaid reimbursement, either in person or by certified mail. Upon public hearing, the
city council may accept, reject or modify the city manager's report; and if it finds that any
reimbursement is unpaid and uncollected, the city council, by motion, may direct the city
manager to docket the unpaid and uncollected reimbursement in the city record of liens;
and upon completion of the docketing, the city shall have a lien against the described
land for reimbursements, interest and the city's actual cost of serving notice upon the
benefiting property owners. The lien shall be enforced in the manner provided by
Oregon Revised Statutes Chapter 223.
(Ord. 98-2 § 1 (part), 1998: Ord. 20-93 § 1 (part), 1993.)
12.14.080 Disposition of advance financed reimbursements.
Developers who have an advance financed agreement with the city shall receive the
advance financed reimbursements collected by the city pertaining to their advance
financed public improvements. Such reimbursements shall be delivered to the
38
developer for a period of twenty years from and after the date the applicable advance
financing agreement has been executed. Such payments will be made by the city within
ninety days of receipt of the advance financed reimbursements. The city shall incur no
liability for its failure to remit advance financed reimbursements pursuant to the
requirements of this section. (Ord. 19-96 § 1, 1997: Ord. 20-93 § 1 (part), 1993.)
12.14.090 Recording.
All advance financing resolutions shall be recorded by the city in the deed records of
Clackamas County, Oregon. Such resolutions shall identify the legal description of the
development and benefiting properties. Failure to make such recording shall not affect
the legality of an advance financing resolution or agreement. (Ord. 98-2 § 1 (part), 1998:
Ord. 20-93 § 1 (part), 1993.)
12.14.100 Public improvements.
Public improvements installed pursuant to advance financing agreement shall become
and remain the sole property of the city pursuant to the advance financing agreement.
(Ord. 20-93 § 1 (part), 1993.)
12.14.110 Multiple public improvements.
More than one public improvement may be the subject of an advance financing
agreement or resolution. (Ord. 20-93 § 1 (part), 1993.)
12.14.120 Advance financed reimbursements on public improvements funded by
the city.
In the event the city is the developer for the construction at its own expense of public
improvements for which advance financing reimbursements are permissible pursuant to
this chapter, the city may, pursuant to the direction of the city council, authorize
advance financing agreements which include terms at variance with the terms otherwise
required by this chapter. The city council may authorize lower interest rates, may permit
installment payments and may extend the time period during which advance financed
reimbursements may be required. (Ord. 20-93 § 1 (part), 1993.)
Footnotes:
1. For statutory provisions regarding city improvements and works generally, see ORS
Ch. 223.
2. For statutory provisions regarding sidewalk improvement districts, see ORS 223.880.
3. For provisions relating to systems development charges for streets, see Ch. 15.28 of
this code.
Chapter 12.16
REGULATIONS GOVERNING CONDUCT ON CITY OF SANDY PUBLIC TRANSIT
12.16.010 Purpose
For the safety, convenience, and comfort of City of Sandy Public Transit Vehicle
39
(transit) passengers, and for the safety of personnel and the region, and for the
preservation of service quality in pursuit of the City’s duty to provide a cost-effective
source of reliable transportation, and to prevent system security vulnerabilities, it is
necessary to establish rules and regulations governing conduct on City of Sandy Public
Transit (transit) property.
12.16.020 Definitions
For the purposes of this chapter:
“Assistance Animal” means:
1. an animal recognized under the Americans with Disabilities Act as a service animal,
including a dog guide, hearing ear dog, or other service animal assisting an individual
with a physical disability in one or more daily life activities including, but not limited to,
pulling a wheelchair, fetching, and balance work; or
2. a companion animal designated to assist an individual with a mental or psychological
disability in accordance with criteria that may be promulgated by the City for identifying
companion animals.
“Emergency” means an on-board transit vehicle fire, any incident that presents the risk
of actual or threatened serious physical injury to persons, any apparently urgent medical
need, or any other circumstance in which the City Manager has declared a state of
emergency.
“Person” means any person, firm, corporation, but excluding those acting under direct
authority of the Sandy City Council.
“Qualified Exclusion” means an exclusion which excludes a “Transit Dependent” person
from use of the Transit System except for use for travel to and from medical and legal
appointments, school or training classes, places of employment, obtaining food, clothing
and necessary household items, or for accessing any critical services.
“Transit Facilities” means all property, equipment and improvements of whatever nature
owned, leased, maintained, operated or otherwise controlled by the City of Sandy, or
operated or controlled on the City’s behalf, whether within or without the city limits, and
operated for the use of the public for mass transportation purposes.
“Transit Dependent” means a person who has no independent source of transportation
and relies solely on public transit for local movement and access.
12.16.030 Prohibited Activities on Transit System
1. Failure to Vacate Elderly and Disabled Priority Seating: No person shall fail to vacate
seats on a transit vehicle designated for use by individuals with disabilities and qualified
senior citizens, when requested to do so by a peace officer or a transit employee.
40
2. Smoking: No person shall smoke tobacco or any other substance, or shall carry any
lighted or smoldering substance in any form aboard a transit vehicle, in any area of a
passenger shelter, or within ten feet of any transit vehicle.
3. Food and Beverages: No person shall bring or carry aboard a transit vehicle food or
beverages in open containers, nor consume food aboard a transit vehicle.
4. Radios, Compact Disk Players and other Sound-Emitting Devices without Earphones
: No person, except a peace officer, firefighter, transit employee, or emergency
response professional in the course of employment, shall operate a radio, compact disk
player, MP3 player, video player or other sound-emitting device aboard any transit
vehicle or in or upon any passenger shelter, unless the only sound produced by such
item is emitted by a personal listening attachment (earphone) audible only to the person
carrying the device producing the sound.
5. Shopping Carts and Unfolded Carriages or Strollers:
a. Except while boarding a transit vehicle, no person shall carry an unfolded or occupied
carriage or stroller aboard any type of transit vehicle. Carriages or strollers must remain
folded while aboard a transit vehicle.
b. No person shall bring or carry a commercial shopping cart aboard any type of transit
vehicle.
c. No person shall abandon a commercial shopping cart at a transit facility.
6. Animals, Except Properly Controlled Assistance Animals and Properly Contained
Pets: No person shall bring or carry aboard a transit vehicle or be present in or upon a
transit facility with an animal except:
a. A person accompanied by an assistance animal or a person training an assistance
animal, so long as the animal is under the control of the person by leash, harness or
other device made for the purpose of controlling the movement of an animal.
b. A person transporting a pet if: (a) the animal is kept and held at all times within a
secure container appropriate and constructed for carrying the size and type of animal;
and c. the animal can be transported without risk of injury to the animal and without risk
of harm or inconvenience to other riders or transit personnel.
d. A trained police dog accompanied by a peace officer.
7. Noxious Fumes or Foul-Smelling Materials or Substances: No person shall carry
aboard a transit vehicle any substance or material emitting a foul smell or releasing
noxious fumes.
41
8. Oversized Packages: No person shall bring or carry aboard a transit vehicle any
package or article of a size which will block any aisle or stairway on the vehicle.
9. Skateboards, Roller-skates and In-line Skates: No person shall ride a skateboard, inline
skates or roller-skates upon a transit vehicle, or transit facility.
10. Riding or Transport of Motorized Human Transporters and other Wheeled
Transportation Devices except in Compliance with Rules of Law: No person shall
operate or ride upon a motorized human transporter or other wheeled transportation
device upon a transit vehicle or transit facility except as otherwise permitted by law.
11. Corrosive and Soiling Substances: No person shall carry upon a transit vehicle any
corrosive material or soiling substance where containment of such substance cannot be
guaranteed.
12. Excessive Noise: No person shall:
a. Make excessive or unnecessary noise, including boisterous and unreasonably loud
conduct, within any transit vehicle or transit facility with the intent to cause
inconvenience, annoyance or alarm to the public, transit personnel, or a peace officer,
or with a reckless disregard to the risk thereof; or
b. Perform vocal or instrumental music, without the prior written authorization of the
City.
13. Display of Lights: No person shall light a flashlight, scope light, or laser light or
object that projects a flashing light or emits a beam of light while inside a transit vehicle,
except in an emergency.
14. Improper Use of City Transit Vehicle/City Transit Facility seating: No person shall:
a. Lie down on or across the seats of a transit vehicle or City transit facility;
b. Place any object or substance on the seats of a transit vehicle or City transit facility
that inhibits the proper use of such seats; or
c. Block or obstruct the use of the seats of a transit vehicle or transit facility.
15. Disruptive Conduct Inside a City Transit Vehicle: No person shall occupy, move
about or engage in activity in a transit vehicle in a manner that:
a. Interferes with the free movement of passengers; or
b. Interferes with or disrupts the function or safe operation of the transit vehicle,
including movement that constitutes a distraction to the operator of a transit vehicle; or
c. Uses a transit vehicle for any purpose other than for transportation.
12.16.040 Misuse of City Transit System
1. Use of Transit System for Non-Transit Purposes: No person shall enter or remain
upon, occupy or use a transit facility for purposes other than boarding, disembarking or
waiting for a transit vehicle, in an area where non-transit uses are prohibited by posted
signage. A person is in violation of this section only after having occupied a transit
facility for a period of time that exceeds that which is reasonably necessary to wait for,
42
board or disembark a transit vehicle.
2. Destructive Conduct Involving a Transit Vehicle: No person shall interfere with the
safe and efficient operation of a transit vehicle through conduct which includes to:
a. Extend any portion of his or her body through any door or window of a transit vehicle
while it is in motion;
b. Attempt to board or de-board a moving transit vehicle;
c. Throw, propel or discard any object or substance in any transit vehicle or through any
open door or window of a transit vehicle;
d. Unreasonably prevent or delay the closure of a door on a transit vehicle;
e. Strike or hit a transit vehicle, stop or cross in front of a transit vehicle for the purpose
of stopping the vehicle or gaining passage after the vehicle has concluded boarding;
f. In any manner hang onto, or attach himself or herself to any exterior part of a transit
vehicle while the vehicle is resting or in motion.
3. Refuse and Waste: No person shall discard or deposit or leave any rubbish, trash,
debris, offensive substance or other solid or liquid waste in or upon a transit vehicle or
transit facility, except in receptacles provided for that purpose. No person shall spit,
defecate, or urinate in or upon a transit vehicle or transit facility, except in the confines
of a lavatory where lavatories are available for public use.
4. Destruction of Signs: No person shall mutilate, deface or destroy any sign, notice or
advertisement posted by the City or located on any transit vehicle or transit property.
5. Posting of Unauthorized Signs or Notices: Except as otherwise allowed by City
regulations, no person shall place, permit or cause to be placed any notice or sign upon
any transit vehicle or transit facility.
6. Alcoholic Beverages: No person shall possess an open container of alcoholic
beverage on a transit vehicle or transit facility, unless authorized by the City.
7. Damaging or Defacing City Transit Property: No person shall:
a. Draw graffiti or any other writing on any transit vehicle or any other transit property; or
b. Damage, destroy, interfere with, or obstruct in any manner, the property, services or
facilities of the transit system.
12.16.050 Criminal Activity
No person shall engage in activity prohibited by the criminal laws of any state, county,
or municipality, in which the criminal incident occurs, while on a transit vehicle or in or
upon a transit facility.
12.16.060 Prohibited Risks to Transit System Security and Order
1. Flammable Substances and Ignition Devices: No person shall bring, possess or carry
aboard a transit vehicle or facility any flammable substance or device that can cause a
spark or flame, except for matches and cigarette lighters. No spark or flame may be lit
or initiated at any time by any device on a transit vehicle, including matches and
43
lighters.
2. Weapons: No person, except a peace officer, shall bring or carry aboard a transit
vehicle any firearm, knife (except a folding knife with a blade less than 3 ½ inches in
length), or any other instrument, article, device, material or substance specifically
designed for, or attempted to be used to, inflict or cause bodily harm to another, except
where otherwise provided by law. Where possession of such weapons cannot be
prohibited by law, a person in possession of a weapon may not display or carry the
weapon in a manner which is likely to result in fear or alarm by other persons or transit
employees.
3. Activation of the Emergency Stop Device Except in an Emergency: No person shall
activate the “emergency stop” device of a transit vehicle in the absence of an
emergency.
4. Hazardous and Toxic Material or Substances : No person shall carry, possess or
transport any hazardous material, toxic chemical, combustible liquid, biological
contagion or agent, radioactive substance or any other inherently dangerous substance
onto a transit vehicle or other transit property unless the person is a City employee or
authorized personnel acting in the course of employment.
5. Harassment and Intimidation:
a. While on a transit vehicle or other transit property, no person shall engage in
harassment or intimidation through a course of conduct, including violent, threatening or
disruptive behavior or conduct intended and likely to provoke a violent response, which
places another person in reasonable fear of imminent physical harm, including, but not
limited to, following such person around or about the vehicle or facility, or by preventing
or delaying the movement or departure of such person through coercion or intimidation;
or
b. While on a transit vehicle, no person shall continue a course of conduct that may
reasonably be expected to result in fear, alarm, or serious offense to other passengers
or transit personnel, after having received a lawful directive to cease such conduct or
depart the transit vehicle, by a transit employee or a peace officer.
6. Explosive Materials or Device : No person may carry, possess or transport any
explosive material or device, assembled or disassembled, onto a transit vehicle or other
transit property unless the person is a City or transit employee, peace officer, or
emergency response professional, acting in the course of employment or duty.
7. Threats: No person may utter a threat to cause damage to a transit vehicle or other
transit property, or state a threat to cause disruption to City operations through the use
of a bomb, explosive, or any other destructive device or weapon, or release of any
harmful substance, while on a transit vehicle or other transit property; or state a threat of
physical harm to a peace officer or transit personnel acting in the course of
employment.
44
8. Interference with Emergency Response: No person may impede the efforts of transit
personnel or peace officers in the course of an emergency response, including the
failure to obey a lawful order by transit personnel or peace officers uttered in the course
of an emergency.
9. Abandonment of Packages: No person shall knowingly abandon an unauthorized
package on a transit vehicle or transit property, where the abandonment of such
package is likely to cause suspicion or alarm about its contents, or require the dispatch
of emergency response personnel to remove and inspect the package.
10. Discharge or Detonation of a Weapon: No person may throw an object at or
discharge a bow and arrow, air rifle, rifle gun, revolver or other firearm at a transit
vehicle or any part of a transit facility, or any person on a transit vehicle or at a transit
facility, except a peace officer acting in the course of employment.
11. Violation of an Interdiction Command: No person shall violate a directive of an
Interdiction Command.
12.16.070 Trespass and exclusion from transit facilities
A. In addition to other measures provided for violation of this code, or any of the laws of
the state, any peace officer, as defined by ORS 133.005(3), as amended, or code
enforcement officer may exclude any person who violates any provision of this code,
any city ordinance, any laws of the state or any rule or regulation duly made and issued
by the City from any transit facility for a period of not more than 30 days.
B. A transit dependent person shall not be issued a complete exclusion from transit
facilities unless the person engaged in violent, seriously disruptive, or criminal conduct,
or conduct posing a serious threat to the safety of others or to the operation of the
transit system. Any person asserting the right to a qualified exclusion on the basis of
transit dependence has the burden of establishing such dependence by a
preponderance of the evidence.
C. Written notice shall be given to any person excluded from any transit facility. The
notice shall specify the dates and places of exclusion. It shall be signed by the issuing
party. Warning of the consequences for failure to comply shall be prominently displayed
on the notice.
D. A person receiving the notice may appeal to the municipal judge in accordance with
12.16.075 of this chapter to have the written notice rescinded or the period shortened.
The appeal must be filed within 5 days of receipt of the exclusion notice, unless
extended by the municipal judge for good cause shown.
E. At any time within the 30 days, a person receiving an exclusion notice may apply in
writing to the city manager for a temporary waiver from the effects of the notice. The
city manager may grant a waiver if good cause exists.
45
12.16.075 Appeal
A. Appeal of an exclusion notice shall be to the municipal judge.
B. Initiation of an appeal of an exclusion notice shall be filed within five (5) days from
the date of the exclusion notice with the municipal court clerk. The municipal judge may
waive this requirement for good cause shown.
C. The request for an appeal hearing shall be in writing and shall contain either a copy
or a full and complete description of the notice of exclusion and a statement of the
grounds upon which it is contended that the decision to exclude is invalid, unauthorized
or otherwise improper.
D. Upon receipt of a request for an appeal hearing, the municipal court clerk shall
schedule a hearing before the judge within 14 days of receipt of the request. Notice of
the hearing time and date shall be given to the person requesting the hearing and to the
person issuing the exclusion notice.
E. At the hearing, the judge may determine the matter upon the record. The judge may
sustain, reverse or modify the exclusion notice appealed from in his or her judgment. If
the appeal concerns an allegation that the excluded person is transit dependent, and
the judge finds that the appellant is transit dependent or did not engage in an act that
warrants a complete exclusion from transit facilities, the judge shall order a qualified
exclusion to permit a transit dependent individual to use the transit system for trips of
necessity, including travel to and from medical and legal appointments, school or
training classes, places of employment, obtaining food, clothing and necessary
household items, or for accessing any other critical services.
F. The determination of the municipal judge is a quasi-judicial decision and is not
appealable to the City Council. Appeals from any determination by the municipal judge
shall be by writ of review to the Circuit Court of Clackamas County, Oregon as provided
in ORS 34.010 through 34.100.
12.16.080 Violation-Penalty
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished for each
offense, upon conviction thereof, by exclusion from transit facilities not to exceed 30
days. (Ord. 2019-14, 2019.)
12.16.090 Criminal Trespass
A person who knowingly violates an order of exclusion from transit facilities commits the
crime of Criminal Trespass.
Chapter 12.18
STREET TREES
12.18.010 Purpose and Intent
46
A. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote and protect public health, safety, and
general welfare by regulating the planting, maintenance, and removal of trees in
and upon public rights-of-way within Sandy.
B. This chapter will be construed and interpreted to promote:
(1) The planting, maintenance, restoration, and survival of desirable trees within
the city; and
(2) The protection of residents from personal injury and property damage, and
the protection of Sandy and its public rights-of-way from property damage
caused or threatened by the improper planting, maintenance, or removal of
trees located in and upon public rights-of-way within the city.
12.18.020 Definitions
A. Tree: For the purposes of this chapter, a tree means any living, standing, woody
plant having a single trunk with a caliper of one inch or greater.
B. Street trees: A tree in or on public rights-of-way within the city.
C. Topping: The severe cutting back of limbs to stubs three inches or larger in
diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree as to remove the normal
canopy and disfigure the tree.
12.18.030 Administration and Authority
A. Authority. The Public Works Director, or designee, will administer and enforce
this chapter, including the creation and issuance of permits as described herein.
B. Rules. The Public Works Director, or designee, may develop and periodically
review and revise, as necessary, rules and regulations to further implement this
chapter. They will consist of standards for the planting, maintenance, and
removal of street trees.
12.18.040 Permits
A. Scope. No person except the Public Works Director, or designee; a contractor
hired by the city and the contractor’s agents; or public utility and its agents may
plant, prune or excavate within ten feet of a street tree, or remove an existing
street tree or plant a new street tree, without first obtaining a permit from the city.
(1) Permits may be applied for in person or, as applicable, online.
(2) Exception. No permit is required when pruning or branch removal is done to
comply with street and sidewalk clearance requirements of Section
8.16.060.A.
B. Fees. Unless the City Council provides otherwise in a resolution, there is no fee
for a street tree permit if it is obtained prior to planting, pruning or excavating
47
within ten feet of a street tree, or obtained prior to removing an existing street
tree or planting a new street tree.
C. Public Utility Companies. Public utility companies must notify the Public Works
Director, or designee, prior to planting, pruning or excavating within ten feet of a
street tree, or removing an existing street tree or planting a new street tree,
demonstrate that its proposed action is necessary and otherwise in accordance
with this chapter and any rules adopted under it, and carry out all such work in
accordance with this chapter, rules adopted under it and through accepted
arboricultural standards.
12.18.050 Street Tree Maintenance and Care
A. Notification. The Public Works Director, or designee, may notify an adjacent
property owner to prune, remove, or otherwise treat any street tree as conditions
may require. Neither a property owner’s duty to maintain street trees as provided
in this chapter, nor any liability for the property owner's failure to do so, is
dependent upon any notice from the city.
B. Debris Removal. A person who prunes, treats, removes, plants or otherwise
maintains a street tree is required to remove all debris from the right-of-way by
sunset of the same day, unless the Public Works Director specifically authorizes
a longer period of time.
C. City Tree Maintenance. The city is authorized to plant, prune, treat, maintain and
remove street trees as may be necessary to preserve or enhance the symmetry
and beauty of such areas. The city may remove, or cause or order to be
removed, any street tree or part thereof that is unsafe or may be injurious or
detrimental to sewers, electrical power lines, natural gas lines, water lines or
other public improvements, or is affected by any fungus, insect or other pest.
This section does not prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent property
owners, provided that a permit is obtained prior to such planting and the selection
and location of the tree conforms to this chapter.
D. City Held Harmless. The City of Sandy and its officers, officials, employees and
agents are not be liable for injury, damage, or loss to person or property caused
in whole or part by the defective or dangerous condition of any street tree.
12.18.060 Notice
A. Notice to Maintain or Remove. Should any property owner fail to maintain
adjacent street trees in accordance with this chapter, the Public Works Director,
or designee, may order such person or persons to maintain or remove such trees
following the notice procedures specified in SMC 12.10.040 (sidewalk
maintenance).
12.18.070 Mutilation and Topping Prohibited
48
A. Mutilation. Unless permitted to do so in accordance with this chapter, no person
may damage, cut, carve, transplant, or remove any street tree; attach any rope,
wire, nails, advertising posters, or other objects to a street tree; allow any
gaseous liquid or solid substance which is harmful to trees to come in contact
with a street tree; or set fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire or the heat
generated from it may injure any portion of a street tree.
B. Tree Topping. Street trees may not be topped, unless the Public Works Director
or designee determines in writing that all other pruning practices are impractical
relative to the condition or location of the street tree.
12.18.080 Street Tree Planting
A. Permitted Street Trees. Trees planted in the public right-of-way shall conform to
the City of Sandy’s Street Tree List, unless specifically authorized through the
issuance of a permit.
12.18.090 Violation
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or who fails to comply with
any notice issued pursuant to it is subject to a fine of $500 for each separate
violation. If this chapter is violated and a street tree is injured, mutilated or is
removed, the cost to repair or replace the street tree will be borne by the party in
violation. The replacement value of street trees will be determined in accordance
with the Valuation of Landscape Trees, Shrubs and Other Plants, as published
by the International Society of Arboriculture.
B. Failure to Comply. If a person to whom a notice is directed fails to comply within
the time specified in the order, the city may cause the street tree in question to
be maintained, pruned and/or removed or replaced, as necessary. The city’s
costs, plus a 10 percent administrative fee, may be assessed to the property
owner, with a lien placed on the property, as provided by Sections 12.10.060 and
12.10.070.
1
TITLE 13
WATER AND SEWER1
Chapter 13.04 WATER SYSTEM-RULES AND REGULATIONS.................................... 1
Chapter 13.06 CROSS-CONNECTIONS............................................................................. 8
Chapter 13.08 WATER SYSTEM-CONNECTION CHARGES AND RATES............... 13
Chapter 13.12 SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM-RULES AND REGULATIONS2 ........... 15
Chapter 13.16 SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM-CONNECTION FEES AND CHARGES
................................................................................................................................................... 19
Chapter 13.18 STORM WATER MANAGEMENT ............................................................ 24
Chapter 13.04
WATER SYSTEM-RULES AND REGULATIONS
13.04.010 Application for water use.
Application for the use of water shall be made on forms furnished by the city. Said
application shall be made at the time a building permit is applied for, and the water and
building permits shall carry the same expiration date. The water permit, along with the
building permit, shall expire by limitation and become null and void if work authorized by
these permits is not commenced within one hundred twenty days from the date of such
permits, or if the work authorized by such permits is suspended or abandoned at any
time after work is commenced for a period of one hundred twenty days. The applicant or
applicants shall agree to conform to the rules and regulations of the city, now or
hereafter in effect, as a condition for the use of water. (Ord. 38-75 § 1, 1975: Ord. 10-73
§ 2, 1973.)
13.04.020 Application-Inspection of premises.
No application for the use of water shall be granted until the premises where the water
is to be supplied has been examined in person by the public works superintendent.
(Ord. 10-73 § 3, 1973.)
13.04.030 Restriction on water use.
No person supplied with water from the city mains will be entitled to use it for any
purpose other than that stated in his or her application. No user of water will be entitled
to supply water in any way to other persons or families, except upon special written
permit from the city council. (Ord. 10-73 § 4, 1973.)
13.04.040 Connection.
The materials for the connection from the main to and including the curb cock will be
supplied by the city, and said materials, including the meter, shall be and remain the
2
property of the city. All tapping of water mains and pipes shall be done by the public
works superintendent, or under his supervision. The meter shall be placed at the curb
line, or at the property line, at the option of the public works superintendent, and shall
be in a substantial concrete box with a cover, the cost of which box and cover shall be
included in the cost of connection. The city may use such meter as the council may, by
resolution or motion, from time to time provide. Service pipes and connections are those
pipes and connections which bring the water from the main to the property line. All
service pipes and connections shall be laid two feet below the street grade, with the
exception of installation of meters. All service pipes and connections shall be under the
exclusive control of the city council, and no person, other than the public works
superintendent or an assistant, will be permitted to install any service pipes or
connections or make any repairs or alterations or changes in any service pipes,
connections and meters. (Ord. 10-73 § 5, 1973.)
13.04.045 Changes in service.
When new buildings are to be erected on the site of old ones and it is desired to
increase the size or change the location of the old service connection, or where a
service connection to any premises is abandoned or no longer in use, a new service
shall be required, as needed, upon application of the occupant and upon payment for a
new connection in the regular manner. (Ord. 38-75 § 2, 1975: Ord. 10-73 § 5A, 1973.)
13.04.050 Placement of stop and waste cocks.
All private service pipes from the property line shall be property installed and at all times
maintained in good order by the owner. Outside pipes shall be placed at least two feet
underground, and inside pipes shall be placed or protected so as to prevent freezing.
Just inside the basement a stopcock and waste cock, of approved pattern, protected
from the frost, must in all cases be placed in a convenient location, by means of which
the pipes in the building may be drained when necessary during freezing weather. If the
building is not provided with a basement, a stop and waste cock must be placed near
the outside wall thereof. Additional stop and waste cocks must be placed at sags and
bends in pipes when they cannot otherwise be drained. (Ord. 10-73 § 6, 1973.)
13.04.060 Leaks-Excavation by public works superintendent.
Where there is a leak under the street and it is doubtful whether the water comes from a
break in the city mains or from the private meter, the public works superintendent will
make the excavation to determine which it is from. If the leak is found in the main, the
city will make all repairs free of charge. If the leak is from the meter to the property
served, the owner, lessee or agent will be notified either in person or by letter; it will be
his obligation to have the condition corrected immediately by a qualified contractor, or
he shall be liable for all damage. (Ord. 10-73 § 7, 1973.)
13.04.070 Separate service for each house-Exception.
A separate service direct to the tap on the main will be required for each house that is to
be supplied with water; provided, that when there are two houses on an inside lot of
ground or less, the service may be divided at the curb and a separate stopcock and a
meter provided for each place to be supplied. (Ord. 10-73 § 8, 1973.)
3
13.04.080 Conditions under which water will not be furnished.
Water will not be furnished where there are defective or leaking faucets, closets or other
fixtures, or where there are water closets or urinals without self-closing valves, or tanks
without self-acting float valves, and when such may be discovered the supply may be
shut off. (Ord. 10-73 § 9, 1973.)
13.04.090 Plumber-Prohibited actions.
No plumber or other person will be allowed to make any alteration in any conduit, pipe
or other fixture connecting with the city mains, or to connect pipes when they have been
disconnected, or to turn water off or on the premises without permission from the public
works superintendent. (Ord. 10-73 § 10, 1973.)
13.04.100 Plumber-Report of work done.
Plumbers or persons doing any work by which additional water may be drawn from the
city mains, or by which there is a change in the kind or classification of service used,
must make in writing a true and accurate report of the work done and deliver it at the
water office as soon as completed, or within twenty-four hours thereafter. (Ord. 10-73 §
11, 1973.)
13.04.110 Interrupted service.
The water may at any time be shut off from the mains, without notice, for repairs or
other necessary purposes, and the city will not be responsible for any consequent
damages. Water for steam boilers will not be furnished by direct pressure from the
mains. Tanks for holding an ample reserve supply of water shall always be provided by
the owner of the boiler. While water is temporarily shut off from the mains, the hot-water
faucets should be kept open by the occupant of the premises to allow the steam to
escape from the water heaters, and should damage result to the meter by reason of
steam or hot water, the owner shall be charged for repairs. (Ord. 10-73 § 12, 1973.)
13.04.120 Access.
Employees of the city shall have free access at proper hours of the day to all parts of
the buildings and premises in which water may be delivered from the mains, for the
purpose of inspecting the conditions of the pipes and fixtures and the manner in which
the water is used. (Ord. 10-73 § 13, 1973.)
13.04.130 Monthly reports by administrative office.
The administrative office shall prepare a monthly report indicating: Number of
consumers, amount collected for rentals, amount collected for applications, amount for
penalties and fines, number of consumers delinquent, together with such other data as
the council may require, and shall at the close of the calendar year make a summary of
these reports. (Ord. 10-73 § 14, 1973.)
13.04.140 Records of public works superintendent.
The public works superintendent shall, as a part of his duties, number all premises
where water is furnished by the city, and shall furnish a record of such to the
administrative office. He shall also keep an accurate record of all mains and pipes laid
4
by him or under his direction and belonging to the city, and shall, not oftener than once
a month, if the council so requests, make a written report of the condition of the water
system, or any part thereof, together with such recommendations as the said
superintendent sees fit to include. (Ord. 10-73 § 15, 1973.)
13.04.150 Use of fire hydrants.
It is unlawful for any person to operate, alter, change, remove, disconnect, connect with,
or interfere in any manner with any fire hydrant owned or used by the city without first
obtaining written permission from the city. The provisions of this section shall not apply
to the Sandy Rural Fire Protection District No. 72. (Ord. 10-73 § 16, 1973.)
13.04.160 Fire protection service.
Fire protection pipes to be used in case of fire will be allowed within and without
buildings on the following conditions:
A. When the owner of a building desires, or when the building code calls for a certain
size pipe to supply water to a wet or dry sprinkler system without hose connections,
such pipe or pipes may be covered by an approved proportional meter or a detector
check. The owner or agent of such building shall agree in writing that water supplied
through this service will not be used for any purpose except for extinguishing a fire. If at
any time it is found that those connections have been added to the system or that
registration is recorded on the meter or detector check, the immediate installation of a
compound meter will be required by the city water department.
B. No charge shall be made for water used in the extinguishing of fires if the owner or
agent reports such use to the city water department in writing within ten days of such
usage. A minimum service charge shall be billed each month to the owner or agent of
the property supplied.
(Ord. 10-73 § 17, 1973.)
13.04.170 Use of private water and city water.
Owners of buildings desiring to use both a city water supply and a supply of water other
than that furnished by the city water system may obtain city water at meter rates upon
the following conditions and not otherwise. Under no circumstances shall a physical
connection, direct or indirect, exist or be made in any manner, even temporarily
between the city water supply and that of a private water supply. Where such
connection is found to exist, or where provision is made to connect the two systems by
means of a spacer or otherwise, the city water supply shall be shut off from the
premises without notice. In case of such discontinuance, service shall not be
reestablished until satisfactory proof is furnished that the cross-connection has been
completely and permanently severed. (Ord. 10-73 § 18, 1973.)
13.04.180 Water for building purposes on meter basis.
If the owner or agent of any premises applies for a permanent service and the meter
has been installed, water shall be furnished for building purposes at meter rates, to be
charged against the premises. A charge for water shall be billed to said owner or
5
occupant when the meter registers at least five hundred cubic feet, or as soon as the
building is occupied. (Ord. 10-73 § 19, 1973.)
13.04.190 Ownership, damage and registration of meters.
All meters of the city water system are the property of the city, and any repairs to said
meters shall be made by the city. If a meter is burned out by hot water or damaged by
the carelessness or negligence of the owner or occupant of the premises, the city water
department will repair the meter, and the cost of such repairs shall be charged against
the owner of the property and if not paid within thirty days, shall then become a lien
against said property. When a meter fails to register accurately, the charge shall be
either based on the average quantity of water used, as shown by the meter when in
order, or if there is no such average consumption, then the minimum rate of the city
shall apply. If freezing or snowing weather shall make reading of the meters
impracticable, an estimated reading shall be made by the city water department during
the time such conditions exist. Estimated readings for other just conditions affecting
reading of a meter shall be made only on approval of the water department. (Ord. 10-73
§ 20, 1973.)
13.04.200 Services outside the city.
A. Excess water of the city, as determined by the council, may be served to individual
users, companies or water districts outside the city boundaries, under such rates,
charges and rules as the council may from time to time prescribe, or as outlined under
special contracts. All regulations now or hereafter that affect the users inside the city
shall apply to users outside the city, except as provided by the council. Service to users
outside the city shall at all times be subject to the prior superior right of the people of the
city to said water. The city shall have the right to refuse to sell water to consumers who
do not comply with the requirement of this section.
B. The city may require annexation prior to service extension if such annexation is
practical and in the best interest of the city. If annexation is not required, the owner must
enter into an agreement for future annexation to the city, upon the city's request in an
agreement form, satisfactory to the city attorney. The water service extension will be
installed to city standards. A person or persons requesting service extension will bear all
costs of the extension of the service, including, but not limited to, the cost of public lines
and any oversizing as specified by the public works director. A water service connection
will be provided only for a permitted use as identified in the Clackamas County
Development Code and the City Comprehensive Plan. The extension of water service
facilities shall follow an approved shadow plat design for future extension of
infrastructure for the site, which meets the satisfaction of the city. No service extension
shall conflict with existent natural hazards and/or goals criteria.
(Ord. 5-93 § 1, 1993: Ord. 10-73 § 21, 1973.)
13.04.210 Report from other distributing agencies.
All water districts, water companies, agencies and other agreeing parties, supplying
water furnished to the city from the waterworks of the city of Portland water bureau to
customers outside the limits of the city must furnish, not later than June 30th of each
6
year, to the city, a written description of the area supplied or to be supplied by such
distributing agency, together with a report and maps showing all mains which now exist
or which may be hereafter laid. Such description, report and maps shall be filed with the
public works superintendent of the city. No increase in services or extensions of mains
shall be made by any water district, company or any parties under agreement by the city
unless approval of the city council shall first be obtained. (Ord. 10-73 § 22, 1973.)
13.04.220 Regulations pertaining to inadequate supply or shortages of water.
A. Upon determination that water consumption exceeds availability and/or water storage
within the system is approaching the minimum required to meet fire protection and other
essential requirements, as determined by the city manager, the city manager shall have
authority to request voluntary reduction of water use by customers, including but not
limited to the following specific actions:
1. Requesting patrons to limit landscape watering between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m.;
2. Requesting voluntary compliance with alternate day system for landscaping watering
(i.e. even numbered addresses water on even numbered days, and odd numbered
addresses on odd numbered days);
3. Requesting other voluntary measures on the part of city customers.
B. Upon determination of serious water shortages by the city council, the city council
may declare an emergency restricting certain uses. Pursuant to such action the city
council may impose the following measures:
1. Prohibiting landscape watering between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.;
2. Requiring compliance with alternate day system for landscaping watering (i.e. even
numbered addresses water on even numbered dates, and odd numbered addresses on
odd numbered days.);
3. Restricting other outdoor uses as determined by the city council.
C. Upon determination of critical water shortages by the city council, the city council
may declare an emergency prohibiting certain uses. Pursuant to such action by the city
council it shall be expressly prohibited to:
1. Water, sprinkle or irrigate lawns, grass or turf unless:
a. It is new lawn, grass or turf that has been seeded or sodded after March 1st of the
calendar year in which any restrictions are imposed, and in such cases it may be
watered as necessary until established,
b. Lawn, grass or turf that is part of a commercial sod farm,
7
c. High use athletic fields that are used for organized play,
d. Golf tees and greens, and
e. Park and recreation areas deemed by the city council to be of a particular
significance and value to the community that would allow exception to the prohibition;
2. Washing, wetting down, or sweeping with water, sidewalks, walkways, driveways,
parking lots, open ground or other hard surfaced areas unless:
a. In the opinion of the city council there is a demonstrable need in order to meet public
health, safety requirements including but not limited to alleviation of immediate fire or
sanitation hazards, or dust control to meet air quality requirements mandated by the
Oregon Department of Environmental Quality,
b. Power washing of buildings, roofs and homes prior to painting, repair, remodeling or
reconstruction and not solely for aesthetic purposes;
3. Washing cars, trucks, trailers, tractors, or other land vehicles or boats or other water
borne vehicles except by commercial establishments or fleet washing facilities which
recycle or reuse the water in their washing processes or by bucket and hose with a
shut-off mechanism unless the city council finds that the public health, safety and
welfare is contingent upon frequent vehicle cleaning such as cleaning of solid waste
transfer vehicles, vehicles that transport food and other perishables or otherwise
required by law.
D. Upon determination that the restrictions and/or prohibitions permitted pursuant to this
section have not reduced water consumption to the level necessary to eliminate
emergency water conditions, the city council may as an additional conservation
measure adopt a temporary conservation water rate schedule. The city council may do
so by the passage of a resolution.
E. Any violation of the restrictions or prohibitions permitted by this section shall be
enforced by the city as follows:
1. The city shall personally deliver a notice of violation to the occupant of the premises.
If the occupant is not present, the city may post the same on the premises advising the
user of the violation and warning the user of what specific sanctions may be imposed if
the violations continue. The city shall also mail the notice of violation by regular mail to
the occupant at the address of the subject premises where the violation has occurred.
2. The following penalties may be imposed if violations continue:
Second violation $100.00 Fine
Third violation $300.00 Fine
Fourth and subsequent violations $500.00 Fine
8
In the case of continuing violations, the city also has the authority to discontinue water
service.
(Ord. 12-92 §1, 1992: Ord. 10-73 § 23, 1973.)
13.04.230 Water for motor power.
Water for motor power shall not be used until the consumer has made special
application to the council and has been granted a special rate. Any failure to comply
with the provisions of this section shall be sufficient cause for shutting off the water.
(Ord. 10-73 § 24, 1973.)
13.04.240 Private pipe or main-Council permission required.
No person shall be permitted to lay any private pipes or mains in or upon any street or
road in the city without permission of the council. (Ord. 10-73 § 26, 1973.)
13.04.250 Violation-Penalty.
Any person who shall in any way interfere with, change, alter or damage any water
main, pipe, conduit, shutoff or any other part of the water system belonging to the city,
or who shall turn on the water to any premises without due authority, shall upon
conviction in municipal court of said city be fined in the sum of not more than one
hundred dollars for each offense, or by imprisonment for a period of not more than ten
days, or by both fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 10-73 § 25, 1973.)
Chapter 13.06
CROSS-CONNECTIONS
13.06.010 Purpose and scope.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health of water consumers by the
control of actual and/or potential cross-connections to customers. (Ord. 9-82 § 1 (part),
1982.)
13.06.020 Definitions.
A. "Backflow" shall mean the undesirable reversal of water or mixtures of water and
other liquids, gases or other substances into the distribution pipes of the potable supply
of water from any source or sources.
B. "Backflow prevention device (approved)" shall mean a device that has been
investigated and approved by the regulatory agency having jurisdiction. The approval of
back- flow prevention devices by the regulatory agency should be on the basis of a
favorable laboratory and field evaluation report by an "approved testing laboratory,"
recommending such approval.
C. "Backflow prevention device (type)" shall mean any approved device used to prevent
backflow into a potable water system. The type of device used should be based on the
degree of hazard either existing or potential.
9
D. "Contamination" shall mean the entry into or presence in a public water supply of any
substance which may be deleterious to health and/or quality of the water.
E. "Cross-connection" shall mean any unprotected actual or potential connection or
structural arrangement between a public or a consumer's potable water system and any
other source or system through which it is possible to introduce into any part of the
potable system any used water, industrial fluid, gas, or substance other than the
intended potable water with which the water, industrial fluid, gas, or substance other
than the intended potable water with which the system is supplied. By-pass
arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices
and other temporary or permanent devices through which or because of which
"backflow" can or may occur are considered to be cross-connections.
F. "Director" shall mean the director of public works of the city of Sandy, or authorized
agent.
G. "Hazard, degree of" shall be derived from the evaluation of a health, system,
plumbing or pollutional hazard.
H. "Hazard, health" shall mean an actual or potential threat of contamination of a
physical or toxic nature to the public potable water system or the consumer's potable
water system that would be a danger to health.
I. "Hazard, plumbing" shall mean an internal or plumbing type cross-connection in a
consumer's potable water system that may be either a pollutional or a contamination
type hazard. This includes, but is not limited to, cross-connections to toilets, sinks,
lavatories, wash trays, domestic washing machines and lawn sprinkling systems.
Plumbing type cross-connections can be located in many types of structures including
homes, apartment houses, hotels and commercial or industrial establishments.
J. "Hazard, pollutional" shall mean an actual or potential threat to the physical
properties of the water system or the potability of the public or the consumer's potable
water system but which would not constitute a health or system hazard, as defined. The
maximum degree or intensity of pollution to which the potable water system could be
degraded under this definition would cause a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable
or could cause minor damage to the system or its appurtenances.
K. "Hazard, system" shall mean an actual or potential threat of severe danger to the
physical properties of the public or consumer's potable water system or of a pollution or
contamination which would have a protracted effect on the quality of the potable water
in the system.
L. "Health Division Officer" shall mean the Oregon State Health Division Officer, or
authorized agent.
10
M. "Potable water supply" shall mean any system of water supply intended or used for
human consumption or other domestic use.
(Ord. 9-82 § 1 (part), 1982.)
13.06.030 Cross-connections.
The installation or maintenance of a cross- connection which will endanger the water
quality of the potable water supply system of the city shall be unlawful and is prohibited.
Any such cross-connection now existing or hereafter installed is declared to be a public
hazard and the same shall be abated. The control or elimination of cross-connections
shall be in accordance with this chapter and in compliance with the Oregon
Administrative Rules chapter 333 Public Water Systems Section 42-230. The director
shall have the authority to establish requirements more stringent than state regulations
if he deems that the conditions so dictate. The city shall adopt rules and regulations as
necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter. The building official is authorized
to enforce the provisions of this chapter in the inspection of existing, new, and
remodeled buildings. (Ord. 9-82 § 1 (part), 1982.)
13.06.040 Use of backflow prevention devices.
A. No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained by the
city unless the water supply is protected as required by state law and regulation and this
chapter. Service of water to any premises shall be discontinued by the city if a backflow
prevention device required by this chapter is not installed, tested and maintained,
or if it is found that a backflow prevention device has been removed, by-passed, or if an
unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises. Service will not be restored until
such conditions or defects are corrected.
B. The customer's system should be open for inspection and tests at all reasonable
times to authorized representatives of the city to determine whether cross-connections
or other structural or sanitary hazards, including violations of these regulations, exist.
When such a condition becomes known, the director shall deny or immediately
discontinue service to the premises by providing for a physical break in the service line
until the customer has corrected the condition(s) in conformance with the state and city
statutes relating to plumbing and water supplies and the regulations adopted pursuant
thereto.
C. An approved backflow prevention device shall also be installed on each service line
to a customer's water system at or near the property line or immediately inside the
building being served; but, in all cases, before the first branch line leading off the
service line.
D. Backflow prevention devices shall be installed under circumstances including but not
limited to the following:
1. Premises having an auxiliary water supply;
11
2. Premises having cross-connections that are not correctable, or intricate planning
arrangements which make it impractical to ascertain whether or not cross-connections
exist;
3. Premises where entry is restricted so that inspections for cross-connections cannot
be made with sufficient frequency or at sufficiently short notice to assure that crossconnections
do not exist;
4. Premises having a history of cross- connections being established or reestablished;
5. Premises on which any substance is handled under pressure so as to permit entry
into the public water supply, or where a cross-connection could reasonably be expected
to occur. This shall include the handling of process waters and cooling waters;
6. Premises where materials of a toxic or hazardous nature are handled in such a way
that if back siphonage should occur, a serious health hazard might result;
7. The following types of facilities will fall into one of the above categories where a
backflow prevention device is required to protect the public water supply. A backflow
prevention device shall be installed at these facilities unless the city determines that no
hazard exists:
a. Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics,
b. Laboratories,
c. Metal plating industries,
d. Piers and docks,
e. Sewage treatment plants,
f. Food or beverage processing plants,
g. Chemical plants using a water process,
h. Petroleum processing or storage plants,
i. Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors,
j. Facilities with fire service lines as specified by Oregon State Health Division,
k. Others specified by the city.
E. The type of protective device required shall depend on the degree of hazard which
exists:
12
1. An air-gap separation or a reduced- pressure-principle backflow prevention device
shall be installed where the public water supply may be contaminated with sewage,
industrial waste of a toxic nature, or other contaminant which could cause a health or
system hazard.
2. In the case of a substance which may be objectionable but not hazardous to health, a
double check valve assembly, air-gap separation, or a reduced-pressure- principle
backflow prevention device shall be installed.
F. Backflow prevention devices required by this chapter shall be installed under the
supervision, and with the approval, of the city.
G. Any protective device required by this chapter shall be approved by the director.
H. These devices shall be furnished and installed by and at the expense of the
customer.
I. It shall be the duty of the customer-user at any premises where backflow prevention
devices are installed to have certified inspections and operational tests made at least
once per year. In those instances where the director deems the hazard to be great
enough, he may require certified inspections at more frequent intervals. These
inspections and tests shall be at the expense of the water user and shall be performed
by a certified tester approved by the director. It shall be the duty of the director to see
that these timely tests are made. The customer-user shall notify the director in advance
when the tests are to be undertaken so that the director or a representative may witness
the tests if so desired. These devices shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced at the
expense of the customer-user whenever said devices are found to be defective.
Records of such tests, repairs and overhaul shall be kept and copies sent to the
director.
J. No underground sprinkling device will be installed without adequate backflow
prevention devices.
K. Failure of the customer to cooperate in the installation, maintenance, testing or
inspection of backflow prevention devices required by this chapter or by state law shall
be grounds for the termination of water service to the premises.
(Ord. 9-82 § 1 (part), 1982.)
13.06.050 Cross-connection inspection.
A. No water shall be delivered to any structure hereafter built within the city of Sandy or
within areas served by city water until the same shall have been inspected by the city
for possible cross-connections and been approved as being free of same.
B. Any construction for industrial or other purposes which is classified as hazardous
facilities where it is reasonable to anticipate intermittent cross-connections, or as
determined by the director, shall be protected by the installation of one or more
13
backflow prevention devices at the point of service from the public water supply or any
other location designated by the city.
C. Inspections shall be made at the discretion of the director of all buildings, structures,
or improvements for the purpose of ascertaining whether cross-connections exist. Such
inspections shall be made by the city.
(Ord. 9-82 § 1 (part), 1982.)
13.06.060 Liability.
This chapter shall not be construed to hold the city responsible for any damage to
persons or property by reason of the inspection or testing herein, or the failure to
inspect or test or by reason of approval of any cross-connections. (Ord. 9-82 § 1 (part),
1982.)
13.06.070 Penalties.
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, refuses to comply with, or resists
the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter or the rules and regulations as
adopted by the city, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall for each offense be punished by a fine in a sum not exceeding five
hundred dollars or imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten days, or by both fine and
imprisonment. (Ord. 982 § 1 (part), 1982.)
Chapter 13.08
WATER SYSTEM-CONNECTION CHARGES AND RATES
13.08.010 Connection charges.
When an application for the use of water has been accepted, as provided for in Chapter
13.04, a connection charge for each living unit as established by the city council by
resolution, plus the cost of meter and connections, and installation charges at the city's
prevailing fee schedule, shall be paid for connections inside the city limits. The
connection fee for connections outside the city limits shall be set by the city council by
resolution for each living unit, plus the cost meter and connections and those charges
for the installation of the city's prevailing fee schedule. (Ord. 18-93 § 8, 1993: Ord. 387 §
1(A), 1987; Ord: 1480 § 1, 1980: Ord. 279 § 1, 1979: Ord. 3875 § 3, 1975: Ord. 973 § 2,
1973.)
13.08.020 Water Charges to Premises: Payment/Delinquent Charges.
All charges for furnishing water through the City's utility system with the exception of
rental premises, shall be chargeable to the premises where the water is supplied.
Charges for rental premises shall be charged to the owner of the premises who must
consent to responsibility for charges where water is supplied. Whenever any charge for
furnishing to any premises should not be paid within fifteen (15) days after the same
becomes due and payable, the water department may terminate water service to such
premises, and water shall not be furnished again thereto until all outstanding obligations
for water supplied to such premises have been paid in full. Written notice of termination
14
of water service for non-payment of water charges shall be given to the owner or
occupant by regular mail, or by posting on the premises at least ten (10) days in
advance of such termination of service. In the case of rental premises, the aforesaid
notice shall be given both to the tenant and to the owner of the premises. For the
purposes of this chapter, the terms "owner" and "tenant" shall have the meaning as
defined in ORS 91.705 (Ord. 18-93 § 9, 1993: Ord. 11-91 § 2, 1991: Ord. 3-87 § 1(B),
1987: Ord. 9-73 § 3, 1973; Ord. 2001-02 § Replaced in its entirety with Ord. 10, 2016)
13.08.050 Water rates.
A. Water rates, as permitted by this section are based upon actual costs of service, as
reflected in the methodologies contained in the city of Sandy Water Rates Study, dated
May, 1991.
B. The water rates permitted by this section include a number of components. These
components include the following:
1. A monthly service charge for each individual customer class;
2. A monthly service charge by meter size, with different rates for inside and outside city
patrons;
3. A volume charge for each one hundred cubic foot unit of consumption, based upon
individual customer classes;
4. An additional outside city patron payment, representing payments in lieu of real
property taxes. This payment is added to the volume charge of individual customer
classes for out of city patrons;
5. An inside/outside rate differential setting total outside city rates at the sum of fifty
percent over total inside city rates.
C. The monthly charges for individual water rate components shall be set by the city
council by resolution.
(Ord. 18-93 § 10, 1993; Ord. 13-92 § 1, 1992; Ord. 6-91 § 1, 1991: Ord. 9-90 § 1, 1990:
Ord. 3-87 § 1(D), 1987: Ord. 19-81 § 1, 1981: Ord. 14-80 § 2, 1980: Ord. 2-79 § 2,
1979: Ord. 973 § 1, 1973.)
13.08.060 Testing meters.
When any water consumer makes a complaint that the bill for any particular period is
excessive, the public works superintendent will, upon request, have such meter reread
and the service inspected for leaks. Should such consumer then desire that the meter
be changed or tested, he will be required to make a deposit in an amount established by
the city council by resolution to cover the cost of making such change or test. The meter
will then be changed or tested. Should the meter on test show a registration in excess of
three percent in favor of the city, the amount deposited will be refunded and the bill
adjusted accordingly. The excess registration not to exceed the two previous readings
15
shall be credited to the account. Where no error is found, the amount deposited will be
retained to cover the expense of such change or test. (Ord. 18-93 § 11, 1993: Ord. 973
§ 8, 1973.)
13.08.070 Use of funds.
Water service charges as and when collected shall be paid into a fund designated as
the water fund. Payment of the operational costs of the city's water system costs
associated with improvements of the city's water system shall be made from said funds.
Moneys received in this fund are to be invested by the city manager in such manner as
the council may from time to time direct. (Ord. 3-87 § 1(E), 1987: Ord. 1-80 § 1, 1980:
Ord. 2-76 § 1, 1976: Ord. 9-73 § 10, 1973.)
13.08.080 Water shut-off on failure to comply.
On failure to comply with the rules and regulations established herein, or any of them as
conditions to the use of water, or failure to pay water rates or other charges in the time
and manner provided, the water may be shut off until payment is made in the amount
due. Additionally, a reconnection fee will be charged for expenses of turning the service
off and on.
These reconnection fees shall be established by resolution by the city council. (Ord. 18-
93 § 12, 1993: Ord. 3-87 § 1(F), 1987; Ord. 8-82, 1982: Ord. 9-73 § 5, 1973.)
13.08.090 Violation-Penalty.
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall upon
conviction thereof be punished by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars or
imprisonment of not to exceed ten days, or both. (Ord. 9-73 § 9, 1973.)
Chapter 13.12
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM-RULES AND REGULATIONS2
13.12.010 Application for sewer connection or repair.
A. No private sewer or sewer connection shall be built, repaired, extended or connected
with any public sewer or drain unless and until an application has been made and plans
for same submitted to and approved by the building official and city council if necessary.
B. Any application for a sewer connection serving a nonresidential use that generates
more than ten equivalent residential units (as defined in Section 13.16.020 of this
chapter) of wastewater flow shall also require the approval of the city council. All
applications for sewer connection permits shall be made by the property owner or by the
person, firm, or company employed to perform the work. The plan shall show the whole
course of the private sewer from its connection with the house or building to the public
sewer and show the location of all branches.
C. In reviewing sewer connection applications the city council shall consider the
following:
16
1. The impact of the use of the capacity (both present and future) of the sewage
treatment plant;
2. The impact of the use on the sewer system and remaining capacity to serve other
undeveloped (but serviced) or re-developable property within the city;
3. The impact of the use on other municipal services;
4. Pending annexation applications;
5. The economic benefit to the community from the proposed use;
6. Assessed value of the proposed use;
7. Number and type of jobs generated.
(Ord. 5-88 § 1, 1988.)
13.12.020 Permit.
The building official shall issue a permit therefor upon payment of the application and
inspection, based on the city's sewer connection fee, which sum shall be paid and
collected for the city before the permit shall be issued or any construction or work
performed. (Ord. 3-73 § 2, 1973.)
13.12.030 Connection.
Wherever there is now or may hereafter be constructed in any street or easement, a
public sewer for the purpose of carrying off sewage within the city sewage system, the
owner(s) of improved property abutting on, adjacent to or along the side of such sewer
line and within two hundred feet of same, must connect and maintain a sewer
connection with such sewer if the property poses a public health risk due to a failing or
improperly maintained septic system as determined by county or state public health
officials. Whenever the building official shall notify in writing the owner or owners of
improved property as stated, it shall be the duty of the owner or owners to make a
sewer connection application and file plans therefor in the manner provided and
complete such connection within sixty days from the date of such notice, unless good
and sufficient reasons prevail, whereby the city council may approve an extension of
time. (Ord. 99-4, 1999: Ord. 3-73 § 3, 1973.)
13.12.040 Pipe specifications.
All sewer connections shall be made with sewer pipe not less than four inches in
diameter, of material approved by the building official. All sewer connections shall be
laid to straight line of grade not less than one-fourth inch per one foot of length.
Changes in line or grade shall not be made between the building and "Y" or "T" in the
main sewer except when necessary to avoid obstructions, and then it shall be made
only with suitable bends, but not the cutting or chipping of the pipe. (Ord. 3-73 § 4,
1973.)
17
13.12.050 Joints.
All joints shall be gas and watertight, in accordance with specification prescribed and
approved by the building official. (Ord. 3-73 § 5, 1973.)
13.12.060 Connections to the main sewer.
Where no branch is available within a reasonable distance, the sewer shall be tapped
and a hub shall be attached by a saddle to a hole cut in the pipe, which hub shall not
protrude past the inside wall of the pipe. All taps shall be made under the supervision of
the city engineer, public works superintendent, building official or someone under their
direction. If the city makes the connection, it shall be done in accordance with the city's
prevailing fee schedule. (Ord. 33-75 § 1, 1975: Ord. 3-73 § 6, 1973.)
13.12.070 Excavations.
All excavations in public streets and easements for sewer connections shall be
performed under the supervision and monitoring of the city engineer, public works
superintendent, building official or someone else under their direction. All trenches not
on streets and easements shall be carefully backfilled by tamping or puddling with water
as directed by the city engineer. The entire sewer connection shall meet the approval of
the building official before any sewage is allowed to pass through to the public sewer.
Reasonable notice shall be given to the city to inspect all sewer connections before their
completion and while said connections are still uncovered. If the excavation work is
done by the city, it shall be done in accordance with the city's prevailing fee schedule.
(Ord. 33-75 § 2, 1975: Ord. 3-73 § 7, 1973.)
13.12.080 Obstructions.
The building official shall advise the city council immediately and the city shall have the
right to refuse to issue a sewer connection permit, or the city shall have the right to
disconnect and plug any existing sewer connection in case it is found that any of the
following will be or have been discharged into the public sewer:
A. Ashes, cinders, sand, earth, coal, sawdust, wood chips, garbage, rubbish, rags,
metal or any other material, liquid or chemical that would form a deposit or obstruction
in the sewer or damage its flow capacity;
B. Grease, gasoline, oil, oil sludge, or other similar materials from wash racks, garages,
machine shops and other establishments. An adequate grease trap or catch basin
which shall be constructed to meet the approval of the building official and city engineer
shall be required in the sewer connection from all wash racks, garages, machine shops,
laundry, creamery, hotel, restaurant and other establishments that may waste grease,
gasoline, cleaning fluids, inflammable liquids and similar material;
C. Paints, asphalt, bitumen, coal tar and other similar substances;
D. Wheat, flour, grain, fruit pits, fruit skins, vegetable parings and other similar material,
except the waste liquid from same property screened and settled;
18
E. Garbage, tin cans, bottles, rubbish and other similar materials. These and all other
materials shall not be dumped into manholes or pump pits;
F. Any waste material or liquid which may obstruct or injure the sewers or which does
not yield readily to treatment by the process used in the sewage treatment plant. No
acid, corrosive liquid, germicide or antiseptic of such strength and quantity as to
interfere with bacterial action in the sewage treatment plant shall be discharged into
public sewers.
(Ord. 3-73 § 8, 1973.)
13.12.090 Separate connections.
Separate sewer connections shall be provided for each city lot and more than one in
case the building official determines that better service will be afforded or that the
system or treatment plant can be better operated. (Ord. 3-73 § 9, 1973.)
13.12.100 Septic tanks.
Where there are existing septic tanks in use or cesspools before the sewer connection
is required, the sewer connection shall not drain the same but it shall run direct from the
house or building soil pipe to the public sewer. Immediately after connection, the septic
tank or cesspool shall be completely filled with earth. All septic tanks shall be replaced
with sewer connections within sixty days from the time the sewer is available for hookup
unless for good and sufficient reason the city council grants an extension of time. (Ord.
3-73 § 10, 1973.)
13.12.110 Outdoor toilets.
No outdoor toilet or privy shall be permitted in the city except in an emergency situation
during a construction project or other unusual circumstances. Authorization for such
must be granted by the building official. (Ord. 3-73 § 11, 1973.)
13.12.120 Illegal hookups.
No spring, creek, surface water drainage, downspout, refrigerator or other receptacle in
which provisions are kept, open fixtures, steam exhaust boiler, blow-off, or drip pipes
shall be connected with the city sewer system without permission and the approval of
the building official. (Ord. 3-73 § 12, 1973.)
13.12.130 Unauthorized personnel.
No unauthorized person or persons shall enter or obstruct or damage any manhole,
sewer, pump station or anything pertaining to said sewer system. No unauthorized
person or persons shall enter the sewer treatment plant enclosure or structures or
tamper or interfere or damage same in any manner. No person or persons shall
interfere with or obstruct any city official or city employee when installing, operating,
repairing, maintaining or inspecting any sewer, manhole, pump station, or the sewage
treatment plant or when inspecting any private sewer connection. (Ord. 3-73 § 13,
1973.)
19
13.12.140 Replacements on private property.
The building official, the city engineer, public works superintendent or any other
authorized employee or person shall have the right to enter upon the premises and
enter any house or building within the city sewage system during normal working hours,
eight a.m. to five p.m., and except upon emergencies, the giving of twenty-four hour
notice, for the purpose of inspection of sewers, drains, traps and plumbing fixtures
connected therewith. If it is found from such inspection or otherwise that any provision
of law or ordinance is not being complied with in any respect, or that any part of the
drainage system is in need of cleaning out or repair, the building official or other city
representative shall immediately serve notice upon the owner and upon the tenant or
occupant, specifying the work to be done to make the installation, system or condition
comply with state law, Board of Health code and city ordinances and standards. (Ord. 3-
73 § 14, 1973.)
13.12.150 Appeal from official decision.
Appeal may be taken to the city council from any ruling or decision by the building
official either granting or refusing a sewer connection permit. (Ord. 3-73 § 15, 1973.)
13.12.160 Location map.
It shall be the duty of the city engineer to keep in his office complete sewer maps on
which shall be drawn, when laid, the location of each sewer connection with any
measurements necessary to show the location, depth and any other detail concerning
same. The sewer connection number shall be placed alongside each of the maps for
reference. (Ord. 33-75 § 3, 1975: Ord. 3-73 § 16, 1973.)
13.12.170 Violation-Penalty.
Any person, persons, firm, company or corporation violating the terms and conditions of
this chapter shall upon conviction thereof be punished by a fine not to exceed three
hundred dollars, or by imprisonment for not more than one hundred days, or both. (Ord.
3-73 § 17, 1973.)
13.12.180 Recovery of damages.
Any person or persons who, as a result of violating any of the provisions of this chapter,
cause any expenses, loss or damages to the city shall immediately become liable to the
city for the full sum of such expenses, loss or damages. The city council may, at its
discretion, instruct the city attorney to proceed against any such person or persons, in
any court of competent jurisdiction, in a civil action to be brought in the name of the city,
for the recovery of the full sum of any such expense, loss or damage sustained by the
city. (Ord. 3-73 § 18, 1973.)
Chapter 13.16
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM-CONNECTION FEES AND CHARGES
13.16.010 Authority and intent.
Pursuant to the statutes of the state and the powers granted in the Charter of the city,
20
the city declares its intention to continue operation and maintenance of sanitary sewers,
sewage pump stations, sewage treatment plants and outfall sewers; to extend and
expand the existing sewerage system of said city, and to reconstruct such existing
sanitary sewers, sewage pump stations, and sewage treatment plants as may be
deemed proper by the city. (Ord. 4-73 § 1, 1973.)
13.16.020 Definitions.
A. "BOD" (biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under the standard laboratory procedure in five
days at twenty degrees centigrade, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l).
B. "ERU" (denoting equivalent residential unit) shall mean the unit of sewage which
incurs the same cost for operation and maintenance as the average volume of domestic
waters discharged from a single-family residence in the sewage collection and
treatment service area. In the city one ERU shall be equivalent to ninety-two thousand
gallons/year (two hundred fifty gallons/day) of sewage flow, one hundred ninety lbs. of
BOD/year (two hundred fifty mg/l per day) and one hundred ninety lbs. of SS/year (two
hundred fifty mg/l per day).
C. "Sanitary sewer" means a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface
and groundwater are not intentionally admitted.
D. "Sewage" means a combination of the water-carried wastes, from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments.
E. "Sewage treatment plant" means any arrangement of devices and structures used for
treating sewage.
F. "Sewer" means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
G. "Sewerage system" means all publicly owned facilities for collecting, pumping,
treating and disposing of sewage.
H. "SS" (denoting suspended solids) means solids that either float on the surface of (or
are in suspension in) the water sewage or other liquids and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
(Ord. 5-88 § 2, 1988.)
13.16.030 Charges levied and imposed.
A. All houses, buildings or properties used for human occupation, employment,
recreation or other purposes which are required to connect to the sanitary sewer
collection system under the provisions of this chapter shall pay a systems development
charge based on the number of equivalent residential units (ERU) generated by the type
of use. ERUs for each type of use shall be calculated according to the following chart:
21
Type of Use ERUs
Single-family, duplex, triplex 1 per household unit
Multi-family (4 or more units) 0.7 per household unit
Manufactured homes 1 per household unit
Room and board facilities 1 per three tenants
Motels 1 per three motel units
Restaurants 1 per 8 seats
Taverns, bar/lounge 1 per 15 seats
Hospitals and similar institutions 1 per 3 beds
Auto service stations 1 per 3 pumps
Car washes 1 per 250 gallons/day of water
consumption
Theaters and other meeting places 1 per 250 seats
Churches 1 per 200 seats
Laundromats 1 per 2 washers
Bakeries 1 per 3 employees
Mortuaries 1 per 6 employees
Elementary schools and middle schools
without showers
1 per 40 students
Middle schools with showers and high
schools
1 per 20 students
Colleges 1 per 20 students
Office, retail 1 per 8 employees or 1,500 sq, ft, of
office space if 6,000 sq. ft. of retail
space, whichever results in the greater
number of units
22
Other commercial 1 per 8 employees or 250 gallons per
day of water consumption, whichever
results in the greater number of units
Industrial and high volume dischargers 1 per 250 gallons of metered wastewater
discharge per day. If metered
wastewater discharge is not available, 1
per 250 gallons per day of metered
water consumption or 1 per 8
employees, which-ever results in the
greater number of units
When calculating ERUs for all user classes except multi-family, fractions will be rounded
to the nearest full ERU. Multi-family ERUs will be calculated to the nearest tenth.
For expansions of existing uses a fractional ERU may be calculated based on the table
above. In all other cases the minimum number of ERUs will be one.
Where there is no user class established for a new customer, the city manager shall
evaluate and assign the appropriate numbers of ERUs.
(Ord. 18-96 §§ 1 - 3, 1997: Ord. 5-88 § 3, 1988.)
13.16.040 Rates.
The bimonthly service charge for all sanitary sewer system users shall be reviewed
annually. Sewer rates shall be set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 9-90 § 2, 1990:
Ord. 2-87 § 1, 1987: Ord. 20-81 § 1, 1981; Ord. 1680 § 1, 1980; Ord. 479 § 1, 1979;
Ord. 473 § 4, 1973.)
13.16.050 Payment and collections.
A. Every person subject to a charge hereunder shall pay the same when due to the
administrative office.
B. Sewer service charges as and when collected shall be paid into a fund designated as
the "sewer revenue fund." Payment of the costs of sewage collection and treatment,
maintenance of sewage facilities, repairs and administrative costs therefor shall be
made from said fund.
C. Sewer service charges as hereinbefore provided shall be collected monthly and if not
paid on or before thirty days after the date of billing, said charges shall be deemed to be
delinquent.
D. The collection of service charges when delinquent and enforcement of payment
thereof may be accomplished by withholding the delivery of water to any premises or
occupant served with sewage disposal facilities when such a delinquency as defined in
23
subsection C of this section exists.
(Ord. 6-85 § 2, 1985; Ord. 4-73 § 5, 1973.)
13.16.060 Enforcement.
A. The administrative office of the city may use such means of collection as may be
provided by the laws of the state or permitted by the charter and ordinances of the city.
B. Any delinquencies may be certified to the tax assessor of Clackamas County and be
by him assessed against the premises serviced and shall thereupon be collected and
paid over in the same manner as other taxes are certified, collected and paid over.
C. In the event it becomes necessary to certify the service charges and delinquent
charges established because of the nonpayment thereof, there shall be added to such
charges a penalty in the amount of ten percent thereof.
(Ord. 4-73 § 6, 1973.)
13.16.070 Protection from damage.
No person or persons shall unlawfully, maliciously, willfully, or as a result of gross
negligence on his or their part break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with
any structure, facility, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sanitary sewer
system of the city. (Ord. 4-73 § 7, 1974.)
13.16.080 Disbursement.
The council, by resolution or motion duly adopted, shall from time to time, and not less
than once each fiscal year, direct the transfer of funds from the account to all or any of
the following:
A. The account or accounts for the construction, operation or maintenance of the
sewerage system;
B. The account or accounts for the payment of principal and interest on maturing sewer
bonds;
C. The account or accounts established for a sinking fund to meet future interest and
principal obligations on sewer bonds.
(Ord. 4-73 § 8, 1973.)
13.16.090 Powers and authority of inspectors.
The building official, city engineer and other duly authorized employees or
representatives of the city shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose
of inspection in accordance with this chapter during normal working hours, eight a.m. to
five p.m., and except upon emergencies, the giving of twenty-four hour notice. (Ord. 4-
73 § 9, 1973.)
13.16.100 Violation-Penalty.
A. Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of Section 13.16.070 is guilty of
24
disorderly conduct and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not to
exceed three hundred dollars or by imprisonment for not more than one hundred days,
or both.
B. Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter, excepting
Section 13.16.070, shall upon conviction thereof be punished by a fine of not to exceed
one hundred dollars or imprisonment of not to exceed ten days, or both.
(Ord.4-73 § 10, 1973.)
13.16.110 Recovery of damages.
Any person or persons who, as the result of violating any of the provisions of this
chapter, cause any expenses, loss or damage to the city, shall immediately become
liable to the city for the full sum of such expense, loss or damage. The council may, at
its discretion, instruct the city attorney to proceed against any such person or persons,
in any court of competent jurisdiction, in a civil action to be brought in the name of the
city, for the recovery of the full sum of any such expense, loss or damage sustained by
the city. (Ord. 4-73 § 11, 1973.)
Chapter 13.18
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
13.18.00 Intent
The intent of these regulations is to:
A. Minimize storm water runoff
B. Reduce storm water peak flows and volumes to pre-development conditions
C. Increase groundwater recharge and evapotranspiration
D. To minimize the discharge of pollutants to receiving water bodies
13.18.10 Definitions.
? Best Management Practice (BMP) non-structural: Strategies implemented to
manage storm water runoff that focus on pollution prevention such as alternative site
design, minimizing impervious surfaces, land use ordinances, education and good
housekeeping measures.
Best Management Practice (BMP) structural: Engineered or manufactured devices or
structures implemented to manage, treat or reduce storm water runoff and pollution.
? BOD: Biochemical Oxygen Demand, the amount of oxygen used by
microorganisms in the breakdown or decay of organic matter in a water body.
25
? Building: Any structure for the shelter, support or enclosure of persons,
animals, or property. When separated by dividing walls without openings, each portion
of such building, so separated, shall be deemed a separate building.
? Detention: The temporary storage and slow release of storm water following a
precipitation event by means of an excavated pond, enclosed depression, piping or
tanks. Detention is used for storm water storage and peak flow reduction.
? Developer: The owners of property or their agents or contractors, or their
successors and assigns, who have undertaken or are proposing development.
Development: Any artificial change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to, construction of buildings or other structures, excavation,
vegetation removal, mining, dredging, filling, grading, compaction, paving, drilling,
stream alteration or channeling, or other similar activities. For purposes of this section
development also includes the redevelopment of existing developed sites.
? Director: means the City of Sandy Public Works Director and the director's duly
appointed designees.
? Impervious Surface Areas: Areas of impervious material including but not
limited to: roofs, driveways, patios, sidewalks, parking areas, sports courts, non-porous
concrete or asphalt streets
? Impervious Surface: A surface that cannot be penetrated by water, preventing
infiltration and generating runoff.
? Impervious: Any material that impedes or prevents the natural filtration of water
into the soil.
? Imperviousness: The degree to which a site or material is impervious.
? Infiltration: The process or rate at which water percolates from the land
surface into the ground. Infiltration is also a general category of BMP designed to collect
runoff and allow it to flow through the ground.
? Land disturbing activity: Any clearing, grading, stripping, excavation, fill, or
any combination thereof.
? Lot: A parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by one main building,
together with any accessory buildings.
? Off-site storm water facility: Any storm water facility located outside the
boundaries of a specific development site but designed to manage storm water
discharge from that development.
26
? On-site storm water facility: Any storm water management facility necessary
to manage storm water within an individual development project and located wholly
within the project boundaries.
? Point Source: Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, including but
not limited to any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container,
rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation, landfill leachate collection system,
vessel or other floating craft from which pollutants are or may be discharged.
Pollutant: Any dredge spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, oil, grease, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical waste, chemical waste, industrial waste,
biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment,
rock, sand, cellar dirt, agriculture and industrial waste, and the characteristics of the
wastewater (i.e., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, odor).
? Porous pavement and paving: Alternatives to conventional asphalt and
concrete utilizing a variety of porous media that allows water to infiltrate.
? Public Works Department: The City of Sandy Public Works Department.
? Redevelopment: Any development that requires demolition or removal of
existing structures or impervious surfaces on a site, and replacement with new
development, structures and impervious surfaces. Maintenance activities such as
pavement overlays of existing impervious surfaces are not considered redevelopment.
? Retention: The collection and storage of storm water runoff without subsequent
discharge to surface waters.
Site Expansion: The addition of new building(s), structures, parking lot(s), or any other
new impervious surface to the site. Construction of any new impervious surface on an
area previously pervious, which does not meet the definition of redevelopment, as defined
in this section shall be considered as expansion.
? Site: That portion of the lot or parcel upon which a building and appurtenances
are to be placed or are already existing, including adequate areas for parking,
maneuvering, driveways, clearance, and proper drainage.
? Storm Frequency: The average recurrence interval, in years, between rainfall
events, which equal or exceed the given event. The magnitude and frequency of the
anticipated rainfall events are based on statistical data recorded and maintained by the
National Climatic Data Center. For example a 2-year frequency storm is a storm of an
intensity which has a 50% chance of occurring in any year, or is expected to occur on
the average, at least once in two (2) years, and of a duration, which will produce the
peak rate of runoff for the watershed of interest.
27
? Storm Water Conveyance: Any feature of the landscape or earth, manmade or
natural, which collects and or carries water in a concentrated flow.
? Storm Water Management Plan: A plan designed and submitted in
accordance with the City of Portland Storm water Management Manual, (September
2002 or latest revisions) to minimize water quality impacts, prevent off-site sediment
transport and manage storm water runoff.
? Storm Water Management: The qualitative and quantitative measures for
managing storm water runoff. Qualitative measures consist of vegetative, structural, and
other measures which manage or treat pollutants carried or generated by surface runoff.
Quantitative measures consist of vegetative and structural measures which manage the
increased volume and rate of surface runoff caused by man-made changes to the land
and have the effect of maintaining the predevelopment patterns of flood magnitude and
frequency.
? Storm water Runoff: The water from precipitation that flows across the land
surface and is not infiltrated, evaporated, or otherwise stored within the contributing
drainage area of a site.
? Surface Water Management System: All natural and constructed facilities
used to regulate the quantity and quality of surface water, including drainage
easements, culverts, storm drains, catch basins, drainage ditches, natural drainage
ways, stream corridors, rivers, ponds, wetlands and impoundments.
? TSS: Total Suspended Solids
13.18.20 Applicability.
It is the policy of the city that all developed land within the city limits shall have sufficient
storm water management systems in place to provide adequate protection of life,
property and natural resources. To this end, as a minimum, all land disturbing activity
subject to this ordinance, shall provide sufficient management of post-development
runoff from the 2-year, 5-year 10-year, and 25-year frequency storms such that the
discharge rates of post-development storm water runoff do not exceed the predevelopment
rates. In certain cases, depending on the capacity of downstream
drainage facilities, (or in cases where the storm drainage system receiving runoff from
the site is only designed to accept street runoff only), a higher standard of retention
and/or detention may be required by the City.
13.18.30 Area of application.
A. Exemptions:
1. Developments such as subdivisions of planned unit developments with city-approved
storm water management systems that meet the standards of this ordinance.
2 Single-family dwellings on legal lots of record
28
3. Areas of the city, as determined by the director, where flow control is not needed or
desirable.
Water quality treatment facilities may be required for land use developments, under any of
the following conditions.
A. Any portion of the development site is within the FSH overlay district.
B The development may otherwise cause significant degradation of water quality in the
receiving stream as a result of erosion, sedimentation or transport of water-born pollutants
without detention or treatment.
C. The development site has an existing or proposed impervious surface area greater than
5,000 square feet.
D. The development involves impervious parking or storage areas, fuel storage or
dispensing areas; vehicle storage, wash, maintenance or dismantling areas; or
mechanical equipment storage or maintenance areas.
E. The development involves site expansion.
F. Infiltration is proposed for storm water management.
13.18.40 Acceptable storm water quality facilities.
The following storm water quality treatment methods and facilities are acceptable to the
City:
A. Detention and sedimentation: Detention of storm water runoff allows for the
settling of fine particles and sediment, and the pollutants associated with these
particles.
B. Filtration: Filtration of storm water is provided by flowing water through various
types of media, such as vegetation, sand or synthetic materials, which absorb and filter
out pollutants.
C. Retention/Infiltration: Retention or infiltration facilities allow for temporary storage
and disposal of storm water by allowing the water to percolate into the ground.
D. Oil and Water Separation: Various types of commercially-available oil and water
separators that use sedimentation, separate chambers, baffles, plates and or physicalchemical
processes to separate water from oil products.
Different types of storm water facilities can be combined to meet the performance
standard. Other storm water quality facilities not included in the above list may be
approved by the city engineer. Design and performance criteria for acceptable storm
29
water quality facilities are contained in Storm water Management Manual, City of
Portland, (September, 2002).
13.18.50 General design standards.
A. The location of the facility shall be consistent with applicable standards of the
Sandy Development Code.
B. The facility shall be designed by a registered Professional Engineer.
C. On-site or off-site storm water management facilities shall be located as close as is
practicable to the development, and storm water management facilities shall avoid a
negative impact on nearby streams, wetlands, groundwater, and other water bodies.
D. Direct storm water discharges to stream channels, seasonal drainages and active
waterways are to be avoided. Where soil conditions permit and where runoff velocities
and erosive forces can be minimized or eliminated storm water discharges should travel
overland to take maximum advantage of infiltration opportunities.
E. All local, state, and federal permit requirements related to implementation of storm
water management facilities must be met by the owner/operator prior to facility use.
F. Discharges from on-site facilities shall be conveyed via an approved drainage facility
or storm water conveyance.
G The quality of storm water leaving the site after development shall be equal to or
better than the quality of storm water leaving the site before development, to the
maximum extent practicable, based on the following criteria:
1. Water quality control facilities required for development shall be designed, installed
and maintained in accordance with the Storm water Management Manual, which is
based on achieving at least 70% removal of the Total Suspended Solids (TSS) from the
flow entering the facility for the design storm specified in the Storm water Management
Manual.
2 Land use activities that may be pollution sources shall be required to implement
additional Best Management Practices for pollution control, including but not limited to,
those management practices specified in the Storm water Management Manual.
3. Facilities shall be designed to safely conduct the less frequent, higher flows through
or around facilities without damage to the facilities.
4. Storm water for any parcel created after the effective date of this Chapter shall be
fully treated on-site or within the original parcel from which the new parcel was created,
or in a privately developed off-site facility with sufficient capacity, as determined by the
City.
30
13.18.60 Storm water quality treatment performance standard.
All developments shall treat 80 percent of the average annual volume of storm water
runoff for the site. This standard can be met by installing storm water quality treatment
facilities to satisfy the following design criteria:
A. Detention based storm water quality control: The required design volume for
detention-based control is equal to the entire runoff volume that would occur from a site
with a 1.2–inch, 12-hour storm. The draw-down time for the entire volume must be
greater than or equal to 48 hours. For the lower half of the detention volume, the drawdown
time must be greater than 36 hours. Additional design criteria for inlet and outlet
spacing and design, as well as guidelines for calculating volumes, are contained in the
Public Works Department Standards.
B. Flow-through based storm water quality control: the required design flow rate for
treatment is the runoff that would be produced from a rainfall intensity of 0.2 inches/hour
for on-line facilities, and 0.11 inches/hour for off-line facilities. This rate must be
maintainable for a minimum of three hours. Additional design criteria for flow calculation,
as well as specific treatment criteria for various types of storm water facilities (e.g.,
infiltration and storm water filters), are contained in the Public Works Standards.
C. Combination detention based on flow-through based storm water quality control:
Detention facilities may be combined with flow-through facilities. The applicant must
demonstrate that the combined system could sufficiently treat storm water runoff for the
runoff produced by the flow-through treatment rates of 0.2 inches/hour (on-line
facilities), occurring for a three-hour period.
Storm water quality facilities selected for the site shall be appropriate to treat expected
storm water pollutants based on the intended use of the site under full build-out
conditions.
13.18.70 Pretreatment for storm water infiltration systems.
When proposed for use as a storm water quality facility, infiltration systems shall include
appropriate pretreatment to remove pollutants expected from the intended use of the
site under full build-out conditions.
13.18.80 Review procedures.
Review of storm water management plans is not a limited land use decision and shall be
processed in the same manner as a building permit.
13.18.90 Approval or denial of storm water management plan.
After receipt of a complete storm water management plan, the director may order a
technical review of the plan by a qualified professional consultant- selected by the City.
The cost of any such review shall be borne by the applicant.
31
A. Following completion of the technical review of the plan, the director shall:
1. Approve the application and indicate on the plans in writing if the plan as submitted
conforms to the applicable technical guidelines. The City of Portland Storm water
Management Manual shall be the recognized authority; or
2. Return the plan to the applicant for required revisions.
B. The approved plan shall not be changed, modified, or altered without authorization
room the director and shall be constructed as planned.
1. Such approval shall be a condition of subdivision or site plan approval.
13.18.100 Submission requirements.
The application shall provide sufficient information to evaluate the applicant’s intent to
include on-site storm water quality controls in order to reduce or eliminate the discharge
of sediments and other storm water pollutants to the storm sewer or natural drainage
channel (e.g., stream). The information contained in a storm water management plan
shall include, at a minimum:
A. Site plan showing:
1. Location of the development site showing property lines, adjacent roads and streets
and the development site boundaries
2. North arrow, scale, date
3. Locations of the storm water quality facilities (including inlet and outlet structures)
with relation to buildings and other structures
4. Storm sewer system for the site
5. Natural watercourses (e.g., streams, wetlands, bogs and marshes) affecting the site
6. Existing and proposed drainage channels (temporary and permanent) and direction of
flow
7. Direction of surface water flows
8. Identification of any rivers, streams, wetlands, channels, ditches, or other
watercourses and associated setbacks on and immediately adjacent to the development
site regulated by Chapter 13.60
9. Delineation of any wetlands, including both inventoried wetlands (LWI) and locally
significant wetlands (LSW).
32
10. Documentation of conformance with applicable Sandy Development Code
provisions.
B. Topographic Plan, certified by a registered engineer or land surveyor showing:
1. Topographic map delineating the drainage area served by each storm water quality
facility
2. Calculations and estimated volume to be captured, conveyed and treated by each
facility
3. The size and physical configuration (with supporting calculations) of each facility
4. Design details for any flow bypass or diversion devices.
In addition any data required for submission in the City of Portland Storm water
Management Manual may also be required.
C. Submittals for storm water management facilities, including construction and
installation requirements, and manufacturer’s data, as appropriate.
D. A statement of the intended use of the site for full build-out conditions and the
appropriateness of the selected storm water quality facilities for treating the storm water
pollutants expected in relation to the land use.
E. The maintenance methods and frequencies necessary to ensure optimum
performance of the storm water quality facilities over their projected life. Following a
review of this information, the City shall work with the developer to determine
maintenance responsibilities, and may require a maintenance agreement for the
proposed storm water quality facilities.
13.18.110 Applicant’s responsibility & maintenance.
A. Maintenance of private storm water quality system shall be the responsibility of the
property owner. Maintenance responsibility shall include all elements of the system up
to the point of connection with the public storm water system. Such connection shall be
subject to the City’s approval.
B. Maintenance requirements shall be specified in an approved maintenance plan at the
time of project acceptance.
C. Private storm water quality facilities are subject to periodic inspection by the City to
ensure proper maintenance and performance.
13.18.120 Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of storm water management required by this ordinance is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on common engineering and scientific
33
practices. This chapter does not imply that areas approved for development will be free
from surface water stagnation or non-point source pollution or that all water treatment
projects to control the quantity and quality of runoff can be constructed cost-effectively.
This chapter shall not create city liability for damage resulting from reliance on the
provisions of this Section or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
13.18.130 Referenced regulations.
All referenced regulations are available as specified below:
A Storm water Management Manual. The Storm water Management Manual is
maintained by the Public Works Department and is available for review at City Hall.
Chapter 13.20
Stormwater Utility
(Ord. 05, 2008)
13.20.010 Intent and scope.
A. Pursuant to the statutes of the state of Oregon and the powers granted in the Charter
of the city, the Council declares its intent to acquire, own, construct, reconstruct,
improve, equip, operate, maintain and repair stormwater management systems within
the city limits consistent with city policy, intergovernmental agreements and state law.
Stormwater management systems are defined as those natural or man-made facilities
used to convey stormwater from public or private places to appropriate destinations with
minimal adverse impact. Included in the stormwater management system are drainage
ditches, swales, culverts, manholes, pipes, detention ponds, streams, creeks, sumps,
storage facilities, curbs, gutters, catchment basins, pump stations, and any other facility
necessary for the conveyance or treatment of stormwater.
B. The Council finds, determines and declares the necessity of providing for the city’s
stormwater management systems by the formation of a stormwater utility.
C. Prohibited Activities. No person shall cause pollution of any waters of the city’s
stormwater management system or place or cause to be placed any wastes in a
location where such wastes are likely to escape or be carried into the waters of the
city’s stormwater management system by any means. Wastes which are unlawful to
discharge or cause to be discharged directly or indirectly into the city stormwater
management system shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
1. Any discharge having a visible sheen such as, but not limited to, petroleum-based
products;
2. Any discharge having a pH of less than 6.0 standard units (S.U.) or greater than 9.0
S.U.;
3. Any discharge that contains toxic chemicals in toxic concentrations;
34
4. Any discharge that contains visible floating solids;
5. Any discharge which causes or may cause visible discoloration (including, but not
limited to, dyes and inks) of the receiving waters;
6. Any discharge which causes or may cause damage to the city’s stormwater
management system;
7. Any discharge which causes interference in the city’s stormwater management
system system;
8. Any discharge which causes or may cause a nuisance or a hazard to the city’s
stormwater management system, city personnel or the receiving waters;
9. Any discharge with a temperature greater than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit;
10. Any discharge (other than noncontact cooling water) from commercial or industrial
operations such as, but not limited to, concrete waste, rug and carpet cleaning waste, or
paint clean-up waste.
11. Any discharge containing human or animal waste or other waste intended for the
sanitary sewer system.
13.20.020 Definitions
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions contained in this section
shall govern the construction of this chapter.
A. Development shall be as defined in SMC 13.18.10
B. Director shall mean the City Director of Public Works or the person designated by the
Director.
C. Duplex shall be as defined in SMC 17.10.30 B (3).
D. Equivalent Residential Unit (ERU) shall mean an area which is estimated to place
approximately equal demand on the public storm drainage facilities as defined in SMC
17.10.30 B (1). One (1) ERU shall be equal to 2,750 square feet of impervious surface.
E. Impervious Surfaces shall be as defined in SMC 13.18.10.
F. Improved Property shall mean any area which has been altered such that the runoff
from the site is greater than that which could historically have been expected. Such a
condition shall be determined by the Director.
G. Manufactured Home Park shall be as defined in SMC 17.10.30 B (7) as "Mobile
home court, park or subdivision".
35
H. Multiple-family unit (MFU) shall be as defined in SMC 17.10.30 B (6) as a "Multi-
Family Dwelling ".
I. Open Drainage way shall mean a natural or constructed path, ditch or channel which
has the specific function of transmitting natural stream water or storm water from a point
of higher elevation to a point of lower elevation.
J. Person responsible shall mean the owner, agent, occupant, lessee, tenant, contract
purchaser or other person having possession or control of property or the supervision of
an improvement on the property.
K. Runoff Control shall mean any measure approved by the Director that reduces storm
water runoff from land surfaces on which development exists.
L. Single Family Dwelling (SFD) shall be as defined in SMC 17.10.30 B (1) as "dwelling,
single-detached” or individual units of "Condominiums". A SFD is presumed to have
2,750 square feet of impervious surface area for purposes of this chapter. The term
SFD shall be inclusive of those units identified as detached single-family residences,
(attached, detached, zero-lot line), unit ownerships, and condominiums, and etc.
M. Storm Drainage Facilities shall mean any structure(s) or configuration of the ground
that is used or by its location becomes a place where storm water flows or is
accumulated including, but not limited to, pipes, sewers, gutters, manholes, catch
basins, ponds, open drainage-ways and their appurtenances. Tickle Creek, No-Name
Creek, their tributaries and creeks excluded by action of the Council are not storm
drainage facilities.
N. Stormwater shall mean water from precipitation, surface or subterranean water from
any source, drainage and non-septic waste water.
13.20.030 Findings
A. The City provides a valuable public service by providing storm drainage facilities for
the collection and disposal of storm water discharged from properties and public rightof-
ways within the City. The storm drainage facilities constitute a public utility owned
and operated by the City. The utility exists for the benefit of any person within the City
who desires public storm drainage facilities available for the diversion, collection and/or
disposal of storm drainage and other runoff water from the person's property and
represents a municipal service in a developed urban environment which is essential to
the public health, safety and welfare.
B. Persons who use the public storm drainage facilities ought to be charged fees that
reflect the costs of the use relative to the management, maintenance, extension and
construction of the public storm drainage facility as a public utility in the City.
C. Accordingly, the structure of the storm drainage utility is intended to be a fee for
service and not a charge against property. Although this structure is intended to
36
constitute a service fee, even if it is viewed as a fee against property or against the
person responsible, as a direct consequence of ownership of that property, the utility's
fee structure should allow the person responsible to have the ability to control the
amount of the fee. Similarly, the utility fee structure should reflect the actual cost of
providing the service. The actual costs ma3y include all costs the utility might incur were
it in private ownership.
D. Persons using water from the City potable water facilities use substantial amounts of
water for irrigating lawns and gardens, washing structures, sidewalks, driveways and
parking lots, and for other activities which result in the discharge of runoff into the public
storm drainage facilities. These uses of water demonstrate a substantial relationship
between persons' use of these water facilities and their use of the public storm drainage
facilities.
13.20.040 Stormwater management policies
A. The City shall maintain public storm drainage facilities located on City property, City
right-of-way or City easements. Public storm drainage facilities to be managed by the
City include, but are not limited to;
1. Open drainageways, swales and detention ponds when located on City property, City
right-of-way or City easement;
2. Piped drainage systems and related appurtenances which have been designed and
constructed expressly for use by the general public and accepted by the Director;
3. Roadside drainage ditches and swales along improved and unimproved City streets;
4. Flood control facilities (levees, dikes, overflow channels, detention basins, retention
basins, dams, pump stations, groundwater recharging basins, etc.) that have been
designed and constructed expressly for use by the general public and accepted by the
City.
5. Stormwater management, conveyance, treatment and detention facilities serving
multiple single-family residences under separate ownership.
B. Storm drainage facilities not to be maintained by the City include, but are not limited
to:
1. Stormwater management facilities not located on City property, City right-of-way, or
City easement;
2. Private parking lot stormwater management facilities;
3. Roof, footing, and area drains;
37
4. Stormwater management facilities not designed and constructed for use by the
general public;
5. Driveway approach culverts;
6. Stormwater management, conveyance, treatment and detention facilities serving
sites under single ownership.
13.20.050 Establishment of a stormwater utility fee.
There is established a stormwater utility fee to be paid by the account holder for each
developed property within the corporate limits of the city. Such fee shall not be imposed
in amounts greater than that which is necessary, in the judgment of the council, to
provide sufficient funds to properly acquire, construct, equip, operate, maintain and
repair the city’s storm sewer systems. Fees for users shall be based upon impervious
surface area and individual mitigation efforts, if any. The council, by resolution, shall
establish the amount and effective date of the fee and may, from time to time, by
resolution change the amount of the fee.
13.20.060 Use of stormwater utility fee.
There is established a stormwater fund, and all stormwater utility fees collected by the
city shall be paid into the fund. Such revenues shall be used for the acquisition,
construction, operation, maintenance and repair (including renewal, replacement and
improvement) of the city’s stormwater management system. To the extent that the fees
collected may not be sufficient to properly meet the expenses of the stormwater
management system, the cost of same may be paid from other city funds as may be
determined by the council, but the council may order the reimbursement to such fund if
additional stormwater utility funds are collected thereafter. The fees collected by virtue
of this chapter shall not be used for general or other governmental purposes of the city
except to pay for the equitable share of the cost of accounting, management and other
administrative costs attributable to the stormwater management system.
13.20.070 Calculation of stormwater utility fee.
A. The amount of the monthly stormwater utility fee shall be determined by resolution
approved by the council based upon the amount of impervious surface per location.
B. All single-family residential users shall be deemed to have two thousand seven
hundred fifty square feet of impervious surface area.
C. Whenever a non-single-family residential stormwater utility customer takes measures
to mitigate the effect of storm water flow from the impervious surface of their site, the
public works director, shall upon written request determine the percent of impervious
surface which has been reduced, eliminated or mitigated and a proportional reduction in
the stormwater utility fee shall be made, but in no event shall the fee be reduced more
than thirty-three percent.
38
D. The stormwater utility fee shall not be imposed on impervious surfaces of a public
street, road or highway.
13.20.080 Initiation of utility service.
Utility service will not be initiated for a new account, for a new account holder, or for the
reinstatement of an existing account in which service has been terminated, without a
written request from the account holder providing information deemed necessary by the
finance director and the payment of a deposit, if any, in an amount and under terms and
conditions determined by the council.
13.20.090 Billings and collection.
A. The stormwater utility fee shall be billed and collected with the monthly city utility bill.
B. Stormwater utility fees as hereinbefore provided shall be collected monthly and if not
paid on or before thirty days after the date of billing, said charges shall be deemed to be
delinquent.
C. The collection of service charges when delinquent and enforcement of payment
thereof may be accomplished by withholding the delivery of water to any premises or
occupant served by the stormwater management system when such a delinquency as
defined in subsection B of this section exists.
D. Any charge due hereunder which is not paid when due may be recovered from the
account holder in an action at law by the city.
E. The stormwater utility fee shall be due when the account holder receives service from
the stormwater management system.
F. For purposes of this section any site with impervious surface coverage is considered
to be served by the stormwater management system
13.20.100 Administration.
A. The public works director shall be responsible for the administration of this chapter
(except for the billing and collection of funds), to include the development of
administrative procedures, maintenance programs, capital improvements, operations
and maintenance standards, and related activities.
B. The finance director shall be responsible for the billing and collection of funds.
13.20.110 Violations.
A. Any customer that violates any of the provisions in this chapter shall be subject to an
enforcement action using any of the remedies and sanctions that are authorized in this
chapter or state law. The director shall determine which enforcement action to take to
address the violation.
B. When the director finds that a customer has violated or continues to violate any
provision of this chapter, a stormwater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or
39
any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may serve upon that
customer a written notice of violation. Within ten days of the receipt of this notice, an
explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention
thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the customer to the
director. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the customer of liability for any
violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this
section shall limit the authority of the city to take any action, including emergency
actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation.
Footnotes:
1. For provisions relating to systems development charges, see Ch. 15.28 of this code.
2. For the statutory authority of a city to construct a sewage system partially within and
partially outside its limits, see ORS 224.020; for provisions regulating subsurface
sewage disposal, see ORS 454.605.
1
TITLE 15
BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Chapter 15.04 BUILDING CODE .............................................................................. 1
Chapter 15.06 MOBILE HOME PLACEMENT PERMITS ..................................... 9
Chapter 15.08 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES ........................ 9
Chapter 15.10 DERELICT BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES ............................ 19
Chapter 15.20 CURBS, SIDEWALKS AND UNDERGROUND UTILITIES* .... 32
Chapter 15.22 UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS ..................................... 35
Chapter 15.24 HOUSE NUMBERING .................................................................... 39
Chapter 15.28 SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT FEES ................................................. 39
Chapter 15.30 DARK SKY ORDINANCE ............................................................... 46
Chapter 15.32 SIGNS (Ord. 08, 2007; Amended by Ord. 04, 2010; Ord. 11, 2011.)
........................................................................................ Error! Bookmark not defined.
Chapter 15.34 DISPOSAL OF DEBRIS FROM CONSTRUCTION SITES’ ...... 76
Chapter 15.35 OBLIGATIONS OF BUILDERS AND LAND DIVIDERS TO CLEAN UP
SIDEWALKS AND ROADWAYS ............................................................................. 76
Chapter 15.36 MUNICIPAL LIEN SEARCH FEES ............................................... 77
Chapter 15.42 ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES ................................................ 78
Chapter 15.44 EROSION CONTROL REGULATIONS (Ord. 2002-12) ........... 79
Chapter 15.04
BUILDING CODE
15.04.010 Administration and enforcement.
The city shall provide for the administration of all plan-checking, permit and inspection
programs that have been delegated by the state. The city program is applicable to
public buildings, including state buildings, as well as private buildings, as modified by
Sections 15.04.010 to 15.04.160. The standards applicable to buildings shall be as
listed in Section 15.04.120. (Ord. 98-12 § 1 (part), 1998.)
15.04.020 Title.
These regulations shall be known as the "city of Sandy building code," may be cited as
such and will be referred to herein as "this code." (Ord. 98-12 § 1 (part), 1998.)
15.04.030 Purpose.
This code will establish uniform performance standards providing safeguards for health,
safety, welfare, comfort and security of these occupants and users of buildings in the
city of Sandy and for the use of modern methods, devices, materials, techniques, and
practicable maximum energy conservation. (Ord. 98-12 § 1 (part), 1998.)
15.04.040 Scope.
This code shall apply to the construction, alternation, moving, demolition, repair,
maintenance and work associated with any building or structure except those located in
2
a public way. Where, in any specific case, different sections of this code specify
different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive
shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific
requirement, the specific requirement shall control. (Ord. 98-12 § 1 (part), 1998.)
15.04.050 Definitions.
For the purpose of the code, the following definition shall apply: "Building official" means
the duly appointed officer or other designated authority charged with the administration
and enforcement of this code, and includes the building official's duly authorized
deputies, officers, and inspectors. (Ord. 98-12 § 1 (part), 1998.)
15.04.060 Alternate materials and methods.
The provisions of this code are not intended to prevent the use of any alternate material,
design or method of construction not specifically prescribed in this code, provided such
alternate has been reviewed and its use authorized by the building official. The building
official may approve any such alternate material, design or method, provided the
building official specifically finds the proposed material, design or method complies with
the provisions of this code and that is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent
of that prescribed in this code in suitability, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance,
durability, safety and sanitation. The building official shall require that evidence or proof
be submitted to substantiate any claims that may be made regarding the alternate
materials, designs or methods. The details of any approval of any alternate material,
design or method shall be recorded and entered in the files of the agency. (Ord. 98-12 §
1 (part), 1998.)
15.04.070 Modifications.
When there are practical difficulties in carrying out the provisions of this code, the
building official may grant modifications provided the building official finds the
modification is in conformance with the intent and purpose of this code and that such
modification does not lessen any fire-protection requirements nor the structural integrity
of the building involved. Any action granting modification shall be recorded in the files of
the building division. (Ord. 98-12 § 1 (part), 1998.)
15.04.080 Tests.
Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of this code or
that any material, method or design does not conform to the requirements of this code,
the building official may require tests as proof of compliance to be made at no expense
to the city of Sandy. Test methods shall be as specified by this code or by other
recognized test standards. If there are not recognized and accepted test methods for
the proposed alternate, the building official shall have the sole and exclusive authority to
determine appropriate test procedures. All tests shall be made by an approved testing
agency. The building official shall retain reports of such tests for the period required for
the retention of similar public records. (Ord. 98-12 § 1 (part), 1998.)
15.04.090 Powers and duties of building official.
A. General. Code enforcement shall be under the administrative and operational control
3
of the building official. The building official is authorized to enforce all the provisions of
this code. The building official shall have the power to render written and oral
interpretations of this code and to adopt and enforce administrative procedures in order
to clarify the application of its provisions.
B. Deputies. In accordance with prescribed procedures and with the approval of the city,
the building official may appoint technical officers and inspectors and other employees
to carry out this function. The building official may request, and shall receive, the
assistance and cooperation of other officials of this jurisdiction, so far as is required in
the discharge of the duties required by this code or other pertinent law or ordinance.
C. Liability Limitation. The building official charged with the enforcement of this code,
acting in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties required by this
code or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be rendered personally liable
for damages that may accrue to persons or property as a result of an act or omission in
the discharge of such duties. A suit brought against the building official or employee
because of such act or omission performed by the building official or employee in the
enforcement of any provision of such codes or other pertinent laws of ordinances
implemented through the enforcement of this code or enforced by the building official
shall be defended by the city of Sandy until final termination of such proceedings, and
any judgement resulting therefrom shall be assumed by the city of Sandy. This code
shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any person owning,
operating or controlling any building or structure for any damages to persons or property
caused by defects, nor shall the building official or the city of Sandy be held assuming
any such liability by reason of the inspections authorized by this code of any permit or
certificates issued under this code.
D. Right of Entry. When it may be necessary to inspect a building in order to enforce the
provisions of this code, or if the building official has reasonable cause to believe that
there exists in a building or upon a premises a condition which is contrary to, in violation
of this code or which otherwise makes the building or premises unsafe, dangerous or
hazardous, the building official may enter such building or premises at reasonable times
to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this code; provided that if such building or
premises be occupied, that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry
requested. If such building or premises be unoccupied, the building official shall first
make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of
the building or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall
have the right to seek a search warrant from a judicial officer in order to secure entry.
E. Stop Work Orders. Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of
this code (or other pertinent laws or ordinances implemented through its enforcement),
the building official may order the work stopped by giving notice in writing served on any
person(s) engaged in the doing or causing of such work to be done. Such person(s)
shall stop any and all such work until specifically authorized or released by the building
official to proceed herewith.
4
F. Authority to Disconnect Utilities in Emergencies. The building official or the building
official's authorized deputy shall have the authority to disconnect fuel-gas utility service,
and/or other energy supplies to a building, structure, premises or equipment regulated
by this code when necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The
building official shall, whenever possible, notify the serving utility, the owner and
occupant of the building, structure or premises of the decision to disconnect prior to
taking such action, and shall notify such serving utility, owner and occupant of the
building, structure or premises in writing of such disconnection within twenty-four hours
thereafter.
G. Authority to Abate Hazardous Equipment. When the building official ascertains that
equipment, or any portion thereof, regulated by this code has become or is hazardous
to life, health or property, the building official shall order the equipment either removed
from its location or restored to a safe and/or sanitary condition, as appropriate. The
notice shall be in writing and contain a fixed time limit for compliance. Persons shall not
use the equipment after receiving such notice, until authorized to do so by the building
official. When equipment (or an installation) is to be disconnected, written notice of the
disconnection (and causes therefor) shall be given within twenty-four hours to the
involved utility, the owner and/or occupant of the building, structure or premises. When
equipment is used or maintained in violation of this code and in violation of a notice
issued pursuant to the provisions of this section, the building official may institute such
action as he/she deems necessary to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such use or
maintenance.
H. Connection after Order to Disconnect. No person shall make a connection to or from
an energy, fuel or power supply to any equipment regulated by this code which has
been disconnected or ordered disconnected or discontinued by the building official until
the building official specifically authorizes the reconnection and/or use of such
equipment.
I. Maintenance. All buildings and structures, both existing and new, and all parts thereof,
shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards which are
required by this code shall be maintained in conformance with the code edition under
which installed. The owner or the owner's designated agency shall be responsible for
the maintenance of buildings and structure. To determine compliance with this section,
the building official may cause a structure to be re-inspected.
(Ord. 98-12 § 1 (part), 1998.)
15.04.100 Appeals.
In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the
building official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, appeals can be
made to the applicable State Advisory Board per ORS 455.070. (Ord. 98-12 § 1 (part),
1998.)
15.04.110 Plans and permits.
A. Issuance. The building official shall review the application, plans, specifications,
5
computations and other data filed by an applicant for a permit. Such plans may be
reviewed by other city of Sandy departments to verify compliance with any applicable
laws under their jurisdiction. If the building official finds that the work described in
application for a permit and the plans, specifications, and other data filed therewith
conform to the requirements of this code and other pertinent laws and ordinances, and
that the fees have been paid, the building official shall issue a permit therefore to the
applicant. When the building official issues the permit where plans are required, the
building official shall enforce in writing or stamp the plans and specifications
"REVIEWED." Such reviewed plans and specifications shall not be changed, modified
or altered without authorization from the building official, and all work regulated by this
code shall be done in accordance with the reviewed plans. The building official may
issue a permit for the construction of part of a building or structure before the entire
plans and specifications for the whole building or structure have been submitted or
reviewed, provided adequate information and detailed statements have been filed
complying with all pertinent requirements of this code. The holder of a partial permit
shall proceed without assurance that the permit for the entire building or structure will be
granted.
B. Retention of Plans. One set of reviewed plans, specifications and computations shall
be retained by the building official for a period of not less than ninety days from date of
completion of the work covered therein, and one set of reviewed plans and
specifications shall be returned to the applicant, with said set being kept at the site of
the building or work at all times during which the work authorized thereby is in progress.
C. Validity of Permit. The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans,
specifications and computations shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an
approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this code or of any other ordinance
of the jurisdiction or any other federal, state or local law, statute, rule, regulation or
ordinance. The issuance of a permit based on plans, specifications and other data shall
not prevent the building official from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in such
plans, specifications and other data, or from preventing building operations being
carried on thereunder when in violation of this code or any other ordinances of the city
of Sandy.
D. Expiration of Plan Reviews. Applications for which no permit is issued within one
hundred eighty days following the date of the application shall expire by limitation, and
plans and other data submitted for review may thereafter be returned to the applicant or
destroyed by the building official. The building official may extend the time for action by
the applicant for a period not exceeding one hundred eighty days on request by the
applicant showing that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have
prevented action from being taken. No application shall be extended more than once. In
order to renew action on an application after expiration, the applicant shall resubmit
plans and pay a new plan review fee.
E. Permit Expiration, Extension and Reinstatement. Every permit issued by the building
official under the provisions of this code shall expire by limitation and become null and
6
void if the building and/or work authorized is not commenced within the time limitations
set forth in this section. Every permit issued by the building official shall expire by
limitation and become null and void if the building or work authorized by such permit is
not commenced within one hundred eighty days from the date of permit, or if the
building or work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after
the work is commenced for a period of one hundred eighty days. The work shall not be
considered suspended or abandoned where the permittee has pursued activities
deemed by the building official to indicate the intent to start and complete the project.
The building official may require the permittee to document these activities. Every
permit issued by the building official shall expire by limitation and become null and void
twenty-four months after the date of permit issuance. If the building or work authorized
by such permit has not received final inspection approval prior to the permit expiration
date, all work shall stop until a new permit is obtained for the value of the work
remaining unfinished. Exception: At the time of permit issuance, the building official may
approve a period exceeding twenty-four months for completion of work when the
permittee can demonstrate that the complexity or size of the project makes completing
the project within twenty-four months unreasonable. Any permittee holding an unexpired
permit may apply for an extension of the time within which work is to be completed
under that permit when the permittee is unable to complete work within the time
required by this section for good and satisfactory reasons. The building official may
extend the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding one hundred
eighty days or written request by the permittee showing that circumstances beyond the
control of the permittee have prevented work from being completed. No permit shall be
extended more than once. When a permit has expired, the permit can be reinstated and
the work authorized by the original permit can be recommended, provided the following
are met:
1. The building code under which the original permit was issued and other laws that are
enforced by the building official have not been amended in any manner, which affects
the work authorized by the original permit;
2. No charges have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications
for such work;
3. The original permit expired less than one year from the request to reinstate;
4. The fee for a reinstated permit shall be one-half the amount required for a new
permit. Where the request for reinstatement does not comply with the preceding criteria,
a new permit, at full permit fees, shall be required.
F. Work without a Permit/Investigation Fees. Whenever any work for which a permit is
required by this code has been commenced without first obtaining such permit, a
special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work. An
investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, may be collected whether or not a permit
is then or subsequently issued. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt
7
any person from compliance with all other provisions of this code nor from any penalty
prescribed by law.
G. Not Transferable. A permit issued to one person or firm is not transferable and shall
not permit any other person or firm to perform any work thereunder.
H. Suspension/Revocation. The building official may, in writing, suspend or revoke a
permit issued under the provisions of this code whenever the permit is issued in error on
the basis of incorrect information supplied, or if its issuance (or activity thereunder) is in
violation of any ordinance or regulation of any other provisions of the city code.
I. Inspections. It shall be the duty of the permit holder or authorized agent to request all
inspections that may be necessary or otherwise required in a timely manner, provide
access to the site, and to provide all equipment as may be deemed necessary or
appropriate by the building official. The permit holder shall not proceed with construction
activity until authorized to do so by the building official. It shall be the duty of the permit
holder to cause the work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes.
Any expenses incurred by the permit holder to remove or replace any material
requested for proper inspection shall be the responsibility of the permit holder or his
agent. Work requiring a permit shall not be commenced until the permit holder has
posted or otherwise made available an inspection record card such as to allow the
building official to conveniently make the required entries thereon regarding inspection
of the work. This card shall be maintained available by the permit holder under final
approval has been granted by the building official.
(Ord. 98-12 § 1 (part), 1998.)
15.04.120 Building code standard.
A. State of Oregon Structural Specialty Code-Current Edition.
1. Enforcement of State Code. The Oregon Structural Specialty Code, as adopted by
OAR 918-469-0010 through 981-460-0015, except as modified in this code, is enforced
as part of this code.
2. Excavation and Grading/Erosion Control. Appendix Chapter 33 of the Uniform
Building Code, current edition, published by the ICBO, is adopted as part of this code.
B. Uniform Fire Code with Oregon Amendments. For the purposes of prescribing
regulations and governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or
explosion, the Uniform Fire Code, current edition, as amended by the State Fire
Marshal, is adopted in its entirely as though it were fully and completely set out in this
section.
C. State of Oregon Mechanical Specialty Code-Current Edition.
1. Enforcement of State Code. The Oregon Mechanical Specialty Code, as adopted by
OAR 918-440-0010 through 918-440-0040, is enforced as part of this code.
8
2. Process Piping. Appendix Chapter 14 of the Uniform Mechanical Code, current
edition, published by the International Conference of Building Officials, except as
modified in the following paragraph, is adopted as part of this code.
3. Section 1401 of this Appendix chapter is modified to read as follows:
The regulations of this chapter shall govern the installation of hazardous process piping
in or in conjunction with a building or structure or located upon the premises.
D. State of Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code-Current Edition.
1. Enforcement of State Code. The Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code, as adopted by
918-750-0010, is enforced as part of this code.
E. State of Oregon One and Two Family Dwelling Code-Current Edition. The Oregon
One and Two Family Dwelling Specialty Code, as adopted by OAR 918-600-0005
through 918-600-0110, are enforced as part of this code.
F. State of Oregon Manufactured Home Installation Standards.
1. Enforcement of State Rules. These manufactured dwelling rules adopted by OAR
918-500-0000 through 918-500-0500 and OAR 918-520-0010 through 918-520-0020
are enforced as part of this code.
G. Manufactured Dwelling Parks.
1. Enforcement of State Rules. These manufactured dwelling park rules adopted by
OAR 918-600-000 through 918-650-0095 are enforced as part of this code.
H. State of Oregon Recreational Park and Organizational Camp Regulations.
1. Enforcement of State Rules. The recreational park and organizational camp rules
adopted by OAR 918-650-0000 through 918-650-0085 are enforced as part of this code.
(Ord. 98-12 § 1 (part), 1998.)
15.04.130 Fees.
A. Fees shall be those fees specifically listed and adopted in the master fees and
charges resolution.
B. The building official may authorize the refunding of fees paid in accordance with the
refund policy in effect in the jurisdiction. The determination of value or valuation under
any provisions of this code shall be made by the building official. The value to be used
in computing the building permit and plan review fees shall be the total value of all
construction work for which the permit is issued as well as all finish work, painting,
roofing, electrical, plumbing, heating, air conditioning, elevators, fire-extinguishing
9
systems and any other permanent equipment.
(Ord. 98-12 § 1 (part), 1998.)
15.04.140 Severability.
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, sentence, or provision of this code shall
be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, such
judgment shall not affect, impair, invalidate, or nullify the remainder of this code, but the
effect thereof shall be confined to the section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, sentence,
or provision immediately involved in the controversy in which judgment or decree shall
be rendered, it being the intent of the governing body to enact the remainder of this
code notwithstanding the parts to be declared unconstitutional and invalid. (Ord. 98-12 §
1 (part), 1998.)
15.04.150 Penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions herein for which a special penalty has not
been expressly provided shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not to
exceed one thousand dollars per violation. Each day that a violation exists is a separate
offense. (Ord. 98-12 § 1 (part), 1998.)
Chapter 15.06
MOBILE HOME PLACEMENT PERMITS
15.06.010 Fee schedule.
A. A permit may be issued for the placement of a mobile home upon payment of fees as
established by resolution of the city council.
B. A four percent surcharge shall be added to the above fees.
(Ord. 18-93 § 13, 1993; Ord. 1-93 § 9, 1993; Ord. 5-79 § 1, 1979.)
Chapter 15.08
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
(Ord. 08, 2001)
15.08.010 Purpose.
A. This Chapter is to provide a method (cumulative with and in addition to any other
remed(ies) available to the City by law) whereby buildings or structures which from
any cause endanger the life, limb, health, property, safety or welfare of the general
public or the building’s occupants such that they should be required to be repaired,
vacated or demolished.
B. This Chapter does not create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class
or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited by the
terms hereof.
10
15.08.015 Scope.
This Chapter shall apply to all “Dangerous Buildings and Structures” as herein defined
be they now in existence or which may hereafter become Dangerous Buildings or
Dangerous Structures in the City.
15.08.020 Alternations, additions & repairs.
All buildings or structures required to be repaired under the provisions of this Chapter
shall be subject to the provisions of Section 3403 of the Oregon Structural Specialty
Code as it currently exists or may hereafter be amended and adopted by the State.
15.08.025 Administration.
The Building Official is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this Chapter. The
Building Official shall have the power to render interpretations of this Chapter and to
adopt and enforce rules and supplemental regulations in order to clarify the application
of its provisions. Such interpretations, rules and regulations shall be in conformity with
the intent and purpose of this Chapter.
15.08.030 Inspections.
The Building Official and others such as the Fire Marshall and Clackamas County
Health Department officials are authorized to make such inspections and take such
other actions as may be required to enforce the provisions of this Chapter, including
(but not limited to) the issuance of stop work or similar abatement orders.
15.08.035 Right of entry.
A. When necessary to make an inspection to enforce the requirements imposed by
the terms of this Chapter (or when the Building Official has reasonable cause to
believe there exists in a building or upon a premises a condition contrary to or in
violation of this Chapter making the building or premises unsafe, dangerous or
hazardous) the Building Official may enter the building or premises at reasonable
times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this Chapter, provided that if
such building or premises be occupied that credentials be presented to the
occupant and entry requested.
B. If such building or premises be unoccupied, the Building Official shall first make a
reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person(s) having charge or control
of the building or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the Building
Official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry.
15.08.040 Dangerous buildings declared to be public nuisances; Abatement.
All buildings or portions thereof determined after inspection by the Building Official to be
dangerous as defined in this Chapter are hereby declared to be public nuisances and
shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal in accordance with the
procedure specified in this Chapter.
11
15.08.045 Violations.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter,
repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any
building or structure or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this Chapter.
15.08.050 Inspections of work.
All buildings or structures within the scope of this Chapter and all construction or work
for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the Building Official
consistent with and in the manner provided by this Chapter and Sections 108 and 1701
of the currently adopted Oregon Structural Specialty Code and other relevant provisions
of municipal, county or state law.
15.08.055 Definitions.
For the purpose of this Chapter, certain terms, phrases, words and their derivatives
shall be construed as specified in either this chapter or as specified in the Building Code
or the Housing Code. Where terms are not defined, they shall have their ordinary
accepted meanings within the context with which they are used. Webster’s 3rd New
International Dictionary of the English Language (Unabridged, copyrighted 1986) shall
be construed as providing ordinary accepted meanings. Words used in the singular
include the plural and the plural the singular. Words used in the masculine gender
include the feminine and the feminine the masculine.
A. Building Official is the City’s Building Official or such other person as may be
designated as such by the Building Official or City Manager.
B. Building Code has the meaning given by the terms of ORS 455.010 to “state
building code” and includes all specialty codes as defined in ORS 455.010.
C. City means the City of Sandy, Oregon.
D. City Manager means the Sandy City Manager or their designate.
E. Dangerous Building or Dangerous Structure is any building or structure having
one or more of the conditions or defects hereinafter described provided that such
condition(s) or defect(s) exist to the extent that the Building Official, City Manager or
their designate(s) can reasonably believe the life, health, property or safety of the
public or the Building’s or Structure’s occupants are endangered:
1. Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is
not of sufficient width or size or is not so arranged as to provide safe and
adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic.
2. Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway or other
means of exit is so warped, worn, loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to not
provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic.
3. Whenever the stress in any materials, member or portion thereof, due to
all dead and live loads, is more than one and one half times the working
stress or stresses allowed in the current applicable structural code as
defined in ORS Chapter 455 for new buildings of similar structure, purpose
or location.
4. Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake,
wind, and flood or by any other cause, to such an extent that the structural
strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was before such
12
catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of the Building
Code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location.
5. Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is likely to fail,
or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure
persons or damage property.
6. Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or
ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or
stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be
capable of resisting a wind pressure of one half of that specified in the
Building Code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location
without exceeding the working stresses permitted in the Building Code for
such buildings.
7. Whenever any portion thereof has wracked, warped, buckled or settled to
such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less
resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of similar
new construction.
8. Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof, because of:
i. dilapidation, deterioration or decay;
ii. faulty construction;
iii. the removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground
necessary for the purpose of supporting such building;
iv. the deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation; or
v. any other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse.
9. Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or any portion thereof,
is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used.
10. Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean
or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of
gravity does not fall inside the middle one third of the base.
11. Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the foundation, shows 33
percent or more damage or deterioration of its supporting member or
members, or 50 percent damage or deterioration of its non-supporting
members, enclosing or outside walls or coverings.
12. Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind,
earthquake or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to
become :
i. an attractive nuisance to children;
ii. a harbor for vagrants and/or criminals; or
iii. a place so as to enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of
committing unlawful acts.
13. Whenever any building or structure has been constructed, exists or is
maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable
to such building or structure provided by the building regulations of this
jurisdiction, (as specified in the appropriately adopted Oregon Building
Code) or of any law or ordinance of this state or jurisdiction relating to the
condition, location or structure of buildings.
13
14. Whenever any building or structure which, whether or not erected in
accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances, has in any nonsupporting
part, member or portion less than 50 percent, or in any
supporting part, member or portion less than 66 percent of the (i) strength,
(ii) fire-resisting qualities or characteristics, or (iii) weather-resisting
qualities or characteristics required by law in the case of a newly
constructed building of like area, height and occupancy in the same
location.
15. Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling
purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay,
damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or
sanitation facilities, or otherwise, is determined by the health officer to be
unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is likely to
cause sickness or disease.
16. Whenever any building or structure, because of obsolescence, dilapidated
condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fireresistive
construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections or heating
apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the fire marshal to be a fire
hazard.
17. Whenever any building or structure is in such a condition as to constitute a
public nuisance known to the common law or in equity jurisprudence.
18. Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site after the
demolition or destruction of the building or structure or whenever any
building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six months so
as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive nuisance or
hazard to the public.
15.08.060 Commencement of proceedings.
When the Building Official has inspected or caused to be inspected any building and
has found and determined that such building is a Dangerous Building, the Building
Official or City Manager has the authority to cause commencement of proceedings to
effect the repair, vacation or demolition thereof.
15.08.065 Notice and order.
The Building Official shall issue a notice and order directed to the record owner of the
building. The notice and order shall contain:
A. The street address and a description sufficient for identification of the premises upon
which the building is located.
B. A statement that the Building Official has found the building dangerous with a brief
factual description of the conditions found to render the building dangerous.
C. A statement of the action(s) required to be taken by the Building Official:
1. If the building must be repaired, the notice and order shall require all
required permits be secured therefore and the work physically
commenced within such time (not to exceed 60 days from the date of the
order) and completed with in such time as the Building Official shall
determine reasonable under all of the circumstances.
14
2. If the building must be vacated, the order shall require that the building or
structure be vacated within a time certain from the date of the order as
determined by the Building Official to be reasonable.
3. If the building or structure is to be demolished, the order shall require that
the building be vacated within such time as the Building Official
determines reasonable (not to exceed 60 days from the date of the order);
that all required permits be secured therefore within 30 days of the date of
the order; and that the demolition be completed within such time as the
Building Official determines reasonable thereafter.
D. Statement advising that if any required repair or demolition work (without vacation
also being required) is not commenced within the time specified, the Building
Official:
1. will order the building vacated and posted to prevent further occupancy
until the work is completed; and
2. may proceed to cause the work to be done and charge the costs thereof
against the property or its owner.
E. Statements advising:
1. that any person having any record title or legal interest in the building may
appeal from the notice and order or any action of the Building Official to
the Municipal Court provided the appeal is made in writing as provided in
this Chapter and filed with the Building Official within 14 days from the
date of service of such notice and order; and
2. that failure to appeal will constitute a waiver of all right to a hearing and
determination of the matter.
15.08.070 Service of notice and order.
The notice and order (and any amended or supplemental notice and order) shall be
served upon the record owner and posted on the property with a copy thereof being
served on each of the following (if known to the Building Official or disclosed from
official public records):
A. the holder of any mortgage or deed of trust or other lien or encumbrance of record;
B. the owner or holder of any lease of record; and
C. the holder of any other estate or legal interest of record in or to the building or the
land on which it is located.
The failure of the Building Official to serve any person required herein to be served shall
not invalidate any proceedings hereunder as to any other person duly served or relieve
any such person from any duty or obligation imposed by the provisions of this section.
15.08.075 Method of service.
Service of the notice and order shall be made upon all persons entitled thereto either
personally or by mailing a copy of such notice and order by certified mail, postage
prepaid, to each such person at their address as it appears in the Clackamas County
tax records or as otherwise known to the Building Official. If no address of such person
appears or is known to the Building Official, then a copy of the notice and order shall be
mailed (addressed to such person) at the address of the building involved in the
15
proceedings. The failure of any such person to receive such notice shall not affect the
validity of any proceedings taken under this section. Service by certified mail in the
manner herein provided shall be effective on the date of mailing.
15.08.080 Proof of service.
Proof of service of the notice and order shall be certified to at the time of service by a
written declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the persons effecting service,
declaring the time, date and manner in which service was made. The declaration,
together with any receipt card returned in acknowledgment of receipt by certified mail
shall be affixed to the copy of the notice and order retained by the Building Official.
15.08.085 Repair, vacation and demolition.
A. Any building or structure declared a dangerous building or structure under this
Chapter shall be made to comply with one of the following:
1. The building or structure shall be repaired in accordance with the current
state building code or other current code applicable to the type of
substandard conditions requiring repair; or
2. The building or structure shall be demolished consistent with subsection D
below.
B. If the building or structure does not constitute an immediate danger to the life, limb,
property or safety of the public it may be vacated, secured and maintained against
entry.
C. If the building or structure is in such condition as to make it immediately dangerous
to the life, limb, property or safety of the public or the building’s occupants, it shall be
ordered vacated, secured and maintained against entry.
D. If a building or structure is found to be or becomes dangerous and if (in the opinion
of the Building Official) the building or structure is not, under current circumstances
likely to be repaired so as to be habitable within 120 days, it may be ordered
demolished by the Building Official with the cost thereof borne by the owners. In the
event the Building Official determines that a building is to be demolished, the
Building Official shall make a written order which includes the circumstances
supporting demolition. The order shall be served on all persons entitled to notice
under 15.08.070 and is subject to a 21 day appeal consistent with the provisions of
15.08.100.
15.08.090 Notice to vacate - Posting.
Every notice to vacate shall, in addition to being served shall be posted at or upon each
exit of the building and shall be in substantially the following form:
DO NOT ENTER
UNSAFE TO OCCUPY
It is unlawful to occupy this building or to remove or deface this notice.
______________________
City Building Official
City of Sandy, Oregon
16
15.08.095 Compliance with notice to vacate.
A. Whenever such notice is posted, the Building Official shall include a notification
thereof in the notice and order issued under 15.08.065 reciting the emergency and
specifying the conditions which necessitate the posting.
B. No person shall remain in or enter any building which has been so posted except
that entry may be made to repair, demolish or remove such building under permit.
C. No person shall remove or deface any such notice after it is posted until the required
repairs, demolition or removal have been completed and all lawful requirements
been met.
15.08.100 Form of appeal.
A. Any person entitled to service under 15.08.070 may appeal from any notice and
order or any action of the Building Official under this Chapter by filing with the
Municipal Court a written appeal containing:
1. A heading in the words: “Before the Municipal Court of the City of Sandy,
Oregon”.
2. A listing of the names of all appellants participating in the appeal along
with a brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each appellant in
the building or the land involved in the notice and order.
3. A brief statement concerning the basis for the appeal together with any
material fact(s) claimed to support those contentions and why the
protested order or action should be reversed, modified or otherwise set
aside.
4. The signatures of all parties named as appellants and their official mailing
addresses.
5. The verification (by declaration under penalty of perjury) of at least one
appellant as to the truth of the matters stated in the appeal.
B. The appeal shall be filed within 14 days of the date of service of the Building
Official’s order or action; however if the building or structure is in such condition as
to make it immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property or safety of the public or
adjacent property and is ordered vacated and is posted in accordance with
15.08.090, such appeal shall be filed not later than 10 days from the date of the
service of the notice and order of the Building Official.
15.08.105 Scheduling appeal for hearing.
As soon as practicable after receiving the written appeal, the Municipal Court shall fix a
date, time and place for the hearing of the appeal. Such date shall not be less than then
(10) nor more than sixty (60) days from the date the appeal was filed with the Building
Official. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given at least 10
days prior to the date of the hearing to each appellant by the Court either by causing a
copy of such notice to be delivered to the appellant personally or by mailing a copy
thereof, postage prepaid, addressed to the appellant at the address shown on the
appeal.
17
15.08.110 Effect of failure to appeal.
Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with the provisions of Section
15.08.100 shall constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing and adjudication of the
notice and order or any portion thereof.
15.08.115 Scope of appeal hearing; Stay of order.
A. Only those matters or issues specifically raised by the appellant shall be considered
in the hearing of the appeal.
B. Except for vacation orders made pursuant to Section 15.08.085, enforcement of any
notice and order of the Building Official issued under this Chapter shall be stayed
during the pendency of an appeal therefrom which is properly and timely filed.
15.08.120 Form of notice of hearing to appellant.
The notice to the appellant(s) shall be substantially in the following form:
“You are hereby notified that a hearing will be held before the
_________Municipal Court at on the ___ day of _________, 20___ at the
hour ___________ upon the notice and order served upon you for alleged
violation(s) of Chapter 15.08 (Dangerous Buildings) of the Sandy
Municipal Code. You may be present at the hearing. You may be, but
need not be, represented by counsel. You may present relevant evidence
and will be given full opportunity to -examine all witnesses.”
15.08.125 Record.
A record of the entire proceedings shall be made by tape recording or by any other
means of permanent recording determined to be appropriate by the court.
15.08.130 Conduct of hearings
Hearings need not be conducted according to the technical rules relating to evidence
and witnesses. Oral evidence shall be taken on oath or affirmation. Hearsay evidence
may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining direct evidence, but shall
not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection
in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in Oregon. Any relevant evidence shall
be admitted if it is the type of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to
rely in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or
statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence over
objection in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in Oregon. Irrelevant and
unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded.
15.08.135 Rights of parties.
The City and the appellant(s) shall be able:
A. To call and examine witnesses on matters relevant to the issues of the hearing;
B. To introduce documentary and physical evidence;
C. To cross-examine opposing witnesses;
D. To rebut evidence; and
E. To be represented by anyone lawfully permitted to do so.
18
15.08.140 Official notice.
In reaching a decision, official notice may be taken (either before or after submission of
the case for decision) of any fact which may be judicially noticeable by Oregon courts.
Parties present at the hearing shall be informed of the matters to be noticed which is to
be noted in the record. Parties present at the hearing shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to refute the noticed matters by evidence or by written or oral presentation
of authority.
15.08.145 Inspection of the premises.
The Court may inspect any building or structure involved in an appeal during the course
of the hearing provided that: notice of such inspection shall be given the parties before
the inspection is made; the parties are given an opportunity to be present during the
inspection; and, the judge shall state for the record after said inspection the material
facts observed and the conclusions drawn therefrom.
15.08.150 Form of decision; Judicial review.
A. With appeals heard by the Municipal Court, the Court shall within a reasonable time
(not to exceed 90 days from the date the hearing is closed) prepare a written
decision which shall contain findings of fact, a determination of the issues presented
and the requirements, if any, to be complied with. The effective date of the decision
shall be as stated therein. A copy of the decision shall be delivered to the City and
appellant by regular mail, postage prepaid.
B. Judicial review of the Court’s decision shall be by way of writ of review as provided
for in ORS 34.010 to ORS 34.100.
15.08.155 Enforcement of orders.
After any order of the Building Official or Municipal Court made pursuant to this Chapter
has become final, no person to whom any such order is directed shall fail, neglect or
refuse to obey any such order. If, the person to whom such order is directed fails
neglects or refuses to comply with said order, the Building Official may take any and all
actions deemed by him, in consultation with the City Manager and City Attorney to be
appropriate including the filing of supplementary enforcement or compliance action(s) in
a court of competent jurisdiction.
15.08.160 Failure to commence work.
Whenever the required repair or demolition is not commenced within 30 days after any
final notice and order issued under this Chapter becomes effective:
A. The Building Official shall cause the building described in such notice and order to
be vacated by posting at each entrance thereto a notice reading:
DANGEROUS BUILDING
DO NOT OCCUPY
It is unlawful to occupy this building or to remove or deface this notice.
City Building Official
City of Sandy, Oregon
19
B. No person shall occupy any building which has been posted as specified in this
section. No person shall remove or deface any such notice so posted until the
repairs, demolition or removal ordered by the Building Official have been completed
and a certificate of occupancy issued pursuant to the provisions of the Building
Code.
C. The Building Official may in addition to any other remedy herein provided, cause the
building to be repaired to the extent necessary to correct the conditions which render
the building dangerous as set forth in the notice and order; or, if the notice and order
required demolition, to cause the building to be sold and demolished or demolished
and the materials, rubble and debris therefrom removed and the lot cleaned. Any
such repair or demolition work shall be accomplished and the cost thereof paid and
recovered in the manner provide for the collective of assessment or nuisance liens
under state statute or city code. Any surplus realized from the sale of any such
building or from the demolition thereof, over and above the cost of demolition,
administrative costs and of cleaning the lot shall be paid over to the person or
persons lawfully entitled thereto.
15.08.165 Interference with repair or demolition work prohibited.
No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any officer, employee, contractor or
authorized representative of this jurisdiction or with any person who owns or holds any
estate or interest in any building which has been ordered repaired, vacated or
demolished under the provisions of this Chapter; or with any person to whom such
building has been lawfully sold pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, whenever
such officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of the City, person
having an interest or estate in such building or structure, or purchaser is engaged in the
work of repairing, vacating and repairing, or demolishing any such building, pursuant to
the provisions of this Chapter, or in per forming any necessary act preliminary to or
incidental to such work or authorized or directed pursuant to this Chapter.
Chapter 15.10
DERELICT BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
15.10.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish an enforcement program to address the
problem of derelict, abandoned, and vacant buildings or structures within the City in
order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the community through the
required maintenance of unkempt, unsightly, unsafe, unsanitary, and otherwise
improperly maintained structures.
The program is intended to protect the City from blight, deterioration, and decay as a
result of properties in a condition or state that potentially would have an adverse effect
on the value, utility, and habitability of property within the City. In addition to the obvious
hazards which these conditions pose to the public health, safety, and welfare, they
specifically cause damage to adjoining and nearby properties. A property which is
20
merely unkempt or vacant for long periods may reduce the value of adjoining and
nearby property, and the habitability and economic well-being of the City may be
materially and adversely affected.
The goals of this chapter are as follows:
A. To supplement the City Nuisance Ordinance and further define as public nuisances
those conditions which constitute visual blight and which could result in conditions
which are harmful or deleterious to the public health, safety and welfare; and
B. To develop regulations that will promote the sound maintenance of buildings and
structures, enhance the livability, community appearance, and the social, economic,
and environmental conditions of the community; and
C. To establish guidelines for the correction of property maintenance violations and
nuisances that afford due process and procedural guarantees to affected property
owners; and
D. To support responsible environmental practices with the repair and reuse of existing
structures in lieu of demolition of buildings that are able to be repaired.
15.10.020 Administration.
A. Determination of whether a building or property is in violation of this chapter shall
be made by the Planning Director (Director), or the Director’s designee. The
Director should consult with the Building Official, Fire Marshal, Public Health
Officer, or any other agency as necessary, before making the determination to bring
the matter before the City Council subcommittee.
1. For a violation to have occurred under this chapter, a combination of at least
two building maintenance standards specified shall be out of compliance.
2. Prior to proceeding with a notice of violation, the Director’s determination shall
be reviewed by a City Council subcommittee. If a majority of the subcommittee
agrees with the Director’s determination, the Director will issue the notice of
violation to the owner or person in charge of the property. For the purposes of
this chapter, the term “person in charge of property” has the meaning defined in
SMC 8.04.010(B).
B. Buildings or structures determined a nuisance shall be subject to the necessary
permits and requirements in accordance with the Oregon Structural Specialty Code.
All construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection
by the Building Official.
C. The City may take appropriate steps to gain entry into or upon the property to
investigate and/or cause the removal of a nuisance.
D. Appeals of the Director's decision shall be made to the City Council within twelve
21
(12) days of the date on the notice of violation. All appeals before the City Council
shall be decided within thirty (30) days of the submission of the appeal.
15.10.030 Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to a building or structure that is actively undergoing
construction or repair as indicated by a valid building permit and appearance that the
person in charge is progressing diligently to complete the repair or construction. This
exception does not apply to requirements relevant to public safety or health concerns.
15.10.040 Building Maintenance Standards.
No person in charge of a property shall maintain or permit to be maintained any
property which does not comply with the requirements of this chapter and is deemed to
be a nuisance and detrimental to the City. All property shall be maintained to the
building code requirements in effect at the time of construction, alteration, or repair, and
shall meet the requirements below.
A. Accessory Structures.
1. All accessory structures, including sheds, trellises, awnings, fences, and other
similar features, shall be maintained structurally safe and sound, and in good
repair.
2. Accessory structures shall comply with maintenance standards in Section
15.10.040 B. through H.
B. Roofs.
1. The roof shall be structurally sound, tight, and have no defects which might admit
rain.
2. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent rainwater from causing dampness in
the walls or interior portion of the building.
3. Roof drains, gutters, and downspouts shall be maintained in good repair and free
from obstructions and shall channel rainwater into approved receivers.
C. Chimneys and Towers.
1. All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks, towers, and similar appurtenances /
attachments shall be maintained so as to be structurally safe and sound, and in
good repair. They shall remain adequately supported and free from obstructions
and shall be maintained in a condition which ensures there will be no leakage or
back-up of noxious gases. They shall be reasonably plumb.
2. Loose bricks or blocks shall be rebonded. Loose or missing mortar shall be
replaced. Unused openings into the interior of the structure must be
22
permanently sealed using approved materials.
D. Foundations and Structural Members.
1. Foundation elements shall adequately support the building and shall be free of
rot, crumbling elements, or similar deterioration.
2. The supporting structural members in every structure shall be maintained so as
to be structurally sound, showing no evidence of deterioration or decay which
would substantially impair their ability to carry imposed loads.
E. Exterior Walls and Exposed Surfaces.
1. Exterior wall and weather-exposed exterior surface or attachment shall be free of
holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards or timbers and any other conditions which
might admit rain or dampness to the interior portions of the walls or the occupied
spaces of the building.
2. Exterior wood surfaces shall be made substantially impervious to the adverse
effects of weather by periodic application of an approved protective coating of
weather-resistant preservative, paint, or other approved coating, and be
maintained in good condition.
3. Exterior metal surfaces shall be protected from rust and corrosion of an extent
that would substantially impair its ability to carry imposed loads.
4. Exterior brick, stone, masonry, or other veneer shall be maintained so as to be
structurally sound and be adequately supported and tied back to its supporting
structure.
5. Cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings, and similar
decorative features shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage and
in a safe condition.
6. Overhang extensions, including, but not limited to, canopies, marquees, signs,
metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes, and exhaust ducts shall be maintained
in good repair and be property anchored so as to be kept in a sound condition.
F. Windows.
1. Each window shall be substantially weather-tight, shall be kept in sound condition
and repair for its intended use.
2. Window sash shall be fully supplied with glass window panes or an approved
substitute without open cracks and holes.
23
3. Window sash shall be in good condition and fit weather-tight within its frames.
4. Window frame shall be constructed and maintained in relation to the adjacent
wall construction so as to exclude rain as completely as possible and to
substantially exclude wind from entering the structure.
G. Doors.
1. Exterior doors, including screen doors, cellar doors, and garage doors, door
assemblies, and hardware shall be maintained in good condition, be weathertight,
and substantially exclude wind and rain from entering the structure.
H. Insect and Rodent Harborage.
1. Every dwelling shall be kept free from insect and rodent infestation, and where
insects and rodents are found, they shall be promptly terminated. After
extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent re-infestation.
15.10.050 Vacant buildings.
In addition to the maintenance standards in Section 15.10.040, the person in charge of
a vacant property and/or building shall comply with the following maintenance and
security requirements:
A. The building and/or property shall be secure so that it is not to accessible to
unauthorized persons, including but not limited to the closure and locking of
windows and doors (walk through, sliding, and garage) and any other opening of
such size that may allow a child to access the interior of a structure; chaining or
padlocking gates, and repairing fencing.
B. If the person in charge of the property or building is an entity or does not reside
within 50 miles of the City limits, the person in charge shall contract with or
otherwise engage a person to provide property management to perform inspections
to verify that all requirements of this ordinance, enforcement notice, and any other
applicable laws are being met.
C. The property shall be posted with name and 24-hour contact phone number of the
owner, person in charge, or a local property management representative. The
posting shall be no larger than 18” X 24” and shall contain the words “THIS
PROPERTY MANAGED BY . . .” The posting shall be secured to the exterior of the
building or placed in a location on the property so it is visible from the street.
15.10.060 Violation options.
When an alleged complaint is reported to the Director, the Director shall prepare a
statement of the facts and shall review the facts and circumstances surrounding the
alleged complaint. The Director shall not proceed further with the matter if the Director
determines that there is not sufficient evidence to support the allegation, or if the City
24
Council subcommittee rules that the nuisance does not exist and is not a violation. If a
nuisance is determined to exist by the City Council subcommittee, the Director may
enforce this code by any of the following methods:
A. Abatement by the Owner;
B. Rehabilitation Procedure;
C. Citation;
D. Abatement by the City;
E. Citation and Abatement;
F. Other enforcement remedies available at law or at equity.
15.10.70 Violation notice.
A. Upon determination by the Director, and after consultation with the City Council
subcommittee, that a nuisance as defined in Chapters 15.10.040 or 15.10.050
exists, the Director shall forthwith cause a notice to be posted on the premises
where the nuisance exists, directing the owner or person in charge of the property to
abate such nuisance.
B. At the time of posting, the Director shall cause a copy of such notice to be forwarded
by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, to the owner or person in charge of
the property at the last known address of such owner or other person.
C. The notice of violation shall contain:
1. A description of the real property, by street address or otherwise, on which such
nuisance exists;
2. A statement explaining the different options for abatement by the owner,
including the rehabilitation procedure.
3. A direction to abate the nuisance by the date listed on the notice;
4. A description of the nuisance;
5. A statement that unless such nuisance is removed, the city may abate the
nuisance and the cost of abatement shall be a lien against the property;
6. A statement that the owner or other person in charge of the property may appeal
to the City Council by filing an appeal with the Director within twelve (12)
business days of the date on the notice of violation. The Council, in regular
course of business, shall hear and determine the objections of the appeal.
D. Upon completion of the posting and mailing, the person posting and mailing the
notice shall execute and file a certificate stating the date and place of such mailing
and posting.
E. An error in the name or address of the owner or person in charge of the property or
the use of a name other than that of the owner or other person shall not make the
notice void and in such a case the posted notice shall be sufficient.
25
15.10.080 Procedure for enforcement.
The following are the general steps that should be conducted in the enforcement of
derelict buildings as noted in the City Code. These procedures are intended as a
guideline and strict adherence to this process is not required. Time lines may be
shortened or lengthened depending on individual circumstances. These procedures do
not prevent the use of other methods of enforcement that may be available to the City.
A. Possible nuisance is identified by staff or through a complaint. Complaints may be
made anonymously.
B. Staff verifies that the nuisance exists and is a violation. Staff identifies property
owner, person in charge, and/or person responsible for the violation.
C. City Council subcommittee evaluates the Director’s determination to rule if the
nuisance exists and is a violation. If a majority of the subcommittee decides that a
nuisance does not exist, then the Director will note that decision for the file and take
no further action on the matter.
D. If a majority of the subcommittee determines a nuisance does exist, the Director
shall cause a notice to be posted on the premises where the nuisance exists and
send a notice of violation by regular mail to the property owner or others advising of
the nuisance, citing code that is in violation, and the options for completing the work.
Staff provides the two options for rectifying the nuisance, rehabilitation or
abatement.
E. If the property owner submits a rehabilitation plan then the steps in Section
15.10.100 for Rehabilitation Procedure shall be followed.
F. If the property owner does not submit a rehabilitation plan then after two weeks,
staff verifies if the nuisance still exists. If a nuisance does not exist, the Director
will note that fact for the file and take no further action on the matter.
G. If nuisance persists, a second notice of violation is sent by regular and certified mail
with due date of additional two weeks, and advise of possible fines.
H. After two weeks, staff verifies if nuisance still exists. If nuisance does not exist, the
Director will note that fact for the file and take no further action on the matter.
I. If nuisance still exists, staff issues a citation with a possible fine up to $500.00 per
day, mandatory appearance in Municipal Court, or initiates the abatement process.
J. Each day the nuisance persists is a separate violation.
K. If nuisance still exists after fines and court, City can abate it and lien the property
for all of its costs incurred to abate the nuisance, including but not limited to
attorney fees, and/or continue with other methods of enforcement available to the
26
city.
15.10.90 Abatement by the owner.
A. On the date listed on the notice to abate the nuisance as contained on the posting
and mailing of the notice as provided in Section 15.10.070, the owner or person in
charge of the property shall have removed the nuisance or show that no nuisance
exists.
B. The owner or person in charge protesting that no nuisance exists shall file with the
Director an appeal which shall specify the basis for appeal.
C. The appeal shall be referred to the City Council as a part of the Council's regular
agenda at the next succeeding meeting. At the time set for consideration of the
appeal, the owner or other person may appear and be heard by the Council, and the
Council shall thereupon determine whether or not a nuisance in fact exists and such
determination shall be entered in the official minutes of the Council. Council
determination shall be required only in those cases where an appeal has been filed
as provided.
D. If the Council determines that a nuisance does in fact exist, the owner or other
person shall, by a date as specified by the Council determination, abate such
nuisance.
15.10.100 Rehabilitation procedure.
A. The Director is authorized to permit probation periods alleviating or suspending
payment of fees and penalties by any owner who submits a rehabilitation plan, which
may required to be prepared by a registered architect or engineer experienced in
preservation and rehabilitation of buildings and structures, showing a proposed or
scheduled date of completion. Plans shall include an advanced schedule of dates
for completion of each portion of work which will be marked off as work progresses.
B. The owner of a plan which is not approved or approved as amended may, upon valid
objection, request a review. Such review will be completed with thirty (30) additional
days and subject to any further revisions the Director may deem appropriate to make
to the plan.
C. If the owner or person in charge of the property objects to the Director’s review of
the rehabilitation plan, they may file an appeal to the City Council not more that
twelve (12) days from the Director’s review. The City Council, in regular course of
business, shall hear and determine the objections to the review of the rehabilitation
plan.
D. An owner may finance such plan through any legitimate private banking or financing
corporation, subject to review as to progress or continuing repairs at each threemonth
period after the plan is approved and until completion, the owner shall be
responsible for submission of a progress report each three months to the Director or
designee. If an owner is unable to show satisfactory progress at any three-month
27
interval, the Director, or their designee, is authorized to cancel or discontinue the
probation and fees shall be reinstated.
E. A suitable rehabilitation plan shall contain the following:
1. Completed application with fee.
2. Site plan, drawn at an approved engineering scale and including the following:
a. Property boundaries and dimensions,
b. Primary building and accessory structure locations,
c. Exterior facilities and equipment.
3. Demolition plans, if necessary.
4. Building materials and colors boards.
5. Architectural drawings, with scaled dimensions shown to include repair items
including, but not limited to the following categories.
a. Accessory structures,
b. Fencing,
c. Awnings and canopies,
d. Roofs, gutters, downspouts,
e. Chimneys and towers,
f. Foundations and structural members,
g. Exposed walls, including wood, metal, and brick surfaces,
h. Decorative features,
i. Signs,
j. Stairs and porches,
k. Handrails and guardrails
l. Windows and window hardware,
m. Doors and door hardware.
n. Exterior facilities and equipment.
6. Statement of approximate cost for rehabilitation work.
7. Estimated construction timeline.
8. Other information or studies determined to be necessary by the Director.
F. After the rehabilitation plan is approved, the owner shall be required to obtain
necessary permits for construction, excavation, demolition or other requirements and
to notify the Director when the project is completed within the approved construction
timeline.
G. At the end of the rehabilitation work upon notice by owner, an inspection will be
made within ten (10) days of notification and additional inspections shall be
conducted as necessary to insure property is in compliance. If maintenance by
owner is not complied with in accordance with the inspection, the owner shall be
notified in writing of the noncompliance and given thirty (30) days in which to wither
bring the building or structure back into compliance or give acceptable reason for
noncompliance, at which time an additional period may be given or final notification
28
given that the probation period has eased and fees are to be reinstated against
owner.
H. When fifty (50) percent or more of a structure suffers major damage by fire, act of
God or other peril while rehabilitation work is in progress, the structure must be
repaired to meet the regular rehabilitation and maintenance plan requirements or be
demolished. The affected owner shall present an additional plan of proposed
reconstruction or request demolition permits. The structure must at fall times be
fenced or boarded, so as to safeguard the general public against the dangers which
may become eminent because of the damaged building or structure. When
demolition is requested and approved the cost shall be borne by the owner. No
work, demolition, excavation, alteration or improvement shall be undertaken prior to
the approval of the plan and proper permits, except where an emergency exists and
the safety of the general public is affected. If and when the emergency is
designated or declared by the City, all other code sections shall take precedence, in
addition to this chapter, to alleviate the emergency.
15.10.110 Citation.
Any person violating any of the provisions herein for which a special penalty has not
been expressly provided shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not to
exceed fine hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation. Each day that a violation exists
after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
15.10.120 Abatement.
A. If, within the time allowed, the nuisance has not been corrected by the owner or
person in charge of the property, the council may cause the nuisance to be abated.
B. The officer charged with abatement of such nuisance shall have the right at
reasonable times to enter into or upon property to investigate or cause the removal
of a nuisance.
C. The Director shall keep an accurate record of the expense incurred by the city in
abating the nuisance and shall include therein a charge of twenty (20) percent of the
expense for administrative overhead.
15.10.130 Assessment of abatement costs.
A. The Director, by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, shall forward to the
owner or person in charge of the property a notice stating:
1. The total cost of abatement, including but not limited the administrative
overhead and outside consultant costs or legal fees;
2. That the cost as indicated will be assessed to and become a lien against the
property unless paid within thirty (30) days from date of notice;
3. That if the owner or person in charge of the property objects to the cost of the
abatement as indicated, they may file a notice of objection with the Director not
more than twelve (12) days from the date of notice.
29
B. Upon the expiration of twelve (12) days after the date of the notice, the Council, in
regular course of business, shall hear and determine the objections to the costs to
be assessed.
C. If the costs of the abatement are not paid within thirty (30) days from the date of the
notice, an assessment of the costs as stated or as determined by the Council shall
be made by resolution and shall thereupon be entered in the docket of city liens and,
upon such entry being made, shall constitute a lien upon the property from which the
nuisance was removed or abated.
D. The lien shall be enforced in the same manner as liens for street improvements are
enforced and shall bear interest at the rate of nine percent per year. Such interest
shall accrue from the date of the entry of the lien in the lien docket.
E. An error in the name of the owner or person in charge of the property shall not void
the assessment nor will a failure to receive the notice of the proposed assessment
void, but it shall remain a valid lien against the property.
Chapter 15.12
MOVEMENT OF BUILDINGS
15.12.010 Permit-Required.
No person, firm or corporation shall move a building into the city, or from one location in
the city to another, without first applying for and receiving a permit from the city recorder
as hereinafter set forth, or no person shall use the public streets of the city for the
purpose of moving any building or buildings into, along or over the said streets without a
permit therefor issued by the city recorder or designated city personnel. Permit shall be
obtained at least seventy-two hours prior to moving into, within or through the city. In the
case of movement of buildings to sites within the city, the permit may not be issued
without prior approval by the design review board. (Ord. 18-80 § 1(A), 1980; Ord. 5-72 §
2, 1973.)
15.12.020 Permit-Issuance.
The city recorder or designated city personnel is authorized to grant and issue a permit
to qualified persons possessing adequate equipment for the moving of a building, into,
along, or upon any public street in the city as provided in Section 15.12.010, and upon
compliance by the applicant with the terms of this chapter, the terms and conditions set
forth in the permit, and the terms and conditions that may be established by the design
review board. (Ord. 18-80 § 1(B), 1980: Ord. 5-72 § 3, 1973.)
15.12.030 Permit-Fee-Bond.
A. Moving Through the City. Before any permit is issued, the applicant shall pay to the
city recorder for the use of the city, a fee set forth in subdivisions 1, 2, and 3 of this
subsection. In addition, the mover shall furnish a certificate of public liability insurance
30
with the following coverage limits: twenty thousand dollars property damage, one
hundred thousand dollars personal injury for any one person, and three hundred
thousand dollars personal injury for any one occurrence. Said certificate shall provide
that the mover will be responsible for any injuries or for the death of any person or
persons and any damage to any property or any person, and damages to streets, and
any other public property owned or maintained by the city, or any other public
corporation, or to any other person on account of, or by reason of, any of the operations
of the mover while engaged in the moving of any building or structure, including injuries
or damages occasioned by the falling or collapsing of, or the weight of, or collision with,
any such building or structure. In addition, for buildings or structures which are to be
moved to a location within the city, the city recorder shall also require of the owner of
the building or structure, a performance bond in the sum of five thousand dollars issued
by a surety company authorized to do business within the state, or cash security in such
sum, the bond security to be approved by the city attorney and to be filed in the office of
the city recorder, and to be conditioned that in the relocation and the reestablishment of
any building that is moved, the principal will make and complete such relocation and
reestablishment in accordance with the plans and specifications submitted with the
application, and in substantial compliance with the regulations and provisions contained
in this section or any other ordinance of the city, and in case the principal fails to do so,
making complete such relocation and establishment, then the surety upon such bond
will be liable to the city in the sum not exceeding five thousand dollars.
1. All buildings up to twelve feet in width will pay twenty-five dollars; twelve to twenty
feet in width will pay fifty dollars; twenty feet and over will pay seventy-five dollars.
2. Buildings being moved in sections will be charged the above fee by width plus fifteen
dollars for the second section; no building or section of building in excess of twenty feet
in width shall be moved through or upon any of the public streets or ways of the city.
3. If buildings are being moved in sections and both sections are being moved at the
same time, only the flat rate will be charged.
B. Moving Buildings into the City. Such an applicant shall file with the city recorder an
application for the proposed moving within city, signed by the owner of the building, or
his authorized agent, together with a surety bond satisfactory to the city recorder in such
penal sum, conditioned to hold the city harmless from any claim or liability by or
because of the issuance of the permit, and for reimbursement and payment to the city,
or to any other person, on account of property damage or injury that may be suffered in
the moving of any such building. Fees shall be established by the city council by
resolution.
C. Moving Buildings from Sites in the City. The applicant shall comply with all other
requirements of this chapter. In addition, the city recorder shall also require of the owner
of the building or structure a performance bond in the sum of five thousand dollars
issued by a surety company authorized to do business within the state, or cash security
in such sum, the bond security be approved by the city attorney and to be filed in the
31
office of the city recorder, and to be a condition that after the building or structure is
moved from the site in the city, the principal will remove all debris and rubbish from the
site and remove all other conditions that might prove an attractive nuisance to children
or otherwise violate the city's nuisance ordinance or dangerous building ordinance, and
in case the principal fails to do so, then the surety upon such bond will be liable to the
city in a sum not to exceed five thousand dollars.
(Ord. 18-93 § 14, 1993; Ord. 23-80 § 1, 1980; Ord. 21-80 § 1, 1980; Ord. 7-73 § 1,
1973; Ord. 5-72 § 4, 1973.)
15.12.040 Notification of property owners-Protests.
For those applications wherein the house or building or structure is to be moved across
the street of the city to and within the city limits, to such application there shall be
attached a list of the names and addresses of the owners of all property and the legal
description of that property within a district bounded by a line four hundred feet from and
parallel to or concentric with the sidelines of the property. The city recorder shall notify
the owners of property within said affected district of the proposed moving of the
building, and if within ten days protests representing more than twenty-five percent of
said property, calculated according to area, are filed with the city recorder, the
application shall be denied and such moving shall not be lawful unless the application is
submitted to and approved by the city council.
If protest is made by the owners of twenty-five percent or less of the property owners of
the affected area, then the city recorder shall issue a permit provided that the terms of
Chapter 15.12 and Chapter 15.16 are met and such moving shall be lawful. (Ord. 18-80
§ 1(C), 1980; Ord. 5-72 § 5, 1973.)
15.12.050 Waiver of objections-Compliance with state standards.
As an alternate to approval of property in the adjacent district, the applicant file with his
application for such moving a waiver of objections of such moving by owners of not less
than ninety percent of the property owners in the affected areas defined in Section
15.12.030. The application with the required signatures shall be presented to the city
recorder for checking before any permit is issued. No portion of the original main
structure shall be dismantled excepting however, porches and fireplaces, chimneys and
roofs.
Before the building inspector may approve the plans, the plumbing and wiring must be
inspected and must meet the State Building Code. A detailed set of plans showing the
foundations and any changes or additions to the structure must be filed with the building
inspector for approval. All construction, including wiring and plumbing must meet the
State Building Code. (Ord. 5-72 § 6, 1973.)
15.12.060 Compliance with traffic requirements.
Any building moved on the streets of the city shall be moved in compliance with the
requirements of the chief of police as pertains to the movement of traffic within the city.
(Ord. 5-72 § 7, 1973.)
32
15.12.070 Compliance with requirements of city recorder.
The application for permit shall be upon the form required by the city recorder. Waivers
of the prescribed property owners within a distance of four hundred feet, exclusive of
streets, of the lot to which the building is to be moved, as defined hereinbefore, of this
chapter, shall contain the information required by the city recorder. (Ord. 5-72 § 8,
1973.)
15.12.080 Permit-Revocation.
Any misstatement or inaccuracy in the application or list of property owners adjoining or
waiver, as herein specified, shall be sufficient grounds for the revocation by the city
recorder of any permit issued. After such revocation, it shall be unlawful to continue
such moving operation. (Ord. 5-72 § 10, 1973.)
15.12.090 Violation-Penalty.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the jail
for a period of not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord.
5-72 § 9, 1973.)
Chapter 15.20
CURBS, SIDEWALKS AND UNDERGROUND UTILITIES*
15.20.010 New construction.
A. Curbs, Sidewalks and Half-street Improvements. No building permit shall be issued
for the construction of any new building on any lot which does not have existing curbs,
sidewalks and half-street improvements meeting the city standards on all abutting
streets to such lots, unless the applicant agrees to construct curbs, sidewalks and halfstreet
improvements to city standards along all such city streets which abut the property
described in the building permit in conjunction with the construction activity related to
the building permit.
B. Undergrounding of Utilities. No building permit shall be issued for construction of any
new building on any lot which is not served by underground utilities, unless the applicant
agrees to construct equipment and related facilities to accept and receive all
underground utility lines which shall serve the building or structure, including but not
limited to those required for all electric, communication and cable TV services in
conjunction with the construction activity related to the building permit.
C. Accessory Structures on One and Two Family Dwelling Lots. Construction of a
detached accessory structure, as defined in the Chapter 17.10 of the Sandy
Development Code (SDC), and more fully described in Section 17.74.10, B, Items 2
through 10, shall be served with underground power extended from the primary dwelling
unit. Construction of a detached accessory structure shall not cause compliance with
Section 15.20.020(A) and (B) for the primary dwelling unit unless the proposed
33
accessory structure has a value in excess of fifty percent of the value of the dwelling
before construction of the accessory structure begins.
D. Accessory Structures on Multi-family, Commercial or Industrial Properties. Accessory
structures, as defined in the Chapter 17.10 of the SDC, shall be served with
underground power extended from the primary building. Construction of a detached
accessory structure shall not cause compliance with Section 15.20.020(A) and (B) for
the primary structure unless the proposed accessory structure has a value in excess of
twenty percent of the value of all structures on the lot before construction of the
accessory structure begins.
(Ord. 98-11 § 1 (part), 1998.)
15.20.020 Remodeling, alterations and additions-One and two family dwellings.
A. Curbs, Sidewalks and Half-street Improvements. No building permit shall be issued
for remodeling, alteration or addition to any building or structure when the estimated
cost of the remodeling, alteration or addition exceeds fifty percent of the value of the
building or structure before such remodeling, alteration or addition is commenced on
any lot which does not have existing curbs, sidewalks and half-street improvements
meeting the city standards on all abutting streets to such lots, unless the applicant
agrees to construct curbs, sidewalks and half-street improvements to city standards
along all such city streets which abut the property described in the building permit in
conjunction with the construction activity related to the building permit.
B. Undergrounding of Utilities. No building permit shall be issued for remodeling,
alteration or addition to any building or structure when the estimated cost of the
remodeling, alteration or addition exceeds fifty percent of the value of the building or
structure before such remodeling, alteration or addition is commenced on any lot which
is not served by underground utilities, unless the applicant agrees to construct
equipment and related facilities to accept and receive all underground utility lines which
shall serve the building or structure, including but not limited to those required for all
electric communication and cable TV services in conjunction with the construction
activity related to the building permit
(Ord. 98-11 § 1 (part), 1998.)
15.20.030 Remodeling, alterations and additions-Multi-family, commercial and
industrial development.
A. Curbs, Sidewalks and Half-street Improvements. No building permit shall be issued
for remodeling, alteration or addition to any building or structure when the estimated
cost of the remodeling, alteration or addition exceeds twenty percent of the value of the
building or structure before such remodeling, alteration or addition is commenced on
any lot which does not have existing curbs, sidewalks and half-street improvements
meeting the city standards on all abutting streets to such lots, unless the applicant
agrees to construct curbs, sidewalks and half-street improvements to city standards
along all such city streets which abut the property described in the building permit in
conjunction with the construction activity related to the building permit.
34
B. Undergrounding of Utilities. No building permit shall be issued for remodeling,
alteration or addition to any building or structure when the estimated cost of the
remodeling, alteration or addition exceeds twenty percent of the value of the building or
structure before such remodeling, alteration or addition is commenced on any lot which
is not served by underground utilities, unless the applicant agrees to construct
equipment and related facilities to accept and receive all underground utility lines which
shall serve the building or structure, including but not limited to those required for all
electric, communication and cable TV services in conjunction with the construction
activity related to the building permit.
Ord. 98-11 § 1 (part), 1998.)
15.20.040 Determination of value of existing structure.
In determining the cost of remodeling and/or additions to existing buildings or structures
as such costs relate to the permit requirements of Section 15.20.010 and Section
15.20.040 of this chapter, all costs incurred for improvements of property in the twentyfour
month period preceding the application for a building permit shall be included with
costs based on one of the following valuations:
A. Cost of new construction, based on the International Conference of Building Officials
Valuation Table standards adopted by the state of Oregon on file in the building
department;
B. Based on an appraisal of the property conducted within the past twenty-four months.
The decision as to the value of the existing structure shall be made by the building
official. (Ord. 98-11 § 1 (part), 1998.
15.20.050 Determination of value of remodeling and/or addition.
A. Cost of new construction, based on the International Conference of Building Officials
Valuation Table standards adopted by the state of Oregon on file in the building
department;
B. Total cost of proposed project based on a signed construction contract.
The decision as to the cost of remodeling and/or additions to building or structures shall
be made by the building official.
(Ord. 98-11 § 1 (part), 1998.)
15.20.060 Timing of completion of improvements.
All improvements listed in Sections 15.20.010 and 15.20.020 shall be installed
according to city standards and shall be completed prior to the completion of the final
inspection and/or issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the new or remodeled
structure or building. In unimproved areas of the city, a time extension may be granted,
provided that the applicant provides a performance bond, or other financial guarantee
acceptable to the city attorney in an amount equal to one hundred twenty percent of the
35
cost of such improvements in full at time of permit issuance. (Ord. 98-11 § 1 (part),
1998.)
15.20.070 Obligation to complete improvements.
Although an exemption is granted under Sections 15.20.010(C) and (D), 15.20.020 or
15.20.030(A) and (B), the property owners shall continue to be obligated to complete
improvements. This obligation shall consist of execution of a waiver of remonstrance to
a local improvement district and execution of a deed restriction agreeing to complete
improvements, including but not limited, to curbs, sidewalks, sanitary sewer, water,
storm sewer or other improvements, which directly benefit the property. This obligation
shall include a time limit under which the improvements must be completed upon written
request by the city. (Ord. 98-11 § 1 (part), 1998.)
15.20.080 Forms and recording of documents.
The form shall be provided by the city and recorded with the property through the
Clackamas County recorder's office. The cost of recording shall be assessed to the
property owner. (Ord. 98-11 § 1 (part), 1998.)
15.20.090 Construction standards for curbs, sidewalks and half-street
improvements.
The city standards for such improvements are those contained in city standards for
public work improvements for new home construction. (Ord. 98-11 § 1 (part), 1998.)
15.20.100 Occupancy of structures.
The building official shall not authorize occupancy, issue certificates of occupancy, or
sign off on the final occupancy, until such time as the provisions of this chapter are
adhered to. (Ord. 98-11 § 1 (part), 1998.)
Chapter 15.22
UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS
(Ord. 07, 2006)
15.22.010 Definitions.
Whenever in this Chapter the words or phrases defined in this Chapter are used, they
shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions:
Commission' shall mean the Public Utilities Commission of the State of Oregon.
Underground utility district' or 'district' shall mean that area in the City within which
poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area
is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter.
Person' shall mean and include individuals, firms, corporations, and partnerships, and
their agents and employees.
36
'Poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures' shall mean poles, towers,
supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, cross arms, braces, transformers,
insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments, and
appurtenances located aboveground within a district and used or useful in supplying
electric, communication, or similar or associated service.
Utility' shall include all persons or entities supplying electric, communication, or similar
or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices.
15.22.020 Public hearing.
The City Council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the
public necessity, health, safety, or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead
wires, and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the City and the
underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication, or
similar or associated service. The City Manager shall notify all affected property owners,
as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and the involved utilities, by mail of the
date, time, and place of such hearings at least ten days prior to the date thereof. Each
such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At
each such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
15.22.040 Designation of underground utility districts by resolution.
If, after any such public hearing, the City Council finds that the public necessity, health,
safety, or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation within a
designated area, the City Council may, by resolution, declare such designated area an
underground utility district and order such removal and underground installation. Such
resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix
the date by which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and
within which affected property owners shall be ready to receive underground service. A
reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having
due regard for the availability of labor, materials, and equipment necessary for such
removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned
thereby. The decision of the City Council as set forth in the resolution shall be final and
conclusive.
15.22.060 Unlawful acts.
Whenever the City Council creates an underground utility district and orders the
removal of poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures therein as
provided in this Chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct,
place, keep, maintain, continue, employ, or operate poles, overhead wires, and
associated overhead structures in the district after the date when such overhead
facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except as such overhead
facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to
the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for
such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in this Chapter,
and for such reasonable time required to remove such facilities after such work has
been performed, and except as otherwise provided in Section 15.22.080 herein.
37
15.22.080 Emergency or unusual circumstances.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this Chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and
maintained for a period, not to exceed ten days, without authority of the City Manager,
in order to provide utilities in the event of an emergency or unusual circumstances. The
City Manager may, under such emergency or unusual circumstances, extend or grant
special permission, on such terms as the City Manager may deem appropriate, without
discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use, or
operate poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures on a temporary or
permanent basis. Any such decisions by the City Manager shall be subject to appeal to
the City Council by filing a written notice of appeal with the office of the City Manager
within 10 business days after the City Manager's decision is mailed.
15.22.090 Exceptions.
The provisions of this Chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of
this Chapter shall, unless otherwise provided in such resolution, not apply to the
following types of facilities:
A. Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the
satisfaction of the City Manager;
B. Poles or fixtures and other appurtenances used exclusively for street lighting;
C. Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a district
within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the
perimeter of a district, where such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead
wires, and associated overhead structures are not prohibited;
D. Poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures used for the transmission
of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of 34,500 volts;
E. Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket
or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on
the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street;
F. Antennae, associated equipment, and supporting structures used by a utility for
furnishing communication services;
G. Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface-mounted
transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed
ducts; and
H. Temporary poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures used or to be
used in conjunction with construction projects.
15.22.100 Notices to property owners and utility companies.
Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to this Chapter,
38
the City Manager shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property
within the district created by such resolution of the adoption thereof. The City Manager
shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any
person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication,
or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary
facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the
supplying utility or utilities at a new location, subject to the applicable rules, regulations,
and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the Commission. Notification by
the City Manager shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to
this Chapter to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized
assessment roll and to the affected utilities.
15.22.110 Responsibility of utility companies.
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district
created by any resolution adopted pursuant to this Chapter, the supplying utility shall, at
its cost, furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors, and associated equipment
required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations, and tariffs on file
with the Commission.
15.22.120 Responsibility of property owners.
A. Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying, or renting a building or
structures within a district shall perform construction and provide that portion of the
service connection on their property between the facilities referred to in this Chapter and
the termination facility on or within such building or structure being served, all in
accordance with the applicable rules, regulations, and tariffs of the respective utility or
utilities on file with the Commission.
B. In the event any person owning, operating, leasing, occupying, or renting such property
does not comply with the provisions of this Chapter within the time provided for in the
resolution enacted pursuant to this Chapter, the City Manager shall post written notice on
the property being served and thirty days thereafter shall have the authority to order the
disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities
supplying utility service to such property. A decision by the City Manager to order the
disconnection and removal of overhead service shall be subject to appeal to the City
Council by filing a written notice of appeal with the office of the City Manager within ten
days of the posting of such written notice.
15.22.130 Responsibility of City.
The City shall remove, at its own expense, all City-owned equipment from all poles
required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or user of such
poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to
this Chapter.
15.22.140 Extension of time.
In the event any act required by this Chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to this
Chapter cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of
39
materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil
disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time
within which such act shall be accomplished may be extended by the City Manager for a
period of time equivalent to the time of such limitation. The City Manager's decision on a
request for extension of time shall be final.
15.22.150 Penalty.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of
the requirements of this Chapter. Any person violating any provision of this Chapter or
failing to comply with any of its requirements shall be guilty of a violation punishable by
a fine of not to exceed $1000. Each day during any portion of which a violation of any of
the provisions of this Chapter is committed, continued, or permitted shall constitute a
separate offense.
15.22.160 Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Chapter is for any reason
held to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of
this Chapter. The City Council hereby declares that it would have adopted this Chapter
and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase thereof, irrespective of the
fact that anyone or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases be
declared invalid.
Chapter 15.24
HOUSE NUMBERING
15.24.010 Assignment of numbers.
The city shall be laid out into certain grid systems, and structures within these areas
shall be assigned new house numbers as a means of facilitating identification of said
structures. (Ord. 10-75 § 1, 1975.)
15.24.020 Method of furnishing number-Map.
There shall be on file in the administrative office a map or similar means of furnishing to
applicants who reside within the city a house number, and said number is to be the
identification for a structure at a certain location on a street. (Ord. 10-75 § 2, 1975.)
15.24.030 Display.
New house numbers shall be prominently displayed on all homes and commercial
establishments within the city. (Ord. 10-75 § 3, 1975.)
Chapter 15.28
SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT FEES
15.28.010 Purpose.
The purpose of the system development charge is to impose a portion of the cost of
40
capital improvements for water, wastewater, drainage, streets, flood control, and parks
and recreation upon those developments that create the need for or increase the
demands on capital improvements. (Ord. 10-91 § 2 (part), 1991.)
15.28.020 Scope.
The system development charge imposed by this chapter is separate from and in
addition to any applicable tax, assessment, charge, or fee otherwise provided by law or
imposed as a condition of development. (Ord. 10-91 § 2 (part), 1991.)
15.28.030 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following mean:
1. "Capital improvements" means facilities or assets used for:
a. Water supply, treatment and distribution;
b. Waste water collection, transmission, treatment and disposal;
c. Drainage and flood control;
d. Transportation; or
e. Parks and recreation.
2. "Development" means a building or mining operation, making a physical change in
the use or appearance of a structure or land, dividing land into two or more parcels
(including partitions and subdivisions), and creating or termination of a right of access.
3. "Improvement fee" means a fee for costs associated with capital improvements to be
constructed after the date the fee is adopted pursuant to this chapter.
4. "Land area" means the area of a parcel of land as measured by projection of the
parcel boundaries upon a horizontal plane with the exception of a portion of the parcel
within a recorded right-of-way or easement subject to a servitude for a public street or
scenic or preservation purpose.
5."Owner" means the owner or owners of record title or the purchaser or purchasers
under a recorded sales agreement, and other persons having an interest of record in
the described real property.
6. "Parcel of land" means a lot, parcel, block, or other tract of land that is occupied or
may be occupied by a structure or structures or other use, and that includes the yards
and other open spaces required under the zoning, subdivision, or other development
ordinance.
41
7. “Qualified public improvement” means a capital improvement that is required as a
condition of development approval, identified in the City of Sandy Capital Improvement
Plans and either:
a. Not located on or contiguous to property that is the subject of development approval;
or
b. Located in whole or in part on or contiguous to property that is the subject of
development approval and required to be built larger or with greater capacity than is
necessary for the particular development project to which the improvement fee is
related. (Ord. 2007-13 § 1.)
8. "Reimbursement fee" means a fee for costs associated with capital improvements
constructed or under construction on the date the fee is adopted pursuant to Section
15.28.040 of this chapter.
9. "System development charge" means a reimbursement fee, an improvement fee or a
combination thereof assessed or collected at the time of increased usage of a capital
improvement, at the time of issuance of a development permit or building permit, or at
the time of connection to the capital improvement. "System development charge"
includes that portion of a sewer or water system connection charge that is greater than
the amount necessary to reimburse the city for its average cost of inspecting and
installing connections with water and sewer facilities. "System development charge"
does not include fees assessed or collected as part of a local improvement district or a
charge in lieu of a local improvement district assessment, or the cost of complying with
requirements or conditions imposed by a land use decision.
(Ord. 10-91 § 2 (part), 1991.)
15.28.040 System development charge established.
A. System development charges shall be established and may be revised by resolution
of the council.
B. Unless otherwise exempted by the provisions of this chapter or other local or state
law, a system development charge is hereby imposed upon all persons who develop
parcels of land that connect to or which will otherwise use or create a need for the
sewer facilities, storm sewers, water facilities, streets or parks and open spaces of the
city.
(Ord. 10-91 § 2 (part), 1991.)
C. In accordance with ORS 223.304(8)(b), the City Manager or designee may annually
adjust the amounts of the City’s system development charges by applying the ENR
Construction Cost Index – Seattle, WA to account for changes in costs over an
identified time period for materials, labor and real property. An adjustment to the City’s
system development charges under this subsection is not a modification to a system
development charge methodology.
42
(Ordinance 2020-14)
15.28.050 Methodology.
A. The methodology used to establish the reimbursement fee shall consider the cost of
then-existing facilities, prior contributions by then-existing users, the value of unused
capacity, rate-making principles employed to finance publicly owned capital
improvements, and other relevant factors identified by the council. The methodology
shall promote the objective that future systems users shall contribute no more than an
equitable share of the cost of then-existing facilities.
B. The methodology used to establish the improvement fee shall consider the cost of
projected capital improvements needed to increase the capacity of the systems to which
the fee is related.
C. The methodology used to establish the improvement fee or the reimbursement fee,
or both, shall be contained in a resolution adopted by the council.
(Ord. 10-91 § 2 (part), 1991.)
15.28.060 Authorized expenditures.
A. Reimbursement fees shall be applied only to capital improvements associated with
the systems for which the fees are assessed, including expenditures relating to
repayment of indebtedness.
B.
1. Improvement fees shall be spent only on improvements associated with the systems
for which the fees are assessed, including expenditures relating to repayment of
indebtedness.
2. A capital improvement being funded wholly or in part from revenues derived from the
improvement fee shall be included in the improvement plan adopted by the city pursuant
to this chapter.
C. Notwithstanding subsections A and B of this section, system development charge
revenues may be expended on the direct costs of complying with the provisions of this
chapter, including the costs of developing system development charge methodologies
and providing an annual accounting of system development charge expenditures.
(Ord. 10-91 § 2 (part), 1991.)
15.28.070 Expenditure restrictions.
A. System development charges shall not be expended for costs associated with the
construction of administrative office facilities that are more than an incidental part of
other capital improvements.
B. System development charges shall not be expended for costs of the operation or
routine maintenance of capital improvements.
(Ord. 10-91 § 2 (part), 1991.)
43
15.28.080 Improvement plan.
The City shall prepare a capital improvement plan, public facilities plan, master plan or
comparable plan that includes a list of the capital improvements that the local
government intends to fund, in whole or in part, with revenues from the improvement fee
and the estimated cost, timing and percentage of costs eligible to be funded with
revenues from the improvement fee for each improvement.
A. The process for modifying or amending the plan shall conform to the requirements in
ORS 223.309(2).
(Ordinance 2020-14)
15.28.090 Collection of charge.
A. The system development charge is payable upon issuance of (1) a building permit;
(2) a permit to connect to the water system; or (3) a permit to connect to the sewer
system.
B. If development is commenced or connection is made to the water or sewer systems
without an appropriate permit, the system development charge is immediately payable
upon the earliest date that a permit was required.
C. The public works director shall collect the applicable system development charge
when a permit that allows the building or development of a parcel is issued or when a
connection to the water or sewer system of the city is made.
D. The public works director shall not issue such permit or allow such connection until
the charge has been paid in full, or until provision for installment payments has been
made pursuant to Section 15.28.110, or unless an exemption is granted pursuant to
Section 15.28.120.
(Ord. 10-91 § 2 (part), 1991.)
15.28.100 Delinquent charges-Hearings.
A. When, for any reason, the system development charge has not been paid, the city
manager shall report to the council the amount of the uncollected charge, the
description of the real property to which the charge is attributable, the date upon which
the charge was due, and the name of the person responsible for the payment of the fee.
B. The city council shall schedule a public hearing on the matter and direct that notice of
the hearing be given to each owner or person responsible for payment of the fee, with a
copy of the city manager's report concerning the unpaid charge. Notice of the hearing
shall be given either personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by both
personal and mailed notice and by posting notice on the parcel at least ten days before
the date set for the hearing.
C. At the hearing, the council may accept, reject, or modify the determination of the city
manager as set forth in the report.
44
D. The finance director shall report to the city manager the amount of the system
development charge, the dates on which the payments are due, the name of the owner,
and the description of the parcel.
(Ord. 10-91 § 2 (part), 1991.)
15.28.110 Installment payment.
A. When a system development charge of twenty-five dollars or more is due and
collectible, the owner of the parcel of land subject to the development charge may apply
for payment in at least ten semi-annual installments, to include interest on the unpaid
balance, in accordance with ORS 223.208.
B. The finance director shall provide application forms for installment payments, which
shall include a waiver of all rights to contest the validity of the lien, except for the
correction of computational errors.
C. An applicant for installment payment shall have the burden of demonstrating the
applicant's authority to assent to the imposition of a lien on the parcel and that the
interest of the applicant is adequate to secure payment of the lien.
D. The city finance director shall report to the city manager the amount of the system
development charge, the dates on which the payments are due, the name of the owner,
and the description of the parcel.
E. The city manager shall docket the lien in the lien docket. From that time the city shall
have a lien upon the described parcel for the amount of the system development
charge, together with interest on the unpaid balance at the rate established by
resolution of the council. The lien shall be enforceable in the manner provided in ORS
Chapter 223.
(Ord. 10-91 § 2 (part), 1991.)
15.28.120 Exemptions, reductions and waivers.
A. Structures and uses established and existing on or before July 1, 1991 are
exempt from system development charges imposed by this chapter, if the size of
the structure or the scope of the use has not increased since July 1, 1991 and if the
parcel of land is no larger than it was on July 1, 1991.
B. Additions to single-family dwellings that do not constitute the addition of a
dwelling unit, as defined by the Oregon Residential Specialty Code or its
currently adopted equivalent, are exempt from all portions of the system development
charge..
C. An alteration, addition, replacement to a structure, an increase in a property’s
size or change in use on the property that does not increase the parcel's or
structure's use of the public improvement facility is exempt from all portions of the
system development charge.
D. A system development charge shall be imposed when a change of use of a
45
parcel or structure occurs, but credit shall be given for the computed system
development charge to the extent that prior structures existed and services were
established on or after July 1, 1991. The credit so computed shall not exceed the
calculated system development charge. No cash refund shall be made on account
of such credit.
E. No sanitary sewer or transportation system development charges shall be
imposed when only the use of an existing structure of 6,000 square feet Gross
Floor Area or less in the C-1 Central Business District zone is changed if such
services were established on or after July 1, 1991.
15.28.130 Credits.
A. A person constructing a qualified public improvement as defined herein shall
be eligible for a credit against the applicable system development charge for the
type of improvement being constructed. Except as the city council may otherwise
approve, credit for qualified public improvements defined in subsection 15.28.030(7)(b)
may be granted only for the cost of that portion of such improvements that exceeds the
City’s minimum standard facility size or capacity needed to serve the particular
development project or property. No cash refund shall be made on account of such
credit. The applicant for a credit has the burden of demonstrating that a particular
improvement qualifies for a credit.
(Ordinance 2020-14)
B. 1. Credits may be transferred from one person or development to another with the
City’s prior written approval.
(Ordinance 2020-14)
2. When the construction of a qualified public improvement gives rise to a credit
amount greater than the improvement fee that would otherwise be levied against
the project receiving the development approval, the excess credit may be applied
against improvement fees that accrue in subsequent phases of the original development
project.
C. Credit shall not be transferable from one type of capital improvement to
another.
D. Credits must be used no later than ten years from the date they are issued.
15.28.140 Segregation and use of revenue.
A. All funds derived from a particular type of system development charge are to be
segregated by accounting practices from all other funds of the city. That portion of the
system development charge calculated and collected on account of a specific facility
system shall be used for no purpose other than those set forth in Section 15.28.060.
B. The city manager shall provide the city council with an annual accounting, based on
the city's fiscal year, for system development charges showing the total amount of
46
system development charge revenues collected for each type of facility and the projects
funded from each account.
(Ord. 10-91 § 2 (part), 1991.)
15.28.150 Appeal procedure.
A. A person challenging the propriety of an expenditure of system development charge
revenues may appeal the decision or the expenditure to the city council by filing a
written request with the city manager describing with particularity the decision and the
expenditure from which the person appeals. An appeal of an expenditure must be filed
within two years of the date of the alleged improper expenditure.
B. Appeals of any other decision required or permitted to be made by the city manager
under this chapter must be filed within ten days of the date of the decision.
C. After providing notice to the appellant, the council shall determine whether the city
manager's decision or the expenditure is in accordance with this chapter and the
provisions of ORS 223.297 to 233.314 and may affirm, modify, or overrule the decision.
If the council determines that there has been an improper expenditure of system
development charge revenues, the council shall direct that a sum equal to the misspent
amount shall be deposited within one year to the credit of the account or fund from
which it was spent.
(Ord. 10-91 § 2 (part), 1991.)
15.28.160 Prohibited connection.
A. No person may connect to the water or sewer systems of the city, connect a
driveway to a city street, or directly connect to the city's stormwater collection facility
unless the appropriate system development charge has been paid or the installment
payment method has been applied for and approved.
B. Violation of this section constitutes a Class A infraction and subjects the violator to
the penalties provided in Chapter 1.18.
(Ord. 10-91 § 2 (part), 1991.)
Chapter 15.30
DARK SKY ORDINANCE
(Ord. 02, 2011)
15.30.000 Purpose.
The purpose of the Sandy Dark Sky Ordinance is to regulate outdoor lighting in order to
reduce or prevent light pollution. This means to the extent reasonably possible the
reduction or prevention of glare and light trespass, the conservation of energy, and
promotion of safety and security. (Ord. 2002-11)
47
15.30.010 Definitions.
The "IES" (Illuminating Engineering Society of North America) Lighting Handbook, most
recent edition, the City of Sandy Development Code, and Building Code, shall be used
for the definition of terms used in this ordinance but not defined herein. In the case
where a definition of a term of this ordinance is found to be in conflict with a definition of
a term of any other ordinance, "IES" handbook or regulation, the more restrictive
definition will apply.
Area Light: Light that produces over 2050 lumens (See Table 2 for Light Output of
Various Lamps). Area lights include, but are not limited to, street lights, parking lot lights
and yard lights.
Automatic timing device: A device that automatically controls the operation of a light
fixture or fixtures, circuit or circuits. Photocells and light and or motion sensors shall be
considered automatic-timing devices
Average Foot-candle: The level of light measured at an average point of illumination
between the brightest and darkest areas. The measurement can be made at the ground
surface or at four to five feet above the ground.
Bulb: The source of electric light. To be distinguished from the whole assembly (See
Luminaire).
Candela (cd): Unit of luminous intensity.
Eighty-five (85) Degree Full Cut-Off Type Fixtures: Fixtures that do not allow light to
escape above an 85-degree angle measured from a vertical line from the center of the
lamp extended to the ground.
Exterior Lighting: Temporary or permanent lighting that is installed, located or used in
such a manner to cause light rays to shine outside. Fixtures that are installed indoors
that are intended to light something outside are considered exterior lighting for the intent
of this Ordinance.
Fixture: The assembly that holds the lamp in a lighting system. It includes the elements
designed to give light output control, such as a reflector (mirror) or refractor (lens), the
ballast, housing, and the attachment parts.
Flood Light: Light that produces up to 1800 lumens (See Addendum 1 for Light Output
of Various Lamps) and is designed to "flood" a well-defined area with light. Generally,
floodlights produce from 1000 to 1800 lumens.
Foot-candle: Illuminance produced on a surface one foot from a uniform point source
of one candela. Measured by a light meter.
48
Full cutoff fixture: A fixture which, as installed, gives no emission of light above a
horizontal plane.
Glare: Intense light that results in discomfort and/or a reduction of visual performance
and visibility.
Holiday Lighting: Festoon type lights, limited to small individual bulbs on a string,
where the output per bulb is no greater than 15 lumens.
IESNA - Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IES or IESNA): The
professional society of lighting engineers, including those from manufacturing
companies, and others professionally involved in lighting.
Illuminance: Density of luminous flux incident on a surface. Unit is foot-candle or lux.
Illuminating devices:
1. Light fixture types
a. Full cutoff fixture types - A fixture which, as installed, gives no emission of light
above a horizontal plane.
b. Floodlights and Spotlights - Fixtures defined as having a full beam width or beam
spread of less than 110 degrees.
2. Lamp types
a. Incandescent lamps - Lamps which produce light via an electrically heated metallic
filament.
b. Fluorescent lamps - Lamps that use fluorescence of a phosphor to produce visible
light.
c. High Intensity Discharge Lamps - Lamps, which produce visible light directly by the
electrical heating or excitation of a gas. Examples of such lighting include, but are
not limited to, Metal Halide, High Pressure Sodium, Low Pressure Sodium and
Mercury Vapor. For purposes of this Ordinance, fluorescent lights are not considered
HID lighting.
Lamp or Bulb: The light-producing source installed in the socket portion of a luminaire.
Light Pollution: Any adverse effect of manmade light including, but not limited to, light
trespass, up lighting, the uncomfortable distraction to the eye, or any manmade light
that diminishes the ability to view the night sky. Often used to denote urban sky glow.
Light trespass: Light emitted by a luminaire falls where it is not wanted or needed or
shines beyond the property on which the luminaire is installed.
49
Lighting: Any or all parts of a luminaire that function to produce light.
Lumen: Unit of luminous flux; the flux emitted within a unit solid angle by a point source
with a uniform luminous intensity of one candela. One foot-candle is one lumen per
square foot. One lux is one lumen per square meter.
Luminaire: The complete lighting unit, including the lamp, the fixture, and other parts.
Luminance: At a point and in a given direction, the luminous intensity in the given
direction produced by an element of the surface surrounding the point divided by the
area of the projection of the element on a plane perpendicular to the given direction.
Units: candelas per unit area. The luminance is the perceived brightness that we see,
the visual effect of the illuminance, reflected, emitted or transmitted from a surface.
Measurement:
1. Lamp output
a. Total output: Measurement of total output is in lumens. This should be understood to
be the initial lumen value for the lamp.
b. Illuminance: Measurements of illuminance are expressed in initial lumens per square
foot. (A desktop illuminance of twenty (20) initial lumens per square foot is adequate
for most purposes.)
In measuring illuminance, the light detector should be pointed directly at the light source
or sources. The intervening light path should be free of obstruction.
Outdoor light fixture: An outdoor illuminating device, outdoor lighting or reflective
surface, luminous tube, lamp or similar device, permanently installed or portable, used
for illumination, decoration, or advertisement. Such devices shall include, but are not
limited to lights used for:
A. parking lot lighting;
B. roadway lighting;
C. buildings and structures;
D. recreational areas;
E. landscape lighting;
F. billboards and other signs (advertising or other);
G. product display area lighting;
50
H. building or structure decoration;
I. building overhangs and open canopies.
Recessed: When a light is built into a structure or portion of a structure such that the
light is fully cut-off and no part of the light extends or protrudes beyond the underside of
a structure or portion of a structure.
Partially Shielded: The bulb of the fixture is shielded by a translucent siding and the
bulb is not visible at all. Light may be emitted at the horizontal level of the bulb.
Shielded: When the light emitted from the fixture is projected below a horizontal plane
running through the lowest point of the fixture where light is emitted. The bulb is not
visible with a shielded light fixture, and no light is emitted from the sides of the fixture.
Also considered a full cut-off fixture.
Spotlight or Floodlight: Any lamp that incorporates a reflector or a refractor to
concentrate the light output into a directed beam in a particular direction (see definition
for floodlight).
Temporary Lighting: Lighting that is intended to be used for a special event for seven
(7) days or less.
Up lighting: Lighting that is directed in such a manner as to shine light rays above the
horizontal plane.
15.30.020 Scope & Applicability.
New Lighting. All exterior outdoor lighting installed after the effective date of this
Chapter in any and all zones in the City shall conform with the requirements established
by this Chapter and other applicable ordinances unless otherwise exempted. This
ordinance does not apply to indoor lighting.
Existing Lighting. All existing lighting located on a subject property that is part of an land
use application or building permit, dependent on the value of the project, shall be
brought into conformance with this Ordinance. The value of the project will determined
in accordance with Chapter 15.20.040 and 15.20.050. If the value exceeds the
threshold in Chapter 15.20.020 and 15.20.030, all lighting on the property must be
brought into full compliance before reoccupation or reuse.
Nonconforming Uses or Structures. If a nonconforming use or structure has been
abandoned for more than twelve months all lighting on the property must be brought
into full compliance before reoccupation or reuse.
Conformity shall occur prior to issuance of Certificate of Occupancy, Final Inspection, or
Final Plat Recordation, when applicable. For other permits, the applicant shall have a
51
maximum of thirty days from date of permit issuance to bring the lighting into
conformance.
Preferred Source - Low-pressure Sodium (LPS) lamps are the preferred illumination
source throughout the city and their use is encouraged.
When an existing fixture is replaced, the replacement fixture shall meet the
requirements of this chapter.
Architectural design, site planning, landscaping and lighting may be further restricted
elsewhere in the Sandy Municipal Code.
All governmental agencies, federal, state or county, which operate within the city limits
of Sandy - should experience no difficulty meeting the requirements of this ordinance
and are encouraged by the city to comply with its provisions.
In the event of a conflict with any other chapter of the Sandy Municipal Code, the more
stringent requirement shall apply.
15.30.030 Exemptions & Exceptions.
A Residential fixtures consisting of lamp types of 2050 lumens and below (the
acceptability of a particular light is decided by its lumen output, not wattage. Check
manufacturer's specifications). Examples include:
100 Watt Standard Incandescent and less
100 Watt Midbreak Tungsten-Halogen (quartz) and less
25 Watt T-12 Cool White Fluorescent and less
18 Watt Low Pressure Sodium and less
B. Federally funded and state funded roadway construction projects, are exempted from
the requirements of this division only to the extent it is necessary to comply with federal
and state requirements.
C. Fossil Fuel Light. Fossil fuel light produced directly or indirectly by the combustion of
natural gas or other utility-type fossil fuels is exempt from the provisions of this article.
D. Full cutoff street lighting, which is part of a federal, state, or municipal installation.
E. Holiday lighting.
F. Lighting of sports facilities or stadiums prior to 11:00 p.m. Illumination after 11:00
p.m. is also permitted if it is necessary in order to conclude a recreational, sporting or
other scheduled activity, which is in progress prior to that time.
52
G. Specialized lighting necessary for safety, such as navigated or runway lighting of
airports, or temporary lighting associated with emergency operations, road hazard
warnings, etc.
H. Traffic control signals and devices.
15.30.040 Approved Materials and Methods of Installation.
The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prevent the use of any design,
material or method of installation or operation not specifically prohibited by this chapter,
provided such alternative design, material or method conforms with the intent of this
division and has been approved by the building official.
The Building Official administrator may approve an alternative design provided
he finds that:
A. It complies with the applicable specific requirements of this division; or
B. It has been designed or approved by a registered professional engineer and
complies with the purpose of this division.
15.30.050 Submittals.
All applications for building permits or land use planning review which include
installation of outdoor lighting fixtures shall include lighting plans conforming to the
provisions of this Ordinance. The Planning Director and/or Building Official shall have
the authority to request additional information in order to achieve the purposes of this
Ordinance.
A. The submittal shall contain the following information and submitted as part of the site
plan to the Planning and Building departments for approval.
1. Plans indicating the location, type, intensity, and height of luminaries including both
building and ground-mounted fixtures;
2. A description of the luminaries, including lamps, poles or other supports and shielding
devices, which may be provided as catalogue illustrations from the manufacturer;
3. Photometric data, such as that furnished by the manufacturer, showing the angle of
light emission and the foot-candles on the ground; and
4. Additional information as may be required by the city in order to determine
compliance with this Ordinance.
B. Applications for single/multi-family residential or other projects where any single
outdoor light fixture exceeds (2050 lumens output) shall be required to comply with
paragraph A above.
53
15.30.060 General Standards.
The following general standards shall apply to all outdoor lighting installed after the
effective date of this ordinance, which is not exempted above:
A. Area Lights: All area lights, including street lights and parking area lighting, shall be
full cut-off fixtures and are encouraged to be eighty-five (85) degree full cut-off type
fixtures. Street lights shall be high-pressure sodium, low-pressure sodium, or metal
halide, unless otherwise determined by the city that another type is more efficient.
Street lights along residential streets shall be limited to a 70-watt high-pressure sodium
(hps) light. Street lights along nonresidential streets or at intersections shall be limited to
100 watts hps, except that lights at major intersections on state highways shall be
limited to 200 watts hps. If the city permits a light type other than high-pressure sodium,
then the equivalent output shall be the limit for the other light type.
B. Canopy Lights: All lighting shall be recessed sufficiently so as to ensure that no light
source is visible from or causes glare on public rights-of-way or adjacent property.
C. Illumination Levels: Illumination levels and uniformity shall be in accordance with
current recommended practices of the Illuminating Engineering Society. Recommended
standards of the illuminating engineering society shall not be exceeded.
D. All outdoor lighting systems shall be designed and operated so that the area 10 feet
beyond the property line of the premises receives no more than .25 (one quarter) of a
foot-candle of light from the premises lighting system.
E. Temporary Lighting: Temporary lighting that conforms to the requirements of this
Ordinance shall be allowed. Nonconforming temporary exterior lighting may be
permitted by the Building Official only after considering 1) the public and/or private
benefits which will result from the temporary lighting; 2) any annoyance or safety
problems that may result from the use of the temporary lighting; and, 3) the duration of
the temporary nonconforming lighting. The applicant shall submit a detailed description
of the proposed temporary nonconforming lighting to the Building Official.
F. Towers: All radio, communication, and navigation towers that require lights shall have
dual lighting capabilities. For daytime, the white strobe light may be used, and for
nighttime, only red lights shall be used.
15.30.070 Non –Permitted Lighting.
A. Newly installed fixtures, which are not full-cutoff fixtures.
B. Lighting which presents a clear hazard to motorists, cyclists, or pedestrians.
C. Laser Source Light. The use of laser source light or any similar high intensity light for
outdoor advertising or entertainment is prohibited.
54
15.30.080 Appeals.
If an application is denied, an individual shall have the right of appeal to the City
Council. The fee for an appeal shall be the same as a Type III review (Section 2-Master
Fee Resolution).
15.30.090 Violations.
This section may be enforced on the basis of a formal complaint filed in writing with the
city.
15.30.100 Penalties.
See Section 1.16.010 of the Sandy Municipal Code.
15.30.110 Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance are severable and if any paragraph, section,
subsection, or part of this ordinance is held to be invalid, unenforceable,
unconstitutional, or inapplicable to any person or circumstance, such illegality, invalidity,
unconstitutionality, or inapplicability shall not affect or impair the remainder of this
ordinance.
TABLE 1: CODE REQUIREMENTS TABLES FOR SHIELDING
Lamp
Type
25 30 35 40 50 60 75 100 110 or
More
Low
Pressur
e
Sodium
Unshiel
ded
Directe
d
Shield
Directe
d
Shield
Directe
d
Shield
Directe
d
Shield
Directe
d
Shield
Directe
d
Shield
Directe
d
Shield
Directe
d
High
Pressur
e
Sodium
Unshiel
ded
Unshiel
ded
Directe
d
Shield
Directe
d
Shield
Directe
d
Shield
Directe
d
Shield
Directe
d
Shield
Directe
d
Shield
Directe
d
Shield
Metal
Halide
Unshiel
ded
Unshiel
ded
Directe
d
Shield
Directe
d
Shield
Directe
d
Shield
Directe
d
Shield
Directe
d
Shield
Directe
d
Shield
Directe
d
Shield
Fluores
cent
Unshiel
ded
Unshiel
ded
Unshiel
ded
Directe
d
Shield
Directe
d
Shield
Directe
d
Shield
Directe
d
Shield
Directe
d
Shield
Directe
d
Shield
Quartz Unshiel
ded
Unshiel
ded
Unshiel
ded
Unshiel
ded
Unshiel
ded
Directe
d
Shield
Directe
d
Shield
Directe
d
Shield
Directe
d
Shield
Tungste
n
Haloge
n
Unshiel
ded
Unshiel
ded
Unshiel
ded
Unshiel
ded
Unshiel
ded
Directe
d
Shield
Directe
d
Shield
Directe
d
Shield
Directe
d
Shield
55
Mercury
Vapor
Unshiel
ded
Unshiel
ded
Unshiel
ded
Unshiel
ded
Unshiel
ded
Incande
scent
Unshiel
ded
Unshiel
ded
Unshiel
ded
Unshiel
ded
Unshiel
ded
Unshiel
ded
Unshiel
ded
Unshiel
ded
Unshiel
ded
1.For the purpose of this section wattage ratings for lamp types will be for either
a single lamp source or multiple lamp sources when installed in a cluster.
2.Lamp types not listed in the table may be approved for use by the building
official providing installation of these lamps conforms to the lumen limits
established in this section.
3. Glass tubes filled with argon, neon or krypton do not require shielding
Table 2: TYPICAL LUMEN VALUES FOR VARIOUS LAMP WATTAGE
Wattag
e
Low
pressur
e
Sodium
High
Pressur
e
Sodium
Metal
Halide
Fluorescen
t
Quart
z
Mercur
y Vapor
Incandescen
t
9 600
18 1,800
35 4,725 2,250
40 4,000 2,250 480
50 7,925
60 870
70 5,800 5,500
75 2,800 1,190
90 14,400
100 9,500 8,00 4,300 1,750
110 6,600
150 16,000 2,850
175 14,00
0
8,600
200 22,000 4,010
250 27,500 20,50
0
12,100
300 6,360
400 50,000 36,00
0
22,500
500 10,850
56
Taken from data supplied by Portland General Electric - Energy Resource Center
City of Sandy
Sign Code
Chapter 15.32
(Ord. 2008-06, effective 5/7/08. Amended by Ord. 2010-04, effective 1/5/11,
and Ord. 2011-11 effective 10/19/11)
15.32.010 Purpose and policy
15.32.020 Signs permitted only in commercial & industrial zones
15.32.030 Signs allowed in residential zones--permits required
15.32.032 Signs allowed in residential zones exempt from permits but subject to
regulation.
15.32.035 Community-wide event signs.
15.32.040 Signs allowed in all zones exempt from permits but subject to regulation.
15.32.050 Signs permitted in all districts - exempt from permits.
15.32.070 General construction and maintenance requirements.
15.32.080 Prohibited signs.
15.32.090 Permit required.
15.32.100 Permit fees.
15.32.110 Permit application.
15.32.120 Permit approval.
15.32.130 Permit conditions.
15.32.140 Permit appeal.
15.32.150 Variances to standards.
15.32.160 Administration and enforcement.
15.32.170 Sign removal.
15.32.180 Periodic review.
15.32.190 Violations.
15.32.200 Limitation of liability.
15.32.210 Definitions.
15.32.010 Purpose and policy.
The sign regulations are intended to serve the community by:
A. Requiring sound construction, by requiring that signs be maintained, and by limiting
the number of visual images to be communicated;
B. Providing an equitable opportunity to use signs outside of public rights-of-way as a
communication medium;
C. Providing standards for frequency, location, size, construction, type and number of
signs;
57
D. Providing reasonable limits on the magnitude and extent of graphic communication
presented to the public; and
E. Regulating the location and quantity of temporary signs, and the circumstances
under which they may be used and encourage all businesses to utilize permanent signs
to the maximum extent possible and not rely on temporary signs for advertising needs.
F. Expressing elements of or reflecting Cascadian architecture by adapting elements of
the Sandy Style into new signs.
15.32.020 Signs permitted only in commercial & industrial zones
Permits are required for these signs.
A. Sign Lighting. Backlit (i.e., internally illuminated) signs are prohibited in the C-1
zone. Panels for existing backlit signs in the C-1 zone may be replaced as long as the
new panel provides light lettering and/or graphics on a dark background (see sample
photo, below).
B. Wall signs.
1. Sign size (area): Up to 10% of the gross wall area of each wall, including windows.
Businesses with less than 250 ft2 of wall area may have a 25 ft2 sign. A building with
frontage on two or more streets shall be permitted wall signs on each frontage.
2. Maximum area: 200 ft2 in the C-1 zoning district; no limit other zones.
3. Multiple uses: the permitted sign area for uses located on the same site or within the
same building may be divided among the uses. Separate wall signs or a joint-use wall
sign may be erected, provided that the maximum allowable sign area is not exceeded.
4. Maximum sign projection: 18 inches.
C. Projecting signs. A "projecting sign" is a sign attached to and projecting out from a
building face or wall and generally at right angles to the building (see sample photo
below). Projecting signs include signs projecting totally in the right-of-way, partially in
the right-of-way, and fully on private property.
1. Maximum area on one sign face: 32 ft2.
2. Height: shall not exceed the height of the structure.
3. Clearance: 8 feet above pedestrian walkways; 15 feet above vehicular driveways
and public rights-of-way. Clearance is measured from the highest point of the grade
below the sign to the lowermost point of the sign.
58
4. Projection distance: no more than 8 feet from the building, or two-thirds the width of
the sidewalk, whichever is less. In any case, the sign shall not project within 2 feet of
the curb.
5. Hanging signs under awnings are encouraged, as long as the above clearances are
met. (See sample photo below.)
6. Marquee, canopy and awning signs are permitted and must comply with the State
Structural Specialty Code and city regulations.
a) Marquee signs may be placed on or incorporated into these structures provided they
do not extend above the upper surfaces of the structure. "Marquee sign" means a sign
incorporated into, erected or maintained under, supported by or attached to a marquee
or permanent canopy. "Marquee" means a permanent roof-like or roofed structure
attached to, supported by and projecting outward from a building over the entrance to a
theater, hotel, etc.
b) As used here, "awning" means a movable shelter supported entirely from the exterior
wall of a building extending over a doorway or window and providing shelter from the
rain or sun. When signs are incorporated into awnings the entire panel containing the
sign is counted as sign face unless it is clear that part of the panel contains no related
display or decoration. Awning signs are considered as wall signs for calculation of the
maximum permitted area.
D. Individual business--freestanding signs. A freestanding sign is a sign on a frame,
pole or other support structure which is not attached to any building. A monument sign
is a type of freestanding sign. (See sample photo below.)
1. Allowed only for businesses with at least 50 lineal feet of public street frontage, and
not part of an integrated business center.
2. Maximum area on one sign face: 32 ft2 in the C-1 district. Other districts: 1 ft2 per
lineal foot of site frontage, up to 100 ft2.
3. Maximum height: 20 feet in the C-1 district, 30 feet in C-2 and industrial districts.
Freestanding signs in C-3 (village commercial) districts are limited to monument signs
with a maximum height of 8 feet.
4. Extra sign area for large frontages (does not apply to C-1 and C-3 districts):
a) The sign area may be increased .25 ft2 for additional lineal foot frontage over 300
feet with a maximum of 150 ft2 of area; or
b) One additional free-standing sign may be installed through a Type II Design Review
process. The sign area for the additional sign is up to 1 ft2 per foot of frontage over 300,
to a maximum of 100 ft2.
59
5. Corner signs: signs facing more than one street shall be assigned to a frontage (for
area calculations) by the applicant.
6. Multiple frontages: Businesses which are not on a corner, with frontage on two or
more streets, shall be permitted the use of a freestanding sign on each frontage.
7. Individual Business Pad Location. A business located on the same lot as two or more
commercial businesses, but designed as a separate structure at an intersection of two
streets is permitted one free standing sign. Size shall be calculated using the individual
business standards, above.
8. Design Standards. All new freestanding signs related to buildings that require
conformance with the Sandy Style Design Standards of Chapter 17.90 shall comply with
the following design standards:
a) Strong base material such as natural stone (e.g., basalt, granite, river stone), split
face rusticated concrete block or brick. Cultured stone may be allowed if it has a stone
texture and is similar in appearance and durability to natural stone. A sign’s base must
extend at least 36 inches above the adjacent finished grade and wrap around all sides
of the sign base.
b) Rectangular-shaped signs shall provide a metal or wood (or material having the
appearance of metal or wood) frame a minimum of three inches wide around all sides of
the sign area.
c) Exception: New freestanding signs in the C-1 Zoning District and located within the
Downtown Exception areas (as identified in Chapter 17.90.10(F)) are exempt from
these design standards and shall complement the architectural design of the building
from which the sign is related.
E. Integrated business center.
1. A master sign shall be required for two or more commercial businesses sharing a
street access or located on the same parcel, shopping or business center.
2. Permitted additional sign area: 40 ft2 (not calculated in maximum sign area).
3. Maximum sign area: 1 ft2 of area for each lineal foot of frontage, up to 100 ft2 (C-1
district), 200 ft2 other districts.
4. Maximum height: 20 feet in the C-1 district and 30 feet in the C-2 and industrial
districts. Integrated business center signs in the C-3 district are limited to monument
signs of no more than 12 feet high. (Amended by Ord. 2005-11)
5. Extra sign area for large frontages: for businesses centers with frontage exceeding
300 feet, additional signs may be permitted at each driveway through a Type II Design
Review process, provided that the signs do not exceed 75 ft2 in the C-1 district, 150 ft2
other districts.
60
6. Design Standards: All new integrated business center signs related to buildings that
require conformance with the Sandy Style Design Standards of Chapter 17.90 shall
comply with the following design standards:
a) Strong base material such as natural stone (e.g., basalt, granite, river stone), split
face rusticated concrete block or brick. Cultured stone may be allowed if it has a stone
texture and is similar in appearance and durability to natural stone. A sign’s base must
extend at least 36 inches above the adjacent finished grade and wrap around all sides
of the sign base.
b) Rectangular-shaped signs shall provide a metal or wood (or material having the
appearance of metal or wood) frame a minimum of three inches wide around all sides of
the sign area.
c) Exception: New integrated business center signs in the C-1 Zoning District and
located within the Downtown Exception areas (as identified in Chapter 17.90.10(F))
shall compliment the architectural design of the building from which the sign is related.
F. A-frame signs.
1. A-Frame signs are permitted as portable permanent signs.
2. Design Review. Prior to issuing a permit for an A-Frame sign, the sign design must
be reviewed and approved by the Sign Review Committee appointed by the City
Council, according to criteria and procedures established by the committee.
3. Dimensions: The sign area shall not exceed six square feet measured at the outside
edge of the sign structure. The top of the sign shall be no more than 4 feet from the
ground (including feet and hinge mechanism).
4. Quantity: no more than one sign per business or property. Properties with multiple
businesses are permitted one sign per separate business entity
5. Location:
a) Signs must not obstruct vehicle sight clearances or be placed so as to obscure
permanent signs. Signs placed on or near sidewalks must maintain at least 4 feet
unobstructed sidewalk width.
b) Signs may be located at a different location than the business location of the owner
of the sign if the sign owner submits a consent form allowing such a sign signed by the
business or property owner where the sign will be located.
6. Time period: may be displayed only during hours that the business is open to the
public, and shall be promptly removed from public display when the business is closed.
G. Searchlights may be used by any business or enterprise once yearly for a maximum
period of two consecutive days. "Searchlights" means an apparatus on a swivel that
projects a strong, far-reaching beam of light.
61
H. Electronic Message Signs. Any permanent sign that incorporates an electronic
message sign shall be subject to the following limitations:
1. The sign shall contain static messages only. The message may be changed through
dissolve or fade transitions, but may not otherwise have movement, or the appearance
or optical illusion of movement or varying light intensity. The image on the electronic
message sign shall remain static for at least one hour.
2. The sign shall have automatic dimmer software or solar sensors to control brightness
for nighttime viewing. The intensity of the light source shall not produce glare, and
lighting from the message module shall not exceed 600 nits (candelas per square
meter) between dusk to dawn as measured from the sign’s face. Applications for sign
permits containing an electronic display shall include the manufacturer’s specifications
and nit (candela per square meter) rating. The City shall have the right to enter the
property to view the programmed specifications of the sign to determine compliance
with this provision.
3. A electronic message sign placed inside a window is subject to the provisions of this
section when it is visible from a public right-of-way.
4. Any existing sign permitted to incorporate a new electronic message sign shall be
brought into compliance with all other applicable provisions of this chapter including but
not limited to sign height, size, and design.
I. Temporary signs are allowed in addition to any permanent sign permitted under this
chapter, except as otherwise stated below.
1. Number. One freestanding or on-building temporary sign is allowed per business,
except that integrated business centers are allowed one freestanding temporary sign for
each permanent freestanding sign that exists on the property. Banners on permanent
freestanding signs are considered freestanding temporary signs.
2. Height. The maximum height of a freestanding temporary sign is six feet. No onbuilding
temporary sign may extend above the roofline of the building on which it is
located.
3. Area. The maximum area of a temporary sign is 32 square feet.
4. Anchoring. Temporary signs must be situated in a manner that prevents the sign from
being blown from its location, while allowing the prompt removal of the sign.
5. Duration. A temporary sign may only be displayed for 180 days total in any calendar
year for each lot, parcel, or business, or until the event associated with the sign has
ended, whichever is earlier. This duration limit begins the first day the temporary sign is
used and runs for 180 consecutive days, regardless of whether the temporary sign is
removed during this period. A business may not display a banner for more than 60
62
consecutive days out of 90 days (i.e. a business must be free of any temporary banners
for at least 30 consecutive days out of 90 days).
15.32.030 Signs allowed in residential zones--permits required
A. One permanent sign is allowed for each parcel or lot zoned residential.
B. The sign must be located flat against the dwelling, or located no further than four feet
from a residence’s footprint.
C. The maximum area of a permanent sign in a residential district is two square feet.
D. Multifamily or residential subdivision standards.
1. Area: The maximum area of a multifamily or subdivision sign is 32 square feet.
2. Number and type: One freestanding sign is allowed for a subdivision development or
a multifamily complex, even if more than one tax lot or ownership is included in the
development, except as follows:
a) If a development has more than one access point, one additional sign may be located
at a major public access point located on a different public road.
b) In the case of (a) above, neither sign may exceed 32 square feet in area.
c) Individual properties within a subdivision are allowed a sign in accordance with
subsections (A) through (C) above.
d) Height. The maximum height of a multifamily or subdivision sign is five feet.
E. Commercial and Institutional Uses within Residential Zones.
1. Number. Only one sign is allowed for a development or complex, even if more than
one tax lot or ownership is included in the development, except that if a development
has more than one access point, one additional sign may be located at a major public
access point located on a different public road.
2. Type. The sign may be freestanding or on-building.
3. Area. The maximum sign face area is 32 square feet.
4. The maximum height for a freestanding sign is five feet.
5. Readerboard signs may be incorporated in a freestanding or on-building sign, subject
to the limits in 15.32.020(H).
63
15.32.032 Signs allowed in residential zones exempt from permits but subject to
regulation.
A. Temporary Signs. Temporary signs are allowed in addition to any permanent sign
permitted under this chapter, except as otherwise stated below.
1. Number. A residentially zoned lot or parcel may have two temporary signs
(freestanding or on-building), so long as the total combined area of the two signs does
not exceed 16 square feet. Additional temporary signs not exceeding six square feet
each are permitted if erected not more than 45 days prior to an election and removed
within five days following the election; except that one such sign may be up to sixteen
square feet in area.
3. Height. The maximum height of a freestanding temporary sign is six feet. No onbuilding
temporary sign may extend above the roofline of the building on which it is
located.
4. Area. The maximum area of a temporary sign in a residential zone is 16 square feet.
5. Anchoring. Temporary signs must be situated in a manner that prevents the sign from
being blown from its location, while allowing the prompt removal of the sign.
6. Duration. A temporary sign may only be displayed for 180 days total in any calendar
year for each lot, parcel, or business, or until the event associated with the sign has
ended, whichever is earlier.
7. A-Frame Signs.
a. Portable A-frame signs are considered to be temporary signs for purposes of this
section. The height of an A-frame sign is limited to three feet and the area to six square
feet.
b. The city shall have available a reasonable supply of professionally made garage sale
signs that can be rented by individuals. In addition, the city may secure a deposit to
recover the cost of replacing the sign in the event of damage or loss.
15.32.035 Community-wide event signs.
Special signs, including but not limited to banners, flags, wind-activated devices,
streamers, balloons, pennants, posters, etc., as approved by the city council may be
permitted:
1. The applicant must submit a written request, specifying the time period for display of
signs, type of event, types of advertising/display material and proposed locations of
display materials;
2. Time limits: twenty-one days prior to the event and removal within seven days
following the event;
64
3. Street banners proposed to be erected over the state highway right-of-way are
subject to a permit issued by the State Highway Division and all applicable rules of that
agency.
15.32.040 Signs allowed in all zones exempt from permits but subject to
regulation.
The following signs are exempt from permits but are subject to regulation as listed
below:
A. Banners on Light Poles in Private Parking Lots (Commercial/Industrial Zones).
1. Number. Only one banner per pole.
2. Size. No larger than 30 inches wide and 60 inches tall.
3. Materials. Limited to materials that appear like canvas or fabric; no reflective vinyl.
B. Signs Held by People.
A sign held by a person in or adjacent to a pedestrian right-of-way, whether or not the
individual is in costume, is permitted as long as the person holds the sign.
15.32.050 Signs permitted in all districts - exempt from permits.
The following signs and operations are exempt from one or more of the requirements of
this chapter but shall comply with all other applicable provisions. Limitations, if any, are
noted below.
A. Signs erected in the public right-of-way by the city, Clackamas County, the state of
Oregon, the U.S. Government, a public utility, or an agent including:
1. Street identification signs,
2. Traffic control, safety, warning, hazard, construction, and related signs;
B. One official national, state and local government flag or banner per property when
installed in a manner that meets city ordinances and when flown and maintained as
specified by the U.S. Flag Code, are exempt from the provisions of these regulations.
The flag structure should not exceed twenty feet or one hundred ten percent of the
maximum height of the primary structure on the property, whichever is greater. All
structures over ten feet in height require a building permit and an inspection of the
footing and structure, as per the Oregon State Structural Specialty Code, prior to
installation of the structure;
C. Signs required by city ordinance, county ordinance or state or federal law are exempt
from the provisions of these regulations. Examples include address numbers, street
names, public notices, restaurant health inspection ratings, handicapped access signs
and civil defense shelter signs;
65
D. Signs erected for the convenience of the public identifying rest rooms, entrances,
public telephones, walkways, directional or information signs, including menu boards,
located wholly within the site;
E. Signs located on private property that are not visible from a public street or right-ofway
unless the department deems that the continuation of such a sign constitutes a
serious and immediate danger to public safety and welfare;
F. Historical markers erected and maintained by a public authority or recognized
historical society or organization identifying sites, buildings or structures of recognized
historical value ;
G. Memorial signs or tablets, historical markers, signs cut into the surface or the facade
of the building, or when projecting not more than two inches;
H. Signs located in the interior of any building or within an enclosed lobby or court of
any building or group of buildings, which signs are designed and located to be viewed
exclusively by patrons of such use or uses;
I. Painted wall decorations and wall graphics ("painted wall decorations" means murals
or displays painted or placed directly onto a wall or fence and containing no copy,
advertising symbols, lettering, trademarks designed and intended as a decorative or
ornamental feature);
J. Signs, decorations and displays inside of windows or attached to the inside of
windows, provided that the sign or display in a window does not exceed 100 ft2.
Window signs larger than 100 ft2 are regulated as wall signs.
15.32.060 Nonconforming signs.
A. The following shall be considered nonconforming signs:
1. Signs that already existed when these regulations were adopted, have an approved
county or state sign permit, and which do not conform to the provisions of these sign
regulations;
2. Signs on lands annexed to the city and having an approved county or state sign
permit.
B. Nonconforming signs shall be removed or shall be altered to conform to the
provisions of this chapter when:
1. The nature of the business conducted on the premises changes and the sign is
changed or modified either in shape, size or legend; or
2. When the name of the business changes and the sign is changed or modified either
in shape, size or legend.
66
3. Exception: Panels on existing nonconforming backlit signs in the C-1 zone may be
changed according to the provisions of Paragraph 15.32.020.A.
C. Nonconforming signs advertising a business or other use which has discontinued
operation within the building, on the lot or in the development shall be deemed
abandoned and shall be removed within one hundred twenty days of the time the
business or use is discontinued, unless a new occupancy permit is issued for a new
use.
D. All temporary signs in existence which do not conform to the provisions of this
chapter shall be removed or made to conform within thirty days of the passage of the
ordinance codified in this chapter.
E. Signs located on property which is annexed to the city shall have sixty days in which
to be removed or made to conform to the provisions of this chapter.
F. If a nonconforming sign is abandoned, the property owner of record, as shown on the
tax roll of Clackamas County, shall be notified via certified mail (return receipt
requested) from the department directing that it be removed within sixty days. Following
notice by the building official, if the abandoned sign has not been removed, the building
official shall cause the sign to be removed. The cost of removal shall be entered by the
city recorder on the docket of city liens against the property owner, and shall be
collectible in the same manner as liens for public improvements. For purposes of this
section, “Abandoned sign” means a structure designed for, but not containing, a sign for
one hundred twenty continuous days.
15.32.070 General construction and maintenance requirements.
A. Each sign shall be constructed, erected and maintained to meet the requirements of
the Oregon Structural Specialty Code, National Electrical Code and Oregon Mechanical
Code. In addition, all illuminated signs shall be subject to the provisions of the
Underwriters' Standard, as defined in Underwriters' Laboratories, "Standards For
Safety, Electric Signs." All signs manufactured in Canada also shall comply with the
standards on the Canadian Standard Association (CAS). For purposes of this section,
"illuminated sign" means any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs or
outlines illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes as part of the sign property.
B. All signs and component parts shall be kept in good repair and maintained in a safe,
neat, clean and attractive condition.
C. The regulations establish standards for allowable area, location, types and activities
permitted upon and uses in conjunction with all signs and other advertising structures
within the city. All sign permits issued and signs erected after the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this chapter shall conform to the standards of these sections.
67
D. Location. All signs, unless specifically authorized by this code or the State Structural
Specialty Code shall be located entirely within the boundaries of the property.
E. Lighted Signs in all districts:
1. Signs may be indirectly, internally or directly illuminated unless otherwise restricted in
this chapter. Indirect lighting shall be screened from view by ground surface, evergreen
landscape screening or ornamental features of the sign structure. Braces and struts
which support indirect lighting from the top or sides of the sign are prohibited.
a "Direct" lighting means exposed lighting or neon tubes on the sign face.
b. "Indirect" lighting means the light source is separate from the sign face or cabinet and
is directed so as to shine on the sign.
c. "Internal" lighting means the light source is concealed within the sign.
2. A lighted sign visible to and located within one hundred feet of a residential zoning
district shall be turned off from ten p.m. to sunrise.
3. Exposed incandescent bulbs may be used on the exterior surface of a sign if each of
such bulbs do not exceed twenty-five watts or unless each such bulbs are screened by
a diffusing lens, sun screen or similar shading device.
4. Floodlights or spotlights shall be permitted on ground-mounted signs and wall signs,
provided that such lights concentrate the illumination onto the area of the signs so as to
prevent glare upon the street or adjacent property.
F. Existing Developments. Existing developments which contain more than one use but
do not meet the criteria established for commercial planned developments, shopping or
business centers and where two or more uses are located on a single lot or group of
contiguous lots which were developed according to a plan, shall be considered to be a
planned development.
15.32.080 Prohibited signs.
The following signs and operations are prohibited signs and operations, and may not be
erected or permitted to operate within the city unless specifically authorized by other
sections of this code:
A. Signs that obstruct the vision clearance of a street or driveway intersection;
B. Signs that obstruct ingress or egress through any door, window, fire escape,
standpipe, or like facility, required or designated for safety or emergency use;
68
C. Signs that may be confused with public traffic signs or highway identification signs, or
graphically appear similar to these types of signs, or signs that may mislead or confuse
vehicle operators;
D. Signs or sign structures determined by the building official to constitute a hazard to
the public safety or health by reason of poor structural design or construction,
inadequate maintenance, lack of repair, or dilapidation ( "maintenance" means normal
care needed to keep a sign functional such as cleaning, oiling and changing of light
bulbs);
E. Signs that rotate, reflect, flash, blink, fluctuate, or have chaser effects (a "rotating
signs" has sign faces or portions of a sign face which revolve around a central axis);
F. Signs placed on, affixed to, or painted on any motor vehicle, trailer or other mobile
structure not registered, licensed and insured for use on public highways and parked
with the primary purpose of providing a sign not otherwise allowed by this chapter;
G. Benches with a commercially available space for advertising;
H. Signs located on or above public rights-of-way without written consent of the
applicable jurisdiction. This includes, but is not limited to, posters or notices on utility
poles, political signs in parking strips, etc., other than traffic control signs installed by the
state, county or city;
I. Roof signs (signs erected upon, against or directly above a roof, or on the top of or
above the parapet of a building).
J. Attention attracting devices, flags, balloons, windsocks, pennants, streamers,
valances, spinners, spirals and other wind-activated devices including propellers.
15.32.090 Permit required.
It is unlawful for any person to erect, repair, alter or relocate within the city any sign or
other advertising structure as defined in this chapter without first obtaining a sign permit
from the city and making payment of the fee required by the city thereof.
15.32.100 Permit fees.
Fees shall be those established in the current fees and charges resolution in effect at
the time of application.
15.32.110 Permit application.
Application for a sign permit shall be made in writing upon forms supplied by the city
and shall contain the following information:
A. Name, address and telephone number of the applicant;
69
B. Location by street number of the building, structure or lot to which or upon which the
sign is to be installed or affixed;
C. A drawing, drawn to scale showing the design of the sign, including dimensions of
the sign, dimensions of wall if wall-mounted, maximum height above grade if freestanding,
method of attachment, source of illumination and the relationship to any
building or structure to which it is proposed to be installed or affixed or to which it
relates;
D. A plot plan drawn to scale indicating the location of the sign relative to property lines,
building locations, streets and sidewalks;
E. Copies of stress sheets and calculations showing that the structure is designed for
dead load and wind pressure in any direction in the amount required by the Uniform
Building Code;
F. Name, address and phone number of the person, firm, corporation or association
erecting such sign or advertising structure;
G. Written consent of the owner of the building, structure or land to which or on which
the structure is to be erected;
H. Copy of any electrical permit required and issued for the sign;
I. For temporary signs, the dates that the temporary sign will be displayed;
J. Any such other information required to show full compliance with this chapter and all
other provisions of this code.
15.32.120 Permit approval.
A. A completed sign permit application accompanied by the appropriate fee shall be
submitted to the development services department or other staff designated by the city
manager, referred hereafter as “department”.
B. The department shall review the sign permit application to ensure that it is complete,
accompanied by the appropriate fee, and the proposed sign complies with the
provisions of these regulations and other city ordinances. A permit shall only be issued
when all of these criteria have been met.
C. An approved sign permit does not replace, supersede or waive structural or electrical
standards and permits required. These other permits must also be obtained prior to
work on the installation of the sign.
D. The applicable permit review fee shall be doubled if sign installation is begun before
obtaining a permit. Payment of such double fee shall not relieve any person from full
compliance with these regulations.
70
E. The permit shall expire if a sign is not installed as approved within one hundred
eighty days from the date of sign permit application approval. Reapplication shall
include a new, fully completed application form and a new application fee. The
application must comply with findings in subsection B of this section, including any
amendments to these regulations adopted since the previous permit approval.
F. An approved sign permit may be revoked by the director if the approved sign is not
constructed and installed as approved, if incorrect information was provided on the
application, or if the city approved the permit in error. A decision of the director may be
appealed to the city council in accordance with appeal procedures for a Type III appeal.
G. All signs shall be subject to inspection and reinspection. Footing inspections may be
required for all signs having footings.
15.32.130 Permit conditions.
The department may attach conditions in conjunction with the approval of a sign permit
as deemed necessary to secure the purpose of this code and may require guarantees
and evidence that such conditions will be complied with.
15.32.140 Permit appeal.
A decision may be appealed to the city council. A written appeal must be filed with the
city recorder within ten days of the notice of the decision. The appeal shall be
conducted the same as an appeal of a decision of the planning commission.
15.32.150 Variances to standards.
There may be rare instances where a combination of strict application of the standards
in this chapter and/or public safety concerns may preclude use of signs as a
communication medium for a primary frontage. In these cases, it may be appropriate to
vary a particular standard to enable a property owner to utilize signs in a manner similar
to others in a district.
A. To request a variance, an applicant shall submit a completed sign variance
application and appropriate review fee.
B. The Sign Review Committee shall hold a public meeting on the application.
C. To approve a sign variance request, the Sign Review Committee must find that the
requested variance is consistent with the intent of the signage regulations for the zoning
district is is requested for, and the sign is of a reasonable size. The Committee shall
balance business needs with the community aesthetics.
D. The Sign Review Committee may impose such conditions on the approval as
necessary to achieve the purposes of these regulations.
E. Unless appealed, the Sign Review Committee's decision shall be the final decision of
the city.
71
F. Appeals to the Sign Review Committee's decisions shall be decided by the City
Council, and the City Council's decision shall be the final decision of the city.
G. Where a sign approved through these variance procedures is not installed within
twelve months, the variance approval shall expire and all work must fully comply with
these regulations as amended to that date.
15.32.160 Administration and enforcement.
The department shall administer and enforce these regulations and is authorized to
issue citations for violations of these regulations in accordance with provisions of the
Sandy Municipal Code.
15.32.170 Sign removal.
The department may order removal of any sign erected, replaced, reconstructed or
maintained in violation of these regulations.
A. The department shall deliver written notice by certified mail (return receipt requested)
to the owner of the sign, or, if the owner of the sign cannot be located, to the owner of
the lot(s), as shown on the tax rolls of Clackamas County, on which such sign is
located, directing that the sign shall be removed or brought into compliance with these
standards.
B. If the owner of such sign or the owner of the lot(s) on which the sign is located fails to
remove the sign or bring the sign into compliance within thirty days after receipt of
written notice from the city, the building official shall cause such sign to be removed at
the expense of the property owner. Such costs shall be entered by the city recorder on
the docket of city liens against the property owner, and shall be collectible in the same
manner as liens for public improvements.
C. If the condition of the sign presents an immediate threat to the safety of the public,
the department may cause removal of the sign immediately, without prior notice, and
the expenses for such removal shall be paid by the owner of the sign or the permit
applicant. If such persons cannot be found, the expense shall be paid by the owner of
the building, structure or property.
15.32.180 Periodic review.
The city council and the department in conjunction with a committee of at least three
local business people, shall review this chapter periodically.
15.32.190 Violations.
Upon conviction, any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty
of a Class B infraction and subject to the penalties provided in ORS 153.110 through
153.310, as now constituted.
A. A person cited for a violation shall be fined up to one hundred dollars.
72
B. Each day a sign is in violation of these regulations shall be considered a new
violation.
15.32.200 Limitation of liability.
The city shall not be held responsible for any damage to persons or property by reason
of approval, disapproval, or the issuance of a sign permit authorized in this chapter, or
inspection or reinspection of a sign as authorized by this chapter.
15.32.210 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:
1. A-Frame Signs. An A-frame sign is a portable permanent sign which has two sides,
the frame or support structure of which is hinged or connected at the top of the sign in
such a manner that the sign is easily moved and erected (see sample photo).
2. Area, Sign Face. "Sign face area" means:
a. The area of sign enclosed in a frame or cabinet is determined based on the outer
dimensions of the frame or cabinet surrounding the sign face. Sign area does not
include foundations, supports, or other essential structures which are not serving as a
backdrop or border to the sign.
b. When a sign is on a base material and attached without a frame, the dimensions of
the base material are to be used, unless it is clear that part of the base contains no
related display or message.
c. When signs are constructed in individual pieces attached to a building wall, sign area
is determined by a perimeter drawn around all the pieces.
d. For sign structures containing multiple modules oriented in the same direction, the
modules together are counted as one sign face.
e. The maximum surface area visible at one time on a round or three-dimensional sign
is counted to determine sign area.
3. "Banner" means a sign made of fabric or other nonrigid material with no enclosing
framework.
4. "Bulletin board" means bulletin boards for public, charitable or religious institutions
when the same are located on the premises of such institutions.
5. Dissolve. Dissolve means a mode of message transition on an electronic message
sign accomplished by varying the light intensity or pattern, where the first message
gradually and uniformly appears to dissipate and lose legibility simultaneously with the
gradual and uniform appearance and legibility of the second message.
73
6. Electronic Message Sign. A sign capable of displaying words, symbols, figures, or
images that can be electronically or mechanically changed by remote or automatic
means including animated graphics and video.
7. "Erect" means to build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix, and shall also
include the painting of wall signs.
8. Fade. Fade means a mode of message transition on an electronic message sign
accomplished by varying the light intensity, where the first message gradually and
uniformly reduces intensity to the point of not being legible and the subsequent
message gradually and uniformly increases intensity to the point of being legible.
9. "Face" means the surface of the sign upon, against or through, which the message is
displayed or illustrated on the sign.
10. "Frontage" means the length of the property line of any one premise along each
public right-of-way it borders.
11. "Height" means the overall height of a free-standing sign or sign structure is
measured from the grade directly below a sign to the highest point of the sign or sign
structure.
12. “Readerboard” means a sign or part of a sign specifically designed to allow for the
convenient display of temporary messages without alteration of the sign field, and on
which the letters or images are readily replaceable such that the copy can be changed
from time to time at will, either by hand or through electronic programming.
13. "Sign" means an identification, description, illustration or device that is affixed to or
represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure or land and which directs
attention to a product, place, activity, person, institution or business.
14. "Sign structure" means a structure specifically intended for supporting or containing
a sign which is not an integral part of a building.
15. "Temporary sign" means a sign or advertising display constructed of fabric, paper,
cardboard, plywood, or other light materials, with or without a frame, not permanently
attached to a building, structure or ground intended to be displayed for a specific and
limited period of time. A temporary sign is intended to:
a. Exist until such time as a permanent sign can be placed;
b. Exist for a limited period of time as determined by the specific date of an event,
activity or sale;
16. “Wall area" means all window and wall area of a building on one plane or elevation.
74
Examples of Appropriate Signs:
Sample Backlit Sign
75
76
Chapter 15.34
DISPOSAL OF DEBRIS FROM CONSTRUCTION SITES’
15.34.010 Required.
All debris generated from construction sites within the city shall be removed, destroyed
or buried pursuant to the terms of this chapter before a certificate of final action and/or a
certificate of occupancy is issued for the structure or structures located on said
construction site. The term "debris" shall include but not be limited to stumps, tree limbs,
brush, discarded building materials, and other waste materials generated by the
construction process. (Ord. 10-79 § 1 (part), 1979.)
15.34.020 burning or burial.
Construction debris may be buried or burned on site only with the specific written
permission of the city, the Oregon Department of Environ-mental Quality and Sandy
Rural Fire District No. 72. (Ord. 10-79 § 1 (part), 1979.)
15.34.030 Violation-Penalty.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars. A person violating a provision of
this chapter is guilty of a separate offense for each day during which the violation
continues. (Ord. 10-79 § 1 (part), 1979.)
Chapter 15.35
OBLIGATIONS OF BUILDERS AND LAND DIVIDERS
TO CLEAN UP SIDEWALKS AND ROADWAYS
15.35.010 Responsibility designated.
Any applicant for a building permit and any land divider as defined in Chapter 16.08 of
this code shall be solely responsible for cleanup of debris, dirt and foreign materials
derived from their development or project upon sidewalks and roadways. Responsibility
shall also apply in the same manner to deposits of the aforesaid material on adjacent
lots or parcels when such deposits are determined to be a nuisance. The responsibility
for building permit applicants shall continue until the building or structure for which the
building permit was issued receives a certificate of occupancy from the city. The
responsibility of the land divider shall continue until such time as all required
improvements within the subdivision or partition have been inspected and finally
approved by the city. The building permit applicant and the land divider shall be
responsible for cleaning all debris, dirt or foreign materials upon the sidewalks,
roadways and adjacent lots; except that if the debris, dirt or foreign material is founded
by the city manager to constitute an immediate traffic or safety hazard, it shall be
immediately removed by the building permit applicant or the land divider. All building
permit applicants and land dividers shall furnish the city with information as to where he
or a designated subordinate may be reached at all times by the city in regard to the
performance of such cleanup work. (Ord. 5-87 § I (A), 1987: Ord. 2-81 § 1 (part), 1981.)
77
15.35.020 City authority to cause cleanup.
Failure of the building permit applicant or the land divider to clean up debris, dirt or
foreign materials, as stated in Section 15.35.010, shall give the city the right to clean up
the debris, dirt or foreign materials utilizing city crews, or to hire an independent
contractor to do the same. The city shall bill the building permit applicant or land divider
for all such cleanup services at the rate of twice the actual city labor cost incurred plus
thirty-five percent of such actual labor costs reflecting utilization of city equipment. In the
event the city hires a private contractor to perform these services, the city shall bill the
land divider or building permit applicant the actual costs incurred by the private
contractor plus fifty percent of the actual costs reflecting the administrative costs
incurred. (Ord. 5-87 § 1(B), 1987: Ord. 2-81 § 1 (part), 1981.)
15.35.030 Deposit required for enforcement procedure.
A. The building permit applicant or land divider shall deposit with the city a sum
established by the city council by resolution, which shall be retained by the city a fund to
be utilized for street, sidewalk and adjacent property cleaning pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter. Failure of the building permit applicant or land divider to maintain said
sum for a period of over five days shall result in the issuance of stop work order which
will remain in effect on the entire development until the fund is restored to the amount
established by the city council by resolution of the building permit applicant or land
divider. If the city bills the applicant or land divider pursuant to Section 15.35.020 for
cleanup costs which exceed the deposit amount, the building permit applicant or land
divider shall pay the bill in full and restore the deposit in full within five days of his
receipt of said bill.
B. The city is not required by the terms of this chapter to clean up roadways, sidewalks
and adjacent parcels of the debris, dirt or foreign materials if the building permit
applicant or land divider fails to do so within the aforesaid time period. The city shall
have the option, if it does not elect to clean the roadways, sidewalks and adjacent
parcels itself, utilizing its own employees or a private contractor, to issue a stop work
order on the entire development after the expiration of the aforesaid time periods, which
stop work order shall remain in effect until the roadways, sidewalks and adjacent lots
are cleared by the building permit applicant or the land divider of debris, dirt or foreign
materials, to the satisfaction of the city.
(Ord. 18-93 § 15, 1993; Ord. 5-87 § 1(C), 1987: Ord. 2-81 § 1 (part), 1981.)
Chapter 15.36
MUNICIPAL LIEN SEARCH FEES
15.36.010 Imposition of municipal lien search fees.
There shall be charged a uniform fee set by council resolution for each lot for which a
municipal lien search is conducted by the city upon the request of a private individual,
Title Company, or other source.
(Ord. 11-91 § 1, 1991: Ord. 10-80 § 1, 1980.)
78
Chapter 15.42
ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES
15.42.010 Procedures.
Upon finding that the regulations of this title have apparently been violated, the city shall
cause the following steps to be taken:
A. A member of the staff shall attempt to contact the property owner or apparent
violation, explaining the requirements of this title and the type of action which the city
can be expected to take if the violation is not corrected.
B. If the property owner and/or violator is willing to correct the violation, he/she shall be
given a reasonable amount of time to make such corrections.
C. If the property owner and/or violator cannot be reached, is reached but does not
intend to comply, or fails to comply within the time limits previously agreed to, the city
shall take any of the following steps which are deemed appropriate in the situation:
1. Withhold any and all permits for the development of the property;
2. Disconnect the property from city services;
3. Cite the individual into a court of competent jurisdiction.
D. The city shall notify, by certified mail, all record owners of the property involved,
stating the nature of the remedial actions which the city is taking to correct the apparent
violation.
(Ord. 7-97 § 1, 1997.)
79
Chapter 15.44
EROSION CONTROL REGULATIONS
(Ord. 2002-12)
15.44.00 Intent.
The purpose is to regulate land disturbing activities that may lead to soil erosion and
sedimentation into watercourses, wetlands, riparian areas, and public and private
property. No land disturbing activity shall be conducted so as to cause slides of mud,
soil, rock, vegetative material, or any other material to be pushed onto, deposited upon,
or gravitated to the property of another, either public or private. (Ord. 2002-12)
15.44.10 Definitions.
Definitions are provided in the most recent version of the Erosion Prevention and
Sediment Control Planning and Design Manual, Clackamas County WES. Selected
words and terms are defined as follows:
Best Management Practice (BMP): Physical, structural and/or managerial practices
employed to avoid or mitigate damage or potential damage from contamination or
pollution of surface waters or wetlands. Structural BMP’s are actually physical
installations rather than procedural/managerial BMP’s such as good housekeeping and
employee training.
Building: Any structure used or intended for support, shelter or enclosure of any
persons, animals, goods, equipment or chattels and property of any kind
Building Official: The duly appointed officer or other designated authority charged with
the administration and enforcement of this Code, and includes the building official's duly
authorized deputies, officers, and inspectors.
Clearing: Any activity that removes vegetative ground cover.
Cut: Portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be
removed by excavating the depth below the original group surface to the excavated
surface.
Denuded Site (or Soil): An area made bare; stripped of ground covering.
Developer: The owners of property or their agents or contractors, or their successors or
assigns, who have undertaken or are proposing development.
Development: Any artificial change to improved or unimproved real estate, including
but not limited to, construction of buildings or other structures, excavation, vegetation
removal, mining, dredging, filling, grading, compaction, paving, drilling, stream alteration
or challenging, or other similar activities.
80
Disturbed Area: That area of natural ground excluding the footprint of the residence
that has been or is proposed to be altered through grading, cut and fill, removal of
natural vegetation, placement of material, trenching, or by any means that causes a
change in the undisturbed natural surface of the land or natural vegetation.
Erosion: The detachment and movement of earth, soil, sand, gravel, rock fragments,
refuse or any other organic or inorganic material by running water, wind, ice, or other
geologic agents, including such processes as gravitational creep, and detachment and
movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice, or gravity.
Erosion Control Manual: The most recent version of the Erosion Prevention and
Sediment Control Planning and Design Manual, Clackamas County WES.
Excavation: Any act by which earth, soil, sand, gravel, rock fragments, refuse or any
other organic or inorganic material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced, relocated, or bulldozed by a person, including the conditions resulting there
from.
Fill: Any act by which earth, soil, sand, gravel, rock fragments, refuse or any other
organic or inorganic material is deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled,
transported, or moved by a person to a new location, including the conditions resulting
there from.
Footprint: That area of the residence measured from the outside walls (excluding any
overhanging portions) which includes indoor uses such as attached garage, carports,
utility room, laundry, etc., but excludes outdoor uses such as patios and breezeways.
Grading: The cutting and/or filling of the land to a desired slope or elevation.
Ground disturbing activity: See Land disturbing activity.
Land disturbing activity: Any clearing, grading, stripping, excavation, fill, or any
combination thereof.
Lot: A single unit of land that is created by a subdivision of land.
Residential Erosion Control Plan: A standard drawing maintained in the Building
Division showing typical erosion control measures used in construction of a singlefamily
dwelling on a lot with slopes less than 5%.
Sediment: Fragmented material originated from weathering and erosion of rocks and
unconsolidated deposits. The material is transported by, suspended in, or deposited by
water, air, wind, or gravity.
Sedimentation: The depositing of solid material, mineral or organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, wind,
water, or gravity.
81
Stabilized: Is when the soil erosion rate approaches that of undisturbed soils. Soils
which are disturbed will be considered protected when covered with a healthy, mature
growth of grass or a good covering of hay or straw mulch (minimum 2 tons/acre). (Mulch
is only a temporary measure; ultimately, the site needs vegetation).
Stockpile: On-site storage of any soil, sand, gravel, clay, mud, debris, vegetation,
refuse or any other material organic or inorganic, in a concentrated state.
Stripping: Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover including tree
removal, clearing, and storage or removal of topsoil.
15.44.20 Area of Application.
This chapter applies to all ground disturbing activities within the city limits whether or not
a permit is required, unless such activities are otherwise exempted by the Sandy
Development Code. All non-permitted ground disturbing activities that are permanent or
temporary in nature shall comply with this chapter unless otherwise noted.
15.44.30 Applicability.
Application and approval of an erosion control plan shall be required under any of the
following circumstances:
A. Prior to final plat approval for any major partition or subdivision, in accordance with
Chapter 17.100.
B. Prior to approval of any building or grading permit that results in:
1. Disturbance of 1,000 square feet or more of land surface area.
2. Land or native vegetation disturbance within the FSH Overlay District Map (Chapter
17.60).
3. Disturbance of land or clearing of vegetation affecting 500 square feet or more of land
area on slopes of 25 percent or greater.
C. Upon a finding that visible or measurable erosion has entered, or is likely to enter,
the public storm drainage and surface water system. As used in this section, "visible or
measurable erosion" shall include the following:
1. Depositions of soil or sediment exceeding one cubic foot in volume on a public or
private street, adjacent property, or into the surface water management system either
by direct deposit, dropping, tracking, discharge or as a result of erosion.
2. Flows of water over bare soils, turbid or sediment laden flows, or evidence of on-site
erosion such as rivulets or bare soil slopes, where the flow of water is not filtered or
captured on the site.
82
3. Any type of earth slides, mudflows, earth sloughing, or other earth movement, which
leaves the property of origin.
D. Exemptions:
1. Cutting brush where vegetative ground cover will remain intact.
2. Maintenance of public infrastructure by state or local government agencies. State and
local government agencies, however, shall implement best management practices to
prevent erosion and control sediment; and shall make regular inspections to ascertain
that erosion and sediment control measures consistent with best management practices
have been implemented and are being effectively maintained.
3. Emergencies: Development, which is subject to Chapter 15.44, may commence
without complying with the requirements of this chapter if the building official or private
property owner determines that emergency response activities are required because
there is a hazard posing imminent danger to life or property, such as substantial fire
hazards, risk of flood or other emergency. However, upon a determination by the
building official that such emergency has passed, the provisions of this chapter shall
apply.
4. Installation of signs.
5. Farming activities provided that the specific land area has been cultivated within the
last three (3) years.
6. Forest practices undertaken in compliance with the Oregon Forest Practices Act and
administrative rules.
7. Single Family Lot - Residential Erosion Control Plan Option: In lieu of compliance
with SDC 15.44 the developer may choose to follow the requirements of the Residential
Erosion Control Plan, on file in the Building Department in the following circumstances:
a. The lot is 20,000 square feet or less.
b. No portion of the lot exceeds 5% slope.
c. The site is not located with a FSH setback.
Nothing in this section shall relieve any person from the obligation to comply with the
regulations or permits of any federal, state, or local authority.
15.44.40 Design Standards.
The required Erosion Control Plan shall comply with the following standards:
A. Control Measures. Specific methods of soil erosion and sediment control shall be
used during construction to minimize visible and measurable erosion. These methods
shall include all of the following:
83
1. The land area to be grubbed, stripped, used for temporary placement of soil, or to
otherwise expose soil shall be confined to the immediate construction site only.
2. The duration of exposure of soils shall be kept to a minimum during construction.
Exposed soils shall be covered by mulch, sheeting, temporary seeding or other suitable
material following grading or construction, until soils are stabilized. During the rainy
season, October 1 through April 30, soils shall not be exposed for more than seven
consecutive days. All disturbed land areas which will remain unworked for 30 days or
more during construction, shall be mulched and seeded.
3. During construction, runoff from the site shall be controlled, and increased runoff and
sediment resulting from soil disturbance shall be retained on-site. Temporary diversions,
sediment basins, barriers, check dams, or other methods shall be provided as
necessary to hold sediment and runoff.
4. Appropriate erosion and sediment control measures shall be installed prior to soil
disturbance.
5. A stabilized pad of gravel shall be constructed and maintained at all entrances and
exits to the construction site to prevent soil deposits on the roadway or in the drainage
ways. The stabilized gravel pad(s) shall be the only allowable entrances or exits to the
site.
6. Topsoil removal for development shall be stockpiled and reused on-site to the degree
necessary to restore disturbed areas to their original or enhanced condition, or to
assure a minimum of six inches of stable topsoil for revegetation. Additional soil shall be
provided if necessary to support revegetation. Topsoil stockpile sites are subject to and
must comply with these regulations.
7. The removal of all sediments which are carried into the streets, or on to adjacent
property, are the responsibility of the developer. The applicant shall be responsible for
cleaning and repairing streets, catch basins, and adjacent properties, where such
properties are affected by sediments or mud. In no case shall sediments be washed into
storm drains, ditches, drainage ways, streams, or wetlands.
8. All temporary erosion and sediment control measures shall be removed after final site
stabilization.
9. Any other relevant provision of the most recent version of the Clackamas County
WES Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control Planning and Design Manual required
by the building official.
B. Restoration of Vegetation. The developer shall be responsible for re-vegetating
public and private open spaces, utility easements, and undeveloped rights-of-way in
accordance with an approved Schedule of Installation.
84
1. If the vegetation existing prior to site development is non-native or invasive, it shall be
replaced with native or non-invasive plant species.
2. Temporary measures used for initial erosion control shall not be left in place
permanently.
3. Work areas on the immediate site shall be carefully identified and marked to reduce
potential damage to trees and vegetation.
4. Trees shall not be used as anchors for stabilizing working equipment.
5. During clearing operations, trees and vegetation shall not be permitted to fall or be
placed outside the work area.
6. In areas designated for selective cutting or clearing, care in falling and removing trees
and brush shall be taken to avoid injuring trees and shrubs to be left in place and the
provisions for tree preservation in Chapter 17.102.
7. Stockpiling of soil, or soil mixed with vegetation, shall be removed prior to completion
of the project.
C. Schedule of Installation. A schedule of planned erosion control and revegetation
measures shall be provided, which sets forth the progress of construction activities, and
mitigating erosion control measures.
D. Responsible Person. The developer shall designate a specific person to be
responsible for carrying out the Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control Plan.
E. Reference Authority. The most recent version of the Clackamas County WES
Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control Planning and Design Manual, a copy of which
is available in the Planning & Development department office, shall be the primary guide
for the City of Sandy in establishing and reviewing erosion control techniques, methods
and requirements. The Building Official may also develop regulations and procedures in
accordance with the Handbook to implement erosion control measures as needed.
15.44.50 Applicant’s Responsibility.
The developer, subsequent developers or property owners shall bear responsibility for
the installation, construction, protection of all stockpiles on the site, materials
transported from the site, maintenance including re-vegetation of all graded areas,
inspection and disposition of erosion control measures. In order to meet the purpose of
this chapter, the developer shall:
A. Plan Approval Required Prior to Clearing or Grading. No grading, clearing or
excavation of land requiring an Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control Plan shall be
undertaken prior to approval of the Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control Plan.
85
B. Implementation. The developer shall implement the measures and construct facilities
contained in the approved Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control Plan in a timely
manner.
1. Install measures intended to keep soil on site or out of water bodies, storm drainage
systems or the public right-of-way as the first step in any development. These measures
shall be made functional prior to any upslope development taking place. The developer
shall be responsible for maintenance, adjustment, repair and replacement of or erosion
control measures to ensure that they are functioning properly without interruption.
2. Remove any soil that enters the public right-of-way.
3. Protect stormwater inlets that are functioning during the course of the development
by approved sediment control measures so that sediment-laden water cannot enter the
inlets without first being filtered.
4. Maintain all erosion and sediment control measures necessary to meet the
requirements of the Erosion Control Manual.
5. Inspect erosion and sediment control measures every 24 hours during storm or rain
events to ensure the measures are functioning properly.
6. The developer shall call for City of Sandy inspection, prior to any clearing or grading,
to certify that erosion control measures are installed in accordance with the Erosion
Prevention and Sediment Control Plan
C. Apply permanent or temporary soil stabilization to denuded development site areas
in conformance with the following schedule:
1. Between October 1 and April 30, all denuded sites shall immediately be provided with
either temporary or permanent soil stabilization.
2. Between May 1 and September 30, temporary erosion and sediment control
measures to reduce dust and sediment transport shall be applied as soon as
practicable, but in no case more than seven days after ground disturbing activity occurs.
3. Ground cover shall be installed on any portion of a site that is denuded for more than
six months. Sports fields or playgrounds surrounded by vegetative cover or permanently
installed curbing are exempt from this requirement.
4. Temporary measures shall be maintained until permanent measures are established.
5. Plant replacement vegetative cover that does not include plants listed as nuisance or
prohibited plants on the City of Portland Plant List (available in the Planning &
Development office) or the City’s Native Plant List. Agriculture, timber production or
residential crop growing activities are exempted from this requirement.
86
6. Secure or protect soil stockpiles throughout the project with temporary or permanent
soil stabilization measures. Depositions of soil may be subject to additional regulations
requiring permit, review or erosion and sediment control.
7. Select BMPs from the Erosion Control Manual.
D. Dust Control. The City of Sandy is susceptible to wind erosion. Therefore, the
building official may require that additional dust control measures be included in the
Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control Plan. Such control measures may include,
but are not limited to, the following:
1. Sprinkling access and haul roads and other exposed dust producing areas with
water.
2. Applying dust palliatives to access and haul roads.
3. Establishing temporary vegetative cover.
4. Placing wood chips, gravel or other effective mulches on vehicle and pedestrian use
areas.
5. Maintaining the proper moisture condition on all fill surfaces.
6. Pre-wetting cut and fill surface areas.
7. Using covered haul equipment.
E. Additional Standards. The following additional standards shall apply:
1. Construction between stream banks shall be prohibited, unless absolutely necessary
to construct required public facilities. Any such activities must be performed in
accordance with the Oregon Department Fish and Wildlife, Oregon Department of State
Lands and other state regulations.
2. Pollutants such as fuels, lubricants, raw sewage, and other harmful materials shall
not be discharged into or near rivers, streams, or impoundments, and shall be properly
stored and disposed.
3. Discharge of water into a stream, wetland or impoundment shall not result in violation
of the state temperature water standard.
4. All sediment-laden water from construction operations shall be routed through stilling
basins, filtered, or otherwise treated to reduce the sediment load, and prevent violation
of the state turbidity rule.
87
F. Storage. All erodible or toxic materials delivered to the job site shall be covered and
protected from the weather and stored according to appropriate health and safety
guidelines.
1. Such material shall not be exposed during storage.
2. Waste material, rinsing fluids, and other such material shall be disposed of in such
manner that pollution of groundwater, surface water, or air does not occur.
3. In no case shall toxic material be dumped into drainage ways or onto land.
G. Duration of Maintenance. Continuing maintenance after development pursuant to the
Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control Plan, including re-vegetation of all graded
areas, shall be the responsibility of the developer, subsequent developers or property
owners.
1. Erosion control measures shall be maintained during construction and for one year
after development is completed.
2. The Building Official may, upon a finding that soils are completely stabilized, reduce
this period.
H. The Building Official shall make regular inspections to ascertain that erosion and
sediment control measures as proposed in the erosion control plan have been
implemented and are being effectively maintained.
15.44.60 Submission Requirements.
The plan shall be prepared using methods and standards shown in the Erosion Control
Manual. If an engineered grading plan is required for the project, then the erosion
control plan shall be prepared by the same person who prepared the engineered
grading plan. Each erosion control plan shall include a certification that any land
disturbing activity will be in accord with the submitted and approved erosion control
plan.
Sites that require an Oregon Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ) 1200-C
construction site permit are encouraged to submit the same Erosion Sedimentation and
Pollution Control Plan (ESPCP) for both the 1200-C permit and the City development,
building, or street opening permit. The City of Sandy does not administer the state
1200-C permit program.
The erosion control plan shall contain the following information:
A. Plan:
1. Location of the development site showing property lines, adjacent roads and streets
and the development site boundaries;
88
2. North arrow, scale, date;
3. Existing and proposed easements;
4. Existing structures, utilities, roads and other paved areas within the development site;
5. Location of proposed construction access driveways and designated vehicle parking
areas;
6. Location of proposed soil stockpiles;
7. Location of existing and proposed surface and subsurface devices, walls, dams,
sediment basins, storage reservoirs, and other protective devices ;
8. Topographic contours and indication of slope steepness or existing and proposed
contours at intervals of two feet;
9. Existing and proposed drainage channels (temporary and permanent) and direction
of flow;
10. Water quality facilities;
11. Finished contours or elevations, including all cut and fill slopes and drainage
channels;
12. Identification of any rivers, streams, wetlands, channels, ditches, or other
watercourses and associated setbacks on and immediately adjacent to the development
site regulated by Chapter 17.60;
13. Direction of surface water flows;
14. Existing vegetation areas where existing vegetative cover will be retained and
measures will be taken to protect vegetation from damage;
15. Type and location of temporary and permanent erosion and sediment control
measure BMPs, such as, but not limited to, silt fencing, matting, straw bales, mulching,
seeding, and sodding; and,
16. The name, address, and telephone number of each of the owners of the land, the
developer of the site, and the person responsible for placement and maintenance of
temporary and permanent erosion control measures.
B. Schedules:
1. A schedule of soil disturbance, construction operations and phasing; and,
89
2. A proposed schedule for the inspection and maintenance of all BMPs.
C. Reports:
1. Design calculations for all temporary and permanent structural control BMP
measures;
2. Identification of all permanent control measures and responsibility for continued
maintenance; and,
3. Drainage report with calculations showing volume, peak discharge, and velocity of
present and future runoff.
D. Narrative: A narrative section including discussion of each BMP measure, its
purpose, construction sequence, and installation timing as they apply to the site.
15.44.70 Additional Requirements for Special Sites.
When the building official determines that special site conditions exist, the building
official may require additional erosion, sediment and pollutant control measures.
A. Special site conditions shall include one or more of the following:
1. Slopes before development that are greater than 10 percent (1 Vertical:10
Horizontal).
2. Ground disturbance of a natural vegetative buffer within 50 feet of any setback or
buffer shown on the FSH Overlay District Map.
3. The development site is located entirely or partially within the FSH Overlay District.
4. The development site or development phase will have ground disturbing activity at
any one time of 10,000 square feet or more. Single-family dwellings and duplex
dwellings are exempt from this size limitation.
5. The development includes a land division containing 10,000 square feet or more.
6. Project timing is such that ground-disturbing activity will take place between October
1 and April 30.
B. Additional requirements imposed by the building official to achieve compliance with
provisions of the Erosion Control Manual may include, but are not limited to, the
following:
1. Requiring drainage control during all development phases.
90
2. Requiring that a State of Oregon registered professional engineer, other professional
certified by the State of Oregon with experience or qualifications in preparing erosion
control plans, or a registered CPESC prepare or implement the erosion and sediment
control plan.
3. Limiting the amount of denuded soil at any given time.
4. Requiring a pre-construction meeting with the contractor, engineer, inspector and City
staff prior to the start of work.
15.44.80 Review Procedures.
Review of erosion control plans is not a limited land use decision and shall be
processed in the same manner as a building permit.
15.44.90 Approval or Denial of Erosion Control Plan.
After receipt of a complete erosion control plan, the Building Official may order a
technical review of the erosion control plan by a qualified professional consultant, as
determined to be appropriate by the building official, at the expense of the applicant.
A. Following completion of the technical review of the plan, the Building Official shall:
2. Approve the application and indicate on the plans in writing if the grading plan as
submitted conforms to the applicable technical guidelines, in the most recent version of
the Erosion and Sediment Control Planning and Design Manual, Clackamas County
WES; or,
3. Approve, subject to such reasonable conditions as may be necessary for the grading
plan to conform to the Erosion Control Manual; or,
4. Disapprove the application, if the grading plan, either as submitted or with conditions,
does not conform to the Erosion Control Manual.
B. The approved plan shall not be changed, modified, or altered without authorization
from the building official.
C. Such approval shall be a component of subdivision or site plan approval.
15.44.100 Issuance of Permit.
A. No permit requiring an erosion control plan shall be issued until the plan is approved.
B. As a condition of permit issuance, the responsible party shall agree to allow all
inspections to be conducted.
C. Where a bond, letter of credit or other guarantee is required, the permit shall not be
issued until the bond or guarantee has been obtained and approved.
91
15.44.110 Revisions to erosion control plan.
A. During development and after the original erosion control permit has been issued,
the building official may request revisions to the approved erosion, sediment or pollutant
control plan. The building official may approve or deny all revisions.
B. The Building Official may require revisions to the approved erosion, sediment and
pollutant control plan when:
1. It is determined that approved erosion, sediment and pollutant control measures are
ineffective because soil erosion and sedimentation are entering into watercourses,
wetlands, riparian areas, and public and private property. An alternate method, measure
or control fails to perform as claimed by the responsible party.
2. A change in project timing has occurred due to an adverse change in weather.
3. During development, relevant new information about soil, site, topography or water
conditions is discovered.
4. Changes to the area or type of ground disturbing activity or equipment used are
proposed or implemented.
5. The project schedule has changed which results in development being conducted at
a different time of year than originally accepted or approved.
6. Additional or substitute construction or maintenance materials or chemicals will be
used during development that requires pollutant BMPs as set out in the Erosion Control
Manual.
C. Revised plans shall show all actual and proposed changes made on the site, the new
locations of the drainage patterns, and the affect that the revisions will have on the site.
The new plans shall show how problems associated with the prior plan have been
corrected, and indicate all new erosion, sediment and pollutant control measures.
D. The responsible party shall be solely responsible for the costs associated with any
revisions, including but not limited to, any additional or alternate methods, measures,
performance criteria or controls.
15.44.120 Appeals.
In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the
Building Official relative to an erosion control plan, appeals can be made in writing to
the Planning Director. Appeals of the Planning Director’s decision shall be made to the
City Council within twelve (12) days of the date of decision. All appeals before the City
Council shall be decided within thirty (30) days of the submission of the appeal.
92
15.44.130 Correction of Ineffective Measures.
If the facilities and techniques approved in the Erosion Control Plan are not effective or
sufficient to meet the purpose of this chapter or the Erosion Control Manual, based on
an on-site inspection, the building official may require modification of erosion control
devices. Depending upon the amount of soil erosion and sedimentation entering
watercourses, wetlands, riparian areas, and public and private property, a revised plan
may be required.
A. The modifications of erosion control devices or the revised Erosion Control Plan shall
be provided within 5 working days of written notification by the building official.
B. The developer shall implement fully the modifications or revised plan within 5 working
days of approval by the building official.
C. In cases where serious erosion is occurring, the building official may require the
developer to install interim control measures immediately, before submittal of the
revised Erosion Control Plan.
15.44.140 Hazards on Private Property.
If the building official becomes aware or is notified of any land containing disturbed soil
areas, or containing unprotected soil storage piles, creating erosion and sedimentation
that affects property of another or is in violation of any provision of Chapter 15.44, the
building official shall require the land owner to follow procedures and employ practices
set out in Chapter 15.44 to control the erosion and sedimentation. The landowner shall
follow the required procedures and employ the required practices.
15.44.150 Security.
The plans for development, including, but not limited to, road (public or private) and
driveway construction and building of any kind or nature whatsoever, must be approved
by the city and appropriate legal permit(s) issued, before any grading, bulldozing,
blasting, or movement of earth is commenced. If construction does not commence
within six months of securing such approval, no construction shall occur until such plans
have been resubmitted and reapproved.
For any grading or other activity for which an erosion control permit is required, at the
City’s discretion, the applicant shall supply a performance bond or other financial
guarantee in the amount of 120% of the value of the erosion prevention and control
measures necessary to stabilize the site and maintain water quality. Any financial
guarantee instrument proposed other than a performance bond shall be approved by
the Public Works Director. The performance guarantee required under this section shall
conform to the requirements of Section 17.100.330.
In the event that construction has not commenced within six months from the date of
issuance of the grading permit or restoration is not complete within twelve months from
the date of issuance of the grading permit, such bond shall be forfeited to the city in
such amount necessary for the purpose of restoration of the construction site to a
stabilized condition and all authorized permits shall be revoked and become void.
93
A. Duration. The financial guarantee instrument shall be in effective for a period of at
least one year after grading has been completed, and shall be released when the
building official determines that the site has been stabilized. All or a portion of the
security retained by the City may be withheld for a period of up to five (5) years beyond
the one-year maintenance period, if it has been determined by the building official that
the site has not been sufficiently stabilized against erosion.
B. If for any reason the financial guarantee is not adequate to complete stabilization of
the site the City shall have the ability to perform any work necessary to stabilize the site.
The City may enter a lien against the subject property in the City’s lien docket in order to
recover these costs.
C. Exemptions. Individual lots zoned for single-family and multi-family residential use
prior to the effective date of this section, and individual lots subject to the Residential
Erosion Control Plan stated in Section 15.44.30 shall be exempt from the security
requirements of this section.
D. Conflict. Due to the immediate threat to the public health, safety and welfare posed
by failure to comply with the strict provisions of the erosion control measures required
under this section, the provisions of Section 15.44.150 shall supersede the more
general provisions of the City of Sandy Development Code, where they exist.
15.44.160 Violations.
Each violation of any provision of this section, or any failure to carry out the conditions
of any approval granted pursuant to this section, shall be unlawful and a civil infraction
subject to the enforcement provisions of Section 1.16.010 of this code.
A. In addition to those penalties available under Section 1.16.010 of this code, the
Building Official may enforce the following additional penalties to this chapter:
1. Issue a stop work order where erosion control measures are not being properly
maintained or are not functioning properly due to faulty installation or neglect.
2. Refuse to accept any further permit applications until erosion control measures have
been installed properly and maintained in accordance with this chapter.
B. The owner of the property from which the erosion occurs, together with any person or
parties who cause such erosion, shall be responsible for mitigating the impacts of the
erosion and for preventing future erosion.
15.44.170 Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance are severable and if any paragraph, section,
subsection, or part of this ordinance is held to be invalid, unenforceable,
unconstitutional, or inapplicable to any person or circumstance, such illegality, invalidity,
unconstitutionality, or inapplicability shall not affect or impair the remainder of this
ordinance.
94
15.44.180 REFERENCED REGULATIONS.
All referenced regulations are available as specified below:
A. Erosion Prevention Planning and Design Manual (.pdf file) (Clackamas County WES,
2008). This document is available online at
http://www.clackamas.us/wes/designmanual.html and for review at City Hall
B. City of Portland Plant List. (City of Portland) This list is maintained by the City of
Portland Planning Bureau and is available online at
http://www.portlandonline.com/auditor/index.cfm?&a=322280&c=34460
C. Native Plant List (City of Sandy). This list is available in the Planning or Building
departments.
TITLE 17
DEVELOPMENT CODE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CHAPTER 17.00 - INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER 17.02 - THE CITY COUNCIL, ITS AGENCIES & OFFICERS
CHAPTER 17.04 - LEGAL FRAMEWORK
CHAPTER 17.06 - ENFORCEMENT
CHAPTER 17.08 - NONCONFORMING DEVELOPMENT
CHAPTER 17.10 - DEFINITIONS
CHAPTER 17.12 - PROCEDURES FOR DECISION MAKING
CHAPTER 17.14 - REQUEST FOR INTERPRETATION
CHAPTER 17.16 - AUTHORIZATION OF SIMILAR USES
CHAPTER 17.18 - PROCESSING APPLICATIONS
CHAPTER 17.20 - PUBLIC HEARINGS
CHAPTER 17.22 - NOTICES
CHAPTER 17.24 - COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AMENDMENT PROCEDURES
CHAPTER 17.26 - ZONING DISTRICT AMENDMENTS
CHAPTER 17.28 - APPEALS
CHAPTER 17.30 - ZONING DISTRICTS
CHAPTER 17.32 - PARKS & OPEN SPACE (POS)
CHAPTER 17.34 - SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (SFR)
CHAPTER 17.36 - LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (R-1)
CHAPTER 17.38 - MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (R-2)
CHAPTER 17.40 - HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (R-3)
CHAPTER 17.42 - CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (C-1)
CHAPTER 17.44 - GENERAL COMMERCIAL (C-2)
CHAPTER 17.46 - VILLAGE COMMERCIAL (C-3)
CHAPTER 17.48 - INDUSTRIAL PARK (I-1)
CHAPTER 17.50 - LIGHT INDUSTRIAL (I-2)
CHAPTER 17.52 - GENERAL INDUSTRIAL (I-3)
CHAPTER 17.54 - SPECIFIC AREA PLAN OVERLAY
CHAPTER 17.56 - HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENT
CHAPTER 17.60 - FLOOD & SLOPE HAZARD (FSH) OVERLAY DISTRICT
CHAPTER 17.62 - CULTURAL AND HISTORIC RESOURCES
CHAPTER 17.64 - PLANNED DEVELOPMENT
CHAPTER 17.66 - ADJUSTMENTS & VARIANCES
CHAPTER 17.68 - CONDITIONAL USES
CHAPTER 17.70 - HARDSHIP PERMIT
CHAPTER 17.72 - CONGREGATE HOUSING
CHAPTER 17.74 - ACCESSORY DEVELOPMENT
CHAPTER 17.76 - MAJOR UTILITY SITING STANDARDS
CHAPTER 17.78 - ANNEXATION
CHAPTER 17.80 - ADDITIONAL SETBACKS ON COLLECTOR & ARTERIAL STREETS
CHAPTER 17.82 - SPECIAL SETBACKS ON TRANSIT STREETS
CHAPTER 17.84 - IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED WITH DEVELOPMENT
CHAPTER 17.86 - PARKLAND & OPEN SPACE
CHAPTER 17.90 - DESIGN STANDARDS
CHAPTER 17.92 - LANDSCAPING & SCREENING
CHAPTER 17.94 - DRIVE-UP USES
CHAPTER 17.96 - MANUFACTURED DWELLING PARK STANDARDS
CHAPTER 17.98 - PARKING, LOADING, & ACCESS REQUIREMENTS
CHAPTER 17.100 - LAND DIVISION
CHAPTER 17.102 - URBAN FORESTRY
ORDINANCES MODIFYING DEVELOPMENT CODE
DESIGN REVIEW APPENDIX A-H
17.00 - 1
CHAPTER 17.00 - INTRODUCTION
17.00.00 ADOPTION
This document shall be known as the Development Code. This Code is adopted pursuant to the
authority found in the Oregon Constitution, Article XI, Section 4; Sandy Charter, and Oregon
Revised States 227.215 et. seq.
17.00.10 STATEMENT OF PURPOSES
A. The development regulations contained in this Code are in accordance with the
Comprehensive Plan and are intended to ensure that development is of the proper type,
design, and location and serviced by a proper range of public facilities and services; and in
all other respects be consistent with the goals and policies of the Sandy Comprehensive Plan.
B. The development approval process shall not result in the exclusion of needed housing at
densities permitted by the underlying zoning district designations.
17.00.20 ORGANIZATION OF THIS CODE
The Code is organized as a reference document that is not intended to be read in its entirety. It
has been developed with a minimal use of planning and legal jargon. Tables and matrices are
used in many places to summarize information. The Development Code describes:
A. The responsibilities of the City Council, Planning Commission, and the Development
Services Director and provides basic information on the legal framework of the Code,
definitions of words that are not in common usage or have a specific meaning to the Code,
and enforcement provisions.
B. Administrative procedures for land use actions. Approvals by staff are defined as Type I and
Type II decisions. In other cases, the Planning Commission and City Council make review
and decisions after conducting at least one public hearing.
C. Permitted and conditional uses within individual zoning districts and which specifies density,
building setbacks, building heights, and other quantifiable dimensions.
D. Overlay zoning districts, which attach an overlay to an underlying base zone such as historic
resource or flood, slope and hazard.
E. Land division regulations, including subdivisions, planned developments, partitions, and
adjustments to property lines.
F. Development provisions required in association with new development or intensification of
existing development, including standards for parking, landscaping, accessory development,
and other site-specific requirements.
17.02 - 1
Revised by Ordinance 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
CHAPTER 17.02 - THE CITY COUNCIL, ITS AGENCIES & OFFICERS
17.02.00 THE CITY COUNCIL AUTHORITY AND RESPONSIBILITY
The State has delegated to the City Council responsibility for adopting land use plans and
controls. In addition, the State has authorized the Council to act upon applications for
development or to delegate its authority to act upon such applications. In addition, the State has
authorized the Council to act upon applications for development or to delegate its authority to act
upon such applications. The City has adopted this Code pursuant to its responsibilities to secure
the health, safety, and welfare of its citizens and also pursuant to its home rule authority. The
City Council has created a Planning Commission for the purpose of implementing such plans and
controls.
17.02.10 POWERS AND DUTIES
The City Council has the following powers and duties in addition to any others it may now have,
be given, or confer upon itself. The City Council:
A. May adopt, amend, supplement, or repeal plans and policies for development of the
community;
B. May adopt, amend, supplement, or repeal the text of any provision or regulation of this Code;
C. May amend the boundaries of zoning districts established on the Official Zoning Map;
D. Shall review decisions of the Planning Commission upon appeal;
E. Shall appoint members of the Planning Commission; and
F. May establish a reasonable schedule of fees with respect to matters under this Code.
17.02.20 THE PLANNING COMMISSION
The Planning Commission shall be appointed in accordance with the Sandy Municipal Code. The
Commission shall have the powers and duties provided therein and provided by this Code. The
Commission shall also hear and act on appeals resulting from alleged errors in orders,
requirements, decisions, and interpretations of the Director or designated administrative officers
charged with the enforcement of this Code and such other matters as required by this Code.
17.02.30 QUORUM OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION
Four members shall constitute a quorum.
17.02.40 DIRECTOR
A. Position. The Director referenced in this Code is the Director of Planning and Development
or any other member of staff designated by the City Manager to supervise, organize, direct,
and control activities defined under this Code. For brevity, the Planning and Development
Director shall be referred to as Director throughout the Code.
17.02 - 2
Revised by Ordinance 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
B. Powers and Duties. The Director provides professional planning assistance to the citizens,
City Council, Planning Commission, and City Manager and is hereby authorized to interpret
provisions of this Code and to perform such other duties in the administration of the
Development Code as are required herein. Such powers and duties may be accomplished by
person(s) as designated by the Director.
• Floodplain Administrator. The Director is hereby appointed to
administer and implement the City of Sandy flood ordinance by
granting or denying development permit applications in accordance
with its provisions.
17.02.50 CONFLICT OF INTEREST
A member of the hearing authority shall not participate in any proceedings or action in which the
member has a legal conflict of interest defined in State law that would bar participation in a
decision by a Planning Commissioner or City Councilor. Any actual or potential interest shall be
disclosed at the meeting of the hearing authority where the action is being taken. Examples of
conflict of interest include: a) the member has a direct economic interest in the proposal; or b)
for any other valid reason, the member has determined that participation in the hearing and
decision cannot be accomplished in an impartial manner.
17.02.60 PARTICIPATION BY INTERESTED OFFICERS OR EMPLOYEES
No officer or employee of the City who has a financial interest in a land use decision shall
participate in discussions with or give an official opinion to the hearing body without first
declaring for the record the nature and extent of such interest.
17.04 - 1
CHAPTER 17.04 - LEGAL FRAMEWORK
17.04.00 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
This Code shall be construed liberally in order to achieve its purposes. Unless otherwise
specifically prescribed in this Code, the following provisions shall govern its interpretation and
construction:
A. When consistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words
in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include
the plural number.
B. Unless otherwise specified in this Code, any action authorized or required to be taken by the
City may be taken by the Council or by an official or agent designated by the Council.
17.04.10 SEVERABILITY AND CONSTITUTIONALITY
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Code is for any reason held illegal,
invalid, or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision
shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. The Council hereby declares that it
would have passed this Code and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, and phrase hereof
irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases
be declared illegal, invalid, or unconstitutional.
17.04.20 DESCRIPTIVE HEADINGS
The paragraph captions and headings in this Code are for convenience and reference purposes
only and shall not affect in any way the meaning or interpretation of this Code.
17.04.30 CALCULATION OF TIME
Where the performance of any act, duty, matter, payment, or thing is required in this case and the
period of time or duration for the performance is prescribed and fixed herein, the time shall be
computed so as to exclude the first and include the last day of the prescribed or fixed period or
duration of time. When the last day of the period falls on Saturday, Sunday, or a legal holiday,
that day shall be omitted from the computation. The word “day” means calendar day unless
otherwise specified.
17.04.40 SAVINGS CLAUSE
Sandy Ordinance 11-80 as amended, which is repealed by the ordinance adopting this Code,
shall remain in force to authorize the arrest, prosecution, conviction, and punishment of a person
who violates Sandy Ordinance 11-80 as amended, prior to the effective date of this Code.
17.04.50 REVIVAL
The repeal of Sandy Ordinance 11-80 as amended, does not thereby revive any provision,
ordinance, or section that was in effect prior to the adoption or amendment of Sandy Ordinance
11-80 as amended. This repeal does not affect any punishment, penalty, or fine incurred before
the repeal took place or any prosecution or proceeding commenced or pending prior to the
adoption of this Code.
17.04 - 2
17.04.60 NONDISCRIMINATION
The City shall not discriminate on the basis of race, religion, national origin, age, color, gender,
sexual orientation or physical disability in the administration or enforcement of this Code.
17.04.70 TEXT AMENDMENTS
This Code may be amended whenever the public necessity, convenience, and general welfare
require such amendment and where it conforms to the Sandy Comprehensive Plan and any other
applicable policies.
A. Initiation. Initiation of an amendment may be accomplished by one of the following methods:
1. Majority vote of the City Council; or
2. Majority vote of the Planning Commission; or
3. Citizens can request that the City Council initiate an amendment. Council may either
initiate and direct staff to proceed or may deny and direct the applicant proceed with an
amendment.
B. Review of Text Amendments. The Planning Commission and City Council shall review
proposed amendments in accordance with the legislative provisions of Chapter 17.20-Public
Hearings.
17.04.80 OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
Boundaries of development districts established by this Code are shown on the Official Zoning
Map on file in the Planning & Development office. The Official Zoning Map and all
amendments and other matters entered on the Official Zoning Map are a part of this Code and
have the same legal effect as if fully set out herein.
A. Amendments. Amendments to the Official Zoning Map shall be adopted as provided in
Chapter 17.26-Zoning District Changes. After adoption of an amendment, the Director shall
alter the Official Zoning Map to indicate the amendment.
B. Interpretation of Zoning District Boundaries. Boundaries of the development districts shown
on the Official Zoning Map shall be located as described in the ordinance or order
establishing and amending such district boundaries. If uncertainty exists as to the boundaries
of the zoning districts that is not resolved by the ordinance or orders establishing and
amending such boundaries, the following rules shall apply:
1. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets, highways, or
alleys, streams, rivers, lakes or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such
center lines;
2. Boundaries indicated as approximately following railroad lines shall be construed to be
midway between the main track or tracks;
3. Boundaries indicated as following the contours of certain elevations or soils of a
particular type shall be construed as following the actual height or soil contour as
determined by accepted surveying practices;
4. Boundaries indicated as parallel to, or extensions of natural or manmade features
indicated in Subsections “1” through “3” above shall be so construed;
5. Distances not specifically indicated shall be determined by the scale of the Official
Zoning Map;
17.04 - 3
6. Where a lot is divided by a boundary, the applicable uses and development standards
shall be those of the district that contains the majority of the land area of a lot of record as
it existed at the time of the adoption of this Code.
Where uncertainties continue to exist after application of the above rules, the Planning
Commission shall determine the location of such boundaries.
17.04.90 DEVELOPMENT REVIEW FEES
A. Required Fees. The Director is authorized to charge and collect fees for the provision of
municipal services outlined in this Code. The City Council, by resolution, shall set fees in
accordance with the Council’s financial policies and shall charge no more than the actual or
average cost of providing planning and development review services in accordance with
ORS 227.175(1). The Director shall maintain a current schedule of fees for public review.
B. Annual Review. Development review fees shall be reviewed annually.
17.06 - 1
CHAPTER 17.06 - ENFORCEMENT
17.06.00 RESPONSIBLE OFFICERS
The Development Code shall be administered and enforced by the Director.
17.06.10 BUILDING PERMIT
No building permit shall be issued by the Building Official for any authorized development
unless the Director has determined that the proposed development complies with the provisions
of this Code and the required development review has been completed.
17.06.20 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
No final certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the Building Official for any development
unless all requirements of this Code have been met or until the applicant has provided some
written form of assurance acceptable to the Director guaranteeing the completion of all
requirements.
17.06.30 STOP WORK ORDER
Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this Code, the Director may order
the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in the work, and any such
persons shall immediately stop such work until authorized by the Director to proceed.
17.06.40 VIOLATIONS
Use of land in the City of Sandy not in accordance with the provisions of this Code constitutes a
violation. Upon receiving information concerning a violation of this Code, the Director may
conduct, or cause to be conducted, an investigation determining whether a violation exists. The
Director may request the assistance of other City agencies and officers in the conduct of such
investigations.
17.06.50 REQUEST FOR PROSECUTION
The Director may prepare and deliver to the City Attorney a request for prosecution indicating
the location and nature of the suspected violation, applicable code sections, and other
information staff may have.
17.06.60 NOTICE OF VIOLATION
After receiving a report of an alleged violation, the Director shall, if he/she determines that
probable cause exists, promptly give notice of the alleged violation by certified first class mail,
return receipt requested, or personal service to the owner of record for tax purposes and to the
person in charge of the property. Such a notice shall indicate the following:
A. Location and nature of the violation; and provision or provisions of this Code which
allegedly have been violated; and
B. Whether immediate enforcement will be sought or if 15 days will be allowed to correct or
remove the violation. Immediate enforcement will be sought in a situation involving a health
17.06 - 2
hazard or other nuisance that unmistakably exists and from which there is imminent danger
to human life or property; and
C. The date of the notice shall be the date of personal service of the notice, or, if notice is
accomplished by first class mail, 3 days after mailing if the address to which it was mailed is
within this State and 7 days after mailing if the address to which it was mailed is outside the
State. However, a defect in the notice of violation with respect to such matter shall not
prevent enforcement of this Code.
17.06.70 CITY ATTORNEY TO PURSUE ENFORCEMENT
As soon as the compliance deadline has expired the City Attorney shall proceed with any legal or
equitable action deemed appropriate unless:
A. It has been demonstrated to the City Attorney that the violation has been corrected, removed,
or will not be committed; or
B. A court of competent jurisdiction has halted enforcement pending the outcome of a
proceeding before it concerning the violation.
17.06.80 PENALTIES
A violation of this Code may be the subject of criminal, civil, or other sanctions authorized under
ordinance of the City:
A. Criminal Penalties. Unless otherwise specified, every violation of the terms of the Code is a
Class A infraction, punishable by a fine of up to $500.00. Each day such violation continues
shall be considered a separate offense.
B. Civil Penalties and Remedies. In addition to, or in lieu of, criminal actions, a violation of this
Code or a permit issued hereunder may be the subject of a civil action in the nature of a debt
or of any appropriate remedy issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction, including
mandatory and prohibitory injunctions and orders of abatement.
1. The Director is authorized to impose a civil penalty of up to $1,000.00 for any violation
of this Code.
2. In imposing a penalty amount pursuant to the schedule authorized by this section the
Director shall consider the following factors:
a) The past history of the person incurring a penalty in taking all feasible steps or
procedures necessary or appropriate to correct any violation;
b) Any prior violations of statutes, rules, orders or permits pertaining to development
regulations;
c) The gravity and magnitude of the violation;
d) Whether the violation was repeated or continuous; and
e) Whether the cause of the violation was an avoidable accident, negligence or an
intentional act.
3. Imposition and enforcement of civil penalties is not an exclusive remedy, but shall be in
addition to any other procedures or remedies provided by law. Imposition or payment of
a civil penalty under this section shall not be a bar to any criminal proceeding authorized
under this ordinance.
4. A civil penalty shall be imposed under this section by issuance of a notice of penalty. A
civil penalty may be imposed for the first 30 days and each additional 30-day period the
17.06 - 3
condition continues. The notice of penalty shall be provided in the manner as described
under Subsection “5” below.
5. Any civil penalty imposed under this section shall become due and payable when the
notice of penalty is served upon the person incurring the penalty. Service shall be by
personal service or by mailing the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
last known address of the person incurring the penalty. The notice of penalty shall
include:
a) A reference to the particular provision or law violated;
b) A statement of the matters asserted or charged;
c) A statement of the amount of the penalty or penalties imposed;
d) A statement of the owner’s right to appeal the penalty; and
e) A statement that if the penalty is not paid within the time required under Subsection
“10” below, the penalty and any costs of service and recording fees will be recorded
by the City Recorder in the City Lien Docket and shall become a lien on the property
of the person incurring the penalty.
6. If the notice of penalty is returned to the City without service upon the named person, the
Director shall post a notice of penalty on the premises where the violation has occurred.
The notice shall be posted so as to be visible from the public right-of-way and shall be
delivered to a person, if any, occupying the premises. The posted notice shall be affixed
to the premises and shall also indicate that tampering or removal of the notice shall
constitute a misdemeanor.
7. The person to whom the notice of penalty is issued shall have 20 days from the date of
service of the notice in which to appeal the penalty before the municipal judge, after
which time the notice of penalty becomes a final order. The appeal shall be as provided in
Subsections “8” and “9” below.
8. Any appeal shall be in writing and signed by the person against whom the penalty has
been assessed or the attorney for that person. The appeal shall state the grounds of the
appeal. A deposit in the amount of the civil penalty assessed and an appeal fee shall
accompany the appeal. The appeal shall be filed with the municipal court and served
upon the City Attorney. Failure to comply with these provisions shall result in the
dismissal of the appeal.
9. The municipal judge shall develop any rules or regulations that may be necessary for the
proper conduct of the appeal. The only issues to be decided by the municipal judge are
determinations of whether or not the condition of the property was as alleged in the
notice of penalty and if so, whether that condition violated this Code. If the judge finds
that the alleged condition existed at the time and date specified on the notice of penalty,
the municipal judge shall issue an order affirming the penalty. The order shall contain a
provision for court costs to be paid by the violator. If the judge finds that the condition
alleged in the notice of penalty did not exist at the time and date specified on the notice,
the municipal judge shall void the notice of penalty. The order voiding the notice of
penalty shall provide for return of the deposit, including the appeal fee. The judge’s order
is final and not subject to appeal unless challenged in a court of competent jurisdiction.
10. Unless the amount of penalty imposed is paid within 10 days after the notice of penalty or
the order becomes final by operation of law or after appeal, the order shall constitute a
lien on the owner’s subject property and shall be recorded in the City Lien Docket.
Where the service has been made by certified mail or other means providing a receipt, the
returned receipt shall be attached to and made a part of the order recorded. The penalty
provided in the order and added costs so recorded become a lien upon the real property.
That lien shall have priority over all other liens and encumbrances of any character. The
lien shall accrue interest at the rate applicable for municipal assessment liens from the
date of docketing until clearance. The lien may be foreclosed on and the property sold as
17.06 - 4
may be necessary to discharge the lien in the manner specified in ORS 223.505 through
223.595.
11. Any lien for a civil penalty shall be released when the full amount determined to be due
has been paid to the City; and the owner or person making such payment shall receive a
receipt therefor, stating that the full amount of penalties, interest, recording fees, and
service costs have been paid and that the lien is thereby released and the record of the lien
satisfied.
17.06.90 TAMPERING WITH OFFICIAL NOTICES
No person shall remove or tamper with a notice posted on property pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter unless authorized by the Director. A violation of this provision shall be a Class “C”
misdemeanor.
17.08 - 1
CHAPTER 17.08 - NONCONFORMING DEVELOPMENT
17.08.00 INTENT
These regulations are intended to permit nonconforming uses and structures to continue, but not
to encourage their perpetuation. The regulation of nonconforming development is intended to
bring development into conformance with this Code and the Comprehensive Plan.
As used in this chapter, nonconforming development includes nonconforming structures and
nonconforming uses. A nonconforming structure is a structure that does not fully comply with
the zoning district provisions because of setbacks, building height, off-street parking, or with
some other standard of the district.
Within the zoning districts established by this Code, development may exist that was lawful at
the time it began, but would be prohibited in the future under the terms of this Code or future
amendments.
In order to avoid undue hardship, nothing in this Code shall be deemed to require a change in the
plans, construction, or designated use of any building on which actual substantial construction
was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Code and upon
which actual building construction has been carried on diligently. Construction is considered to
have started if excavation, demolition, or removal of an existing building has begun in
preparation of rebuilding, and a building permit has been acquired, prior to the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this Code.
17.08.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. Alterations of a Nonconforming Use. No building, structure, or land area devoted to a
nonconforming use shall be enlarged, extended, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered
unless such development conforms to the provisions of this Code. Nothing in this chapter
shall be construed to prohibit normal repair, maintenance, and nonstructural alterations to
such development, nor the alteration, strengthening, or restoration to safe condition as may
be required by law.
B. Alteration of a Nonconforming Structure. Where the use of a structure is permitted by the
applicable development district but the structure is nonconforming, an alteration, expansion,
enlargement, extension, reconstruction, or relocation may be administratively approved if the
improvement, evaluated separately from the existing structure, would be in compliance, and
is not within a vision clearance area.
17.08.20 DISCONTINUANCE OF A NONCONFORMING USE
Whenever a nonconforming use is discontinued for more than 1 year, further use shall be in
conformity with the provisions of this Code. For purposes of this Code, rental payments or lease
payments and taxes shall not be considered a continued use. “Discontinued” shall mean nonuse
and shall not require a determination of the voluntary or involuntary nature of the discontinuance
or the intent to resume the nonconforming use.
17.08.30 DAMAGE TO A NONCONFORMING USE
If a structure with a nonconforming use is damaged by any means to an extent exceeding 80
percent of its most recent, pre-damage assessed valuation as indicated by the Clackamas County
17.08 - 2
Assessor’s office, any future development on the site shall conform to the requirements of the
zoning district in which it is located.
17.08.40 RECLASSIFICATION TO CONDITIONAL DEVELOPMENT
Whenever a nonconforming use is classified as a use that may be permitted conditionally, it shall
be reclassified as conforming upon receipt of an approved conditional use permit in accordance
with Chapter 17.68.
17.08.50 EXCEPTIONS
A. Multi-Family Dwellings, Office Uses, Automotive Fueling Stations, Car Washes, and
retail auto dealerships in the C-1 zoning district. (Ord. 2000-02 § , 2000.)
1. Multi-family dwellings in existence as of September 30, 1997 shall not be
classified as nonconforming development. However, any redevelopment or
expansion shall require compliance with current landscaping, access and parking
standards and shall be processed as a conditional use permit.
2. Office uses in existence as of September 30, 1997 shall not be classified as
nonconforming development. However, any redevelopment or expansion shall
require compliance with current landscaping, access and parking standards and
shall be processed as a conditional use permit.
3. Automotive fueling stations and car washes in existence as of September 30, 1997
shall not be classified as nonconforming development. However, any
redevelopment or expansion shall require compliance with current landscaping,
access and parking standards and shall be processed as a conditional use permit.
4. Retail auto dealerships in existence as of September 30, 1997 shall not be
classified as nonconforming development. Redevelopment of the existing
dealership shall require compliance with current landscaping, lighting and access
requirements. Expansion of an existing dealership shall be permitted only on
property contiguous to the existing auto dealership and in the same ownership as
the auto dealership on the effective date of this ordinance. Expansion shall be
processed as a conditional use permit. If the existing auto dealership building is
proposed to be altered or if a new building is proposed to be constructed on the
expansion property, the entire dealership shall be required to conform to current
applicable criteria and standards in the Sandy Development Code. If the
expansion is proposed to include only parking for the display of automobiles,
landscaping, light standards and signage, only the expansion property shall be
required to conform to current applicable criteria and standards in the Sandy
Development Code. (Ord. 2000-02 § , 2000.)
B. Nonconforming Duplexes. Where a duplex is a nonconforming building type in the zoning
district where it is located and has been damaged as described in 17.08.30 above, a duplex
may be reconstructed provided such reconstruction commences within 1 year of the damage
and complies with required development standards.
C. Nonconforming Lots of Record. An existing lot of record may not meet the lot size
requirements of the zoning district in which it is located. Such a lot may be occupied by a use
permitted in the district. If, however, the lot is smaller than the size required in its district,
residential use shall be limited to one dwelling unit or to the number of dwelling units
consistent with density requirements of the district. Also, other applicable requirements of
the zoning district must be met.
17.08 - 3
D. Street and Drainageway Dedications. The act of conveyance to or appropriation by the City
for street, drainage or other public purposes shall not in itself render as nonconforming the
use of land, structure, or other improvement maintained upon a lot.
E. Residential Uses. Any residential dwelling permitted prior to adoption of this Code, but
which is no longer allowed as a new use, may be modified or enlarged, provided it complies
with required development standards of the district.
F. Legally Required Alterations. Alterations of any nonconforming use shall be permitted when
necessary to comply with any lawful requirement for alteration in the use.
17.10 - 1
Revised by Ordinance 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
CHAPTER 17.10 - DEFINITIONS
17.10.00 INTENT
These definitions are intended to provide specific meanings for words and terms commonly used
in zoning and land use regulations.
17.10.10 MEANING OF WORDS GENERALLY
All words and terms used in this Code have their commonly accepted, dictionary meaning unless
they are specifically defined in this Code or the context in which they are used clearly indicated
to the contrary.
17.10.20 MEANING OF COMMON WORDS
A. All words used in the present tense include the future tense.
B. All words used in the plural include the singular, and all words used in the singular include
the plural unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary.
C. The word “shall” is mandatory and the word “may” is permissive.
D. The word “building” includes the word “structure”.
E. The phrase “used for” includes the phrases “arranged for”, “designed for”, “intended for”,
“maintained for”, and “occupied for”.
F. The word “land” and “property” are used interchangeably unless the context clearly indicates
to the contrary.
G. The word “person” may be taken for persons, associations, firms, partnerships or
corporations.
17.10.30 MEANING OF SPECIFIC WORDS AND TERMS
The listed specific words and terms are defined as follows:
Abandonment: To cease or discontinue a use or activity without intent to resume, but excluding
temporary or short-term interruptions to a use or activity during periods of remodeling,
maintaining or otherwise improving or rearranging a facility, or during normal periods of
vacation or seasonal closure. An “intent to resume” can be shown through continuous operation
of a portion of the facility, maintenance of sewer, water and other public utilities, or other
outside proof of continuance such as bills of lading, delivery records, etc.
Abandonment, Discontinued Use: Discontinued use shall mean nonuse and shall not require a
determination of the voluntary or involuntary use or intent to resume the use.
Abutting Lots: Two or more lots joined by a common boundary line or point. For the purposes
of this definition, no boundary line shall be deemed interrupted by a road, street, alley or public
17.10 - 2
Revised by Ordinance 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
way, it being the intent of this definition to treat property lying on the opposite sides of a road,
street, alley or public way as having a common boundary line or point.
Access: The place, means, or way by which pedestrians or vehicles shall have safe, adequate,
and usable ingress and egress to a property, use or parking space.
Accessory Dwelling Unit: A second dwelling unit either in or added to an existing single-family
detached dwelling, or in a separate accessory structure on the same lot as the main dwelling, for
use as a complete, independent living facility with provisions within the accessory apartment for
cooking, eating, sanitation and sleeping. Such a dwelling is an accessory use to the main
dwelling.
Accessory Structure (Detached): A structure that is clearly incidental to and subordinate to the
main use of property and located on the same lot as the main use; freestanding and structurally
separated from the main use.
Accessory Structure Example
Accessory Structure (Attached): A structure that is clearly incidental to and subordinate to the
main use of the property; attached to the principal structure by the wall or roof of the latter or by
the roof over a breezeway connecting the accessory and principal structures.
Accessory Use: A use on the same lot with and of a nature customarily incidental and
subordinate to the principal use.
Acre, Gross: Gross acre means an acre area of land, which includes in its measurement public
streets or other areas to be dedicated or reserved for public use.
Acre, Net: Net acre means an acre area of land, which does not include in its measurement
public streets or other areas to be dedicated or reserved for public use.
Activate (as in “activate wall”): Make the exterior of a building inviting to pedestrians through
a combination of elements, such as an enhanced customer entrance, weather protecting features
(such as canopies or awnings), pedestrian-scale signage, and transparent windows allowing for
views into and from interior building spaces.
Actual Construction: The placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened
in a permanent manner.
17.10 - 3
Revised by Ordinance 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
Adjacent Lot: Adjacent means the same as abutting lot.
AE Zone (floodway): Area of special flood hazard with water surface elevations determined as
depicted on the FIRM.
Affordable Housing: Housing for households with incomes at or below the Clackamas County
median, as determined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), on
the assumption that these households do not spend more than 30 percent of their income for
housing costs. Housing costs for renters include rent and heating. Housing cost for homeowners
includes principal on the mortgage plus interest, taxes, insurance, and heating. Note: Median
income figures depend upon the household size assumed. These numbers are updated annually
by HUD.
A-Frame building: A building with steeply angled sides that meet at the top of the building in
the shape of an “A”; more than half of the two side elevations comprise the primary roof form.
After School Program: A program designed to provide care for and educational enhancement to
children immediately following school release.
Agriculture: Nursery activity, horticulture and similar activities for the cultivation of
commercial crops in addition to pasturing, breeding, dairying, and similar uses of animals, and
poultry for commercial use; does not include processing, slaughtering, large scale poultry
raising, commercial forestry and similar uses.
Aisle: The driving portion of the parking area. The aisle provides access to each space.
Alley: A public or private way permanently reserved as a means of access to abutting property,
usually with principal access from another street.
Alteration: Any change, addition, or modification in construction or occupancy of an existing
building or structure.
Amendment: A change in the wording, context, or substance of the Development Code, or a
change in the zone boundaries or area district boundaries upon the zoning map.
Anchor space/store/building: The largest single use, or the largest space designed for a single
store or use, on a site.
Ancillary structure/store/building: An accessory structure, store, or building. See also,
Accessory Use
Angled: Any parking space that is not parallel to the curb or driving aisle.
Apartment: A dwelling unit, which is located within a multi-family dwelling but excluding
condominiums. (Multi-family dwelling is defined under Building Types.)
Appeal, floodplain: A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s interpretation of
any provision of this ordinance or a request for a variance.
17.10 - 4
Revised by Ordinance 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
Application: For purposes of this Code, application is defined as documents and materials
submitted or to be submitted to the city.
Area of Shallow Flooding: A designated Zone AO or AH on a community’s Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of
one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by
ponding or sheet flow.
Area of Special Flood Hazard: The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one
percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM) as Zone A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR. “Special flood hazard area” is
synonymous in meaning with the phrase “area of special flood hazard.”
Automobile Fueling Station: Automotive fueling station means any premises used primarily for
supplying motor fuel, oil, minor servicing, excluding body and fender repair, and the sale of
accessories as a secondary service for automobiles, at retail direct to the customer.
Automobile Wrecking Yard: The dismantling or wrecking of used motor vehicles or trailers, or
the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled, partially dismantled, obsolete or wrecked vehicles or
their parts.
Base Flood: A flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year.
Base Flood Elevation (BFE): The elevation to which floodwater is anticipated to rise during the
base flood.
Basement: Any area of a building having its floor subgrade below ground level on all sides.
Batten seam: Application of a batten where two exterior boards or panels adjoin (e.g., board and
batten siding).
Bed and Breakfast Inn: A house, or portion thereof, where short-term lodging rooms and meals
are provided. The operator of the inn shall live on the premises or in adjacent premises.
Berm: An earthen mound designed to provide a visual interest, screen undesirable views, and/or
decrease noise.
Berm Example
17.10 - 5
Revised by Ordinance 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
Big-box, or Large-Format Commercial/Industrial: Any single building containing more than
30,000 square feet of gross floor area in the C-1 zone, or greater than 60,000 square feet of gross
floor area in any other commercial or industrial zone.
Block: A tract of land bounded by street or by a combination of streets and public parks,
cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, drainageways, or unsubdivided land.
Boarding, Lodging or Rooming House: An establishment with lodging for not less than five
persons nor more than 10 persons not including members of the owner-occupant or tenantoccupant
family, other than a hotel or motel, where lodging, with or without meals, is provided.
Bond: Any form of security (including a cash deposit, surety bond, collateral, property, or
instrument of credit) in an amount and form satisfactory to the City.
Breezeway: A structure for the principal purpose of connecting the main building or buildings
on a property with other main buildings or accessory buildings.
Buffer: A combination of physical space and vertical elements, such as plants, berms, fences or
walls, designed to provide space or distance, obstruct undesirable views, serve as an acoustic
barrier, generally reduce impacts of adjacent development, or separate and screen incompatible
land uses from each other.
Buffer Example
Building: Any structure used or intended for support, shelter or enclosure of any persons,
animals, goods, equipment or chattels and property of any kind. If within an Area of Special
Flood Hazard then the definition of “Structure” provided in Chapter 17.10 shall apply.
Building Types:
A. Nonresidential: That group of building types comprising the following:
1. Detached: A single main building, freestanding and structurally separated from
other buildings.
17.10 - 6
Revised by Ordinance 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
2. Attached: Two or more main buildings placed side by side so that some structural
parts are touching one another.
B. Residential: That group of building types comprising the following:
1. Single Detached: One dwelling unit, freestanding and structurally separated from
any other dwelling unit or buildings, located on a lot or development site,
including manufactured homes as defined in this chapter.
2. Single Detached (Zero Lot Line): A single detached structure with no setback
from one lot line.
3. Duplex: A dwelling containing two independent dwelling units.
17.10 - 7
Revised by Ordinance 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
4. Single Attached (Zero Lot Line): Two dwelling units located on separate lots but
attached side by side sharing some structural parts at a common property line with
no setback from one lot line.
5. Attached (Row House): More than 2 dwelling units located on separate lots
placed side by side but sharing some structural parts at a common property line.
6. Multi-Family Dwelling: At least 3 dwelling units in any vertical or horizontal
arrangement, located on a lot or development site. An existing dwelling may be
utilized as part of a multi-family dwelling when redevelopment of the site occurs
and does not have to be attached to another structure.
7. Manufactured Dwelling Park: A place where four or more manufactured or
mobile homes are located within 500 feet of one another on a lot, tract, or parcel of
land under the same ownership, the primary purpose of which is to rent or keep
space for rent or to offer space free in connection with securing the trade or
patronage of such person.
17.10 - 8
Revised by Ordinance 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
C. The following commonly used terms are not considered building types for purposes of
this Code.
1. Cluster: An arrangement of building types designed to retain open space areas
equal to or greater than the cumulative total open space areas normally required
and maintaining the permitted gross density of a site.
2. Condominium: A form of ownership where the owner has a deed to a volume of
space, and is governed by the provisions of ORS Chapter 100.
Building Envelope: That portion of a lot or development site exclusive of the areas required for
front, side, and rear yards and other required open spaces; and which is available for siting and
constructing a building or buildings.
Building Height: See Height of Buildings definition.
Building Line: A line on a plat indicating the limit beyond which buildings or structures may
not be erected, or the minimum or maximum distance as prescribed by this Code between the
property line abutting a street and the closest point of the foundation of any building or structure
related thereto. Building line means a line established by this title to govern the placement of a
building with respect to the front lot line through the setback requirements of a minimum front
yard. A building line is ordinarily parallel to the front lot line and at a distance in accordance
with the setback requirement.
Bulk Plant: An establishment where commodities, including both liquids and solids, are
received by pipelines, tank car, tank vehicle, or other container, and are stored or blended in bulk
for the purpose of distribution by pipeline, tank car, tank vehicle or container.
Carport: A stationary-roofed structure or a portion of a building open on two or more sides
primarily used for the parking of motor vehicles.
Cemetery: Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead and related cemetery
activities, including: columbarium, crematoriums, mausoleums, and mortuaries, when operated
in conjunction with and within the boundary of such cemetery.
Change of Zone: The legislative act of rezoning one or more lots or parcels
Church: An institution that people regularly attend to participate in or hold religious services,
meetings and other activities.
City: The City of Sandy, a municipal corporation of the State of Oregon, where the provision
involves a duty owed the City in either its governmental or its corporate capacity; otherwise, that
officer, department, or agency of the City indicated by the context, or where the context does not
clearly indicate a specific officer, department, or agency, then the City Manager of the City.
Civic Space: A public or quasi-public gathering space, such as a plaza, square, outdoor seating
area, bus waiting area, garden, fountain, sculpture or public art display, or similar space, oriented
to pedestrians and connecting one or more developments to the adjacent streetscape.
17.10 - 9
Revised by Ordinance 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
Civic Space Example
Clinic: A building or portion of a building designed and used for the diagnosis and treatment of
human patients that does not include overnight care facilities, including medical, dental and
psychiatric services.
Commercial Day Care Facility: Any business other than a family day care home providing
adult supervision for children or adolescents.
Commission: The Planning Commission.
Common Open Space: An area within a development designed and intended for the use or
enjoyment of all residents of the development or for the use and enjoyment of the public in
general.
Comprehensive Plan: The comprehensive development plan for the City of Sandy, comprising
plans, maps or reports, or any combination thereof relating to the future economic and physical
growth and development or redevelopment of the city.
Community Service Use: A community use, including but not limited to, schools, churches,
community centers, fire stations, libraries, parks and playgrounds, cemeteries, or government
buildings.
Concrete Form: A method of concrete construction where members are cast horizontally near
their eventual location and integrate textures or patterns replicating other materials.
Conditional Use: A use that would not be generally appropriate within a zoning district but
which, if controlled as to number, area, location, or relation to the neighborhood, would not be
detrimental to the public health, safety, or general welfare.
Condominium: A form of ownership where the owner has a deed to a volume of space, and is
governed by the provisions of ORS Chapter 100.
Congregate Housing: A structure containing two or more dwelling units or rooming units
limited in occupancy to persons 55 years or older or handicapped persons, their spouses, except
for rooms or units occupied by resident staff personnel, providing indoor, conveniently located,
17.10 - 10
Revised by Ordinance 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
shared food preparation service, dining areas, and common recreation, social and service
facilities for the exclusive use of all residents.
Conservation Easement: An easement granting a right or interest in real property that is
appropriate to retaining land or water areas predominately in their natural, scenic, open or
wooded condition; retaining such areas as suitable habitat for fish, plants, or wildlife; or
maintaining existing land uses.
Consolidation: The elimination of a property line or lines of unplatted land to create a single
unit of land where more than one unit previously existed.
Contiguous: The same as abutting.
Cooperative: A group or association which has taken a deed or lease to property and which
issues stock upon which the tenant’s rights to proprietary leases are based. The stock, or other
evidence of interest in the cooperative corporation or association, shall be purchased by persons
who are tenants in the occupancy of at least 80% of the accommodations in the structure and are
entitled by reason of such ownership to proprietary leases of such accommodations.
Critical Facilities (floodway): Hospitals, fire stations, police stations, storage of critical records,
and similar facilities.
Cross-gable: Where one gable-ending roof intersects another gable-ending roof. (See graphic
below.)
Gables (cross-gables) Example
Curtain windows (flush glazing): Preassembled wall units or continuous window glazing
providing a flush surface; windows may be separated by metal framing members which may be
set entirely behind the glass panes or units. This type of glazing does not allow for the division of
windows into small panes with trim.
Day Care Facility: A child care facility certified to care for thirteen or more children, or a
facility that is certified to care for twelve or fewer children and located in a building constructed
other than a single family dwelling. Also known as a “Certified Child Care Center” as defined in
OAR 414, Division 300.
Day Care, Family: Baby-sitting, care of 12 or fewer children, including resident family
members, as accessory to any residential use regardless of full-time or part-time status. Family
day care is subject to the definition of home business.
17.10 - 11
Revised by Ordinance 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
Day(s): Shall mean calendar days unless working days are specified.
Density, Gross: The number of residential dwelling units per gross acre of land
Density, Net: The number of dwelling units per net acre (based on the total area of the parcel)
excluding areas dedicated for public use.
Density Transfer Receiving Areas: Unconstrained buildable land on the same site as land that
is partially covered by the FSH overlay zone. Density may be transferred from constrained and
unbuildable land to buildable density transfer receiving areas as prescribed in Chapter 17.60.120.
Detached: A single main building, freestanding and structurally separated from other buildings.
Detention, Stormwater: The release of surface and stormwater runoff from a site at a slower
rate than it is collected by the drainage facility system, the difference being held in temporary
storage.
Detention Facility, Stormwater: A facility that collects water from developed areas and
releases it at a slower rate than it enters the collection systems.
Developer: The owners of property or their agents or contractors, or their successors or assigns,
who have undertaken or are proposing development.
Development Site: A legally established lot or parcel of land occupied or capable of being
occupied by a building or group of buildings including accessory structure(s) and accessory
use(s), together with such yards or open spaces, and setback areas as are required by this Code
and having frontage upon a street.
Development: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not
limited to, construction of buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading,
compaction, paving, excavation or drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials, stream
alteration or channeling, vegetation removal or other similar activities.
Director: Planning and Development Director of the City of Sandy, or the Director’s official
designee, with responsibility for administration of this Code.
District: A land use area or zone established by this title for the designated intent.
Drainageway: A natural or artificial watercourse, including adjacent riparian vegetation, that
has the specific function of transmitting natural stream water or storm runoff water from a point
of higher elevation to a point of lower elevation.
Drip line (of a tree): A line projected to the ground delineating the outermost extent of foliage
in all directions.
Drive-in Facility: Any portion of a building or structure from which business is transacted, or is
capable of being transacted, directly with customers located in a motor vehicle.
17.10 - 12
Revised by Ordinance 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
Dwelling Unit: An independent living unit within a dwelling structure designed and intended for
occupancy by not more than one family and having its own housekeeping and kitchen facilities.
Hotel, motel, and rooming and boarding units, which are used primarily for transient tenancy,
shall not be considered as dwelling units.
Easement: A right that a person has to use someone’s land for a specific purpose such as for
access or for utilities.
Effects of Buoyancy: Uplift force of water on a submerged or partially submerged object.
Erosion: Detachment and movement of soil, rock fragments, refuse, or any other material,
organic or inorganic.
Established Grade: The curb line grade established by the City.
Excavation: The process of altering the natural (grade) elevation by cutting and/or filling the
earth or any activity by which soil or rock is cut, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced
or relocated.
Facing (Building Elevation): A building elevation that is typically parallel and adjacent to a
public street or civic space.
Facing and visible from a Public Street example
Family: Any number of individuals living together in a dwelling unit related by blood, marriage,
legal adoption or guardianship; or a group of not more than 5 persons all or part of whom are not
so related by blood or marriage living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit.
17.10 - 13
Revised by Ordinance 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
Fast-Food Restaurant – This type of restaurant is characterized by a large carryout clientele and
high turnover rates for eat-in customers. These limited service eating establishments do not
provide table service.
Fence: Any artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination of materials erected to
enclose or screen areas of land, serve as a boundary, or means of protection or confinement.
Fence, Sight-obscuring: A fence or evergreen planting of such density and so arranged as to
obstruct vision.
Fill: Placement of any soil, sand, gravel, clay, mud, debris, refuse, or any other material, organic
or inorganic.
Finished Grade (ground level): The average of finished ground levels at the center of all walls
of the building unless otherwise specified.
Flag Lot: A lot that has access to a public right-of-way by means of a narrow strip of land.
Flag Lot Example
Flood or Flooding: (A) A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.
(3) Mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by flooding as defined in
paragraph (a)(2) of this definition and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on
the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water
and deposited along the path of the current.
(B) The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result
of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical
levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water,
accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood, or by
some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in
paragraph (a)(1) of this definition.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM): The official map of a community, on which the Federal
Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community. A FIRM that has been made available digitally is called a
Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM).
17.10 - 14
Revised by Ordinance 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
Flood Insurance Study: An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if
appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and
determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards.
Floodplain or Flood-Prone Area: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from
any source. See “Flood or Flooding.” The lowland and relatively flat areas adjoining inland
waters including, at a minimum, that area identified as the Area of Special Flood Hazard.
Flood-proofing: Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or
adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real
property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
Flood, Slope and Hazard Areas (FSH):
• Buildable Areas: Accessible lands of less than 25% slope that lie outside steep slope
and water quality setback areas as defined in Chapter 17.60, Flood and Slope Hazard
(FSH).
• Restricted Development Areas: As shown on the City of Sandy Zoning Map
including:
1. Slopes of 25% or greater that (a) encompass at least 1,000 square feet and (b) have
an elevation differential of at least 10 feet.
2. Protected water features, including locally significant wetlands, wetland mitigation
areas approved by the Division of State Lands, and perennial streams.
3. Required setback areas as defined in section 17.60.30.
Floodway (Regulatory Floodway): The channel of a river or other water course and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.
Floodway: The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the adjoining floodplains
required to carry and discharge the base flood flow.
Floodway Example
17.10 - 15
Revised by Ordinance 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
Floor Area: The sum of the area of several floors of a building including areas used for human
occupancy. It does not include cellars, unenclosed porches, or attics not designed for human
occupancy, or any floor space in any accessory building or any interior building parking areas,
exclusive of vent shafts.
Floor, Habitable: A floor usable for living purposes, which includes working, sleeping, eating,
cooking or recreation, or a combination of the above. A floor used only for storage or parking is
not a “habitable floor.”
Foster Home, Adult: Any family home or facility in which residential care is provided for 5 or
fewer adults who are not related to the provider by blood or marriage.
Frontage: That portion of a development site that abuts a public or private street. For the
purposes of determining yard requirements on corner lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to a street
shall be considered frontage, and yards shall be provided as indicated under “yards” in the
definition section.
Flood and Slope Hazard (FSH) Overlay District: An overlay zoning district defining water
quality, flood, and slope hazard areas within the City identified on the City of Sandy Zoning
Map.
Gabled roof: The generally triangular portion of a wall between the lines of a sloping roof. The
shape of the gable and how it is detailed depends on the structural system being used (which is
often related to climate and materials) and aesthetic concerns. The City of Sandy requires
minimum roof pitch on some buildings which supports the use of gables.
Garage, Private: A portion of a main building or an accessory building, shelter or carport used
for the parking or temporary storage of private automobiles, trailers, mobile homes, boats or
other vehicles owned or used by occupants of the main building.
Garage, Public: A building designed and used for the storage, care, or repair of motor vehicles,
including both minor and major mechanical overhauling, paint, and body work or where such
vehicles are parked or stored for compensation, hire or sale.
Grade: Given in reference to the slope of land or in reference to construction: is the lowest point
of elevation of the finished surface of the ground, paving or sidewalk within the area between the
building and the property line, or, when the property line is more than 5 feet from the building,
between the building and a line 5 feet from the building.
Gross Area: The total usable area including accessory space dedicated to such things as streets,
easements and uses out of character with the principal use, but within a unit of area being
measured.
Ground floor: The floor of a building that is at or nearest the ground level.
Ground floor elevation: The elevation of a building that is at or nearest the ground level
measured from the ground to a point 12-feet above the ground. (This definition is used to
measure the ground floor area subject to window requirements in Chapter 17.90).
17.10 - 16
Revised by Ordinance 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
Group Care Home: A home or residential institution maintained and operated for the
supervision, care or training of physically, mentally, or socially handicapped persons, but not
including foster homes or detention facilities.
Grove: A stand of three or more trees of the same species or mix, which form a visual and
biological unit.
Guest House: An accessory, detached dwelling without kitchen facilities, designed for and used
to house transient visitors or guests of the occupants of the main building without compensation.
Half-story: A space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection of roof decking and
exterior wall face not more than 5 feet above the top floor level. A half-story containing one or
more dwelling units shall be counted as a full story.
Half-Street improvement: A ½ street improvement includes curb and pavement 2 feet beyond
the centerline of the right-of-way. A ¾ street improvement includes curbs on both sides of the
street and full pavement between curb faces.
Health/Recreation Facility: An indoor facility including uses such as game courts, exercise
equipment, locker rooms, Jacuzzi, and/or sauna and pro shop.
Hearing Authority: The City Council, Planning Commission or an agency or officer of the
Council designated by this Code to conduct public hearings prior to acting on applications for
development.
Heavy timber: Exposed timber framing or detailing consisting of larger wooden members,
commonly with dimensions in the range of 6" to 12", as opposed to common wood framing
which uses many more timbers with dimensions usually in the 2" to 10" range. The methods of
fastening the frame members also differ; in conventional framing the members are joined using
nails or other mechanical fasteners while timber framing uses mortice and tenon (wood joint) or
metal fasteners.
Height of Buildings: The vertical distance above a reference datum measured to the highest
point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the average height of
the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof. The reference datum shall be selected by either of
the following, whichever yields a greater height of building:
A. The elevation of the highest adjoining sidewalk or ground surface within a 5-foot
horizontal distance of the exterior wall of the building when such sidewalk or ground
surface is not more than 10 feet above lowest grade.
B. An elevation 10 feet higher than the lowest grade when the sidewalk or ground surface
described in Item “A” above is more than 10 feet above lowest grade.
17.10 - 17
Revised by Ordinance 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
Determining Building Height Example
High-Turnover Sit Down Restaurant – This type of restaurant consists of a sit-down, fullservice
eating establishment with turnover rates of approximately one hour or less. This type of
restaurant is usually moderately priced and frequently belongs to a restaurant chain. This
restaurant type is different than fast-food and quality restaurants as defined in the Institute of
Transportation Engineers, Trip Generation manual.
Highest Adjacent Grade: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to
construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
Hipped roof. A type of roof where all sides slope downwards to the walls, usually with a fairly
gentle slope. Thus it is a roof with no gables or other vertical sides to the roof. A square hip roof
is shaped like a pyramid. Hip roofs on rectangular houses will have two triangular sides and two
trapezoidal ones. Hip roofs often have dormers. Where two hipped (“h”) roof forms adjoin, the
edge is called a valley (“v”). See graphic.
Hipped Roof Example
Historic Resource Alteration: Historic resource alteration means the change, addition, removal,
physical modification or repair, which affects the exterior appearance of a landmark, excluding,
however, routine maintenance and painting.
Historic Resource Alteration, Major: Means exterior alteration, which is not a minor
alteration.
Historic Resource Alteration, Minor: Means exterior alteration which does not change the
appearance or material of the landmark or contributing resource as it exists, or duplicates or
17.10 - 18
Revised by Ordinance 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
restores the affected exterior features and material as determined from historic photos, building
plan or other evidence or original features or material.
Historic Structure (Area of Special Flood Hazard): Any structure that is:
A. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
B. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by
the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
C. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or
D. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified either:
1. By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or
2. Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Home Business: A lawful commercial activity commonly carried on within a dwelling or
attached or detached accessory structure.
Homeowners Association: An incorporated, nonprofit organization operating under recorded
land agreements through which a) each lot owner of a planned development or other described
land area is automatically a member; and b) subject to a charge for a proportionate share of the
expenses for the organization’s activities, such as maintaining a common property.
Hospital: An establishment, which provides sleeping and eating facilities to persons receiving
medical, obstetrical or surgical care and nursing service.
Hotel: A facility offering transient lodging accommodations at a daily rate to the general public.
A hotel may provide additional services, such as restaurants, meeting rooms, and recreational
facilities.
Household: A domestic establishment including a member or members of a family and/or others
living under the same roof.
Hydrodynamic Load: Force of water in motion.
Hydrostatic Load: Force of water at rest.
Impervious Surface: Any material that substantially reduces or prevents the infiltration of
stormwater into previously undeveloped land. Impervious area shall include graveled driveways
and parking areas.
17.10 - 19
Revised by Ordinance 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
Impervious Surface Example
Irrigation System: Method of supplying water (which can be manually or mechanically
controlled) to a needed area.
Junkyard: An area used for the dismantling, storage or handling in any manner of junked
vehicles or other machinery, or for the purpose of storage of dismantled material, junk and scrap,
and/or where wastes and used or secondhand materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored,
processed, or handled. Materials include, but are not limited to, scrap iron and other metals,
paper, rags, rubber tires, and bottles, if such activity is not incidental to the principal use of the
same lot.
Kennel: Any premises or building in which four or more dogs or cats at least four months of age
are kept commercially for board, propagation or sale.
Kitchen: Any room used, intended or designed for preparation and storage of food, including
any room having a sink and provision for a range or stove.
Land Area, Net: That land area remaining after all area covered by impervious surfaces has
been excluded (subtracted).
Land Division: Land divided to create legally separate parcels in one of the following ways:
A. Partition: A division of land that creates three or fewer lots within a calendar year
when such parcel exists as a unit or contiguous units of land under single ownership at
the beginning of the year. See also, “Replat, Minor.”
A partition does not include division of land resulting from any of the following:
1. Establishment or modifications of a “tax lot” by the County Assessor;
2. A lien foreclosure, foreclosure of a recorded contract for the sale of real property
or creation of cemetery lots;
3. An adjustment of a property line by relocation of a common boundary where an
additional unit of land is not created and where the existing unit of land reduced in
size by the adjustment complies with any applicable development district criteria
established by this Code;
4. Sale or grant by a person to a public agency or public body for state highway,
county road, city street or other right-of-way purposes provided that such road or
17.10 - 20
Revised by Ordinance 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
right-of-way complies with the applicable Comprehensive Plan policies and ORS
215.213 (2)(q)-(s) and 215.283 (2)(p)-(r). See “Property Line Adjustment.”
B. Subdivision: Division of an area or tract of land into four or more lots within a
calendar year when such area or tract of land exists as a unit or contiguous units of
land under a single ownership at the beginning of such year. See also, “Replat, Major.”
Land, Intensity of: Relative measure of development impact as defined by characteristics such
as the number of dwelling units per acre, amount of traffic generated, and amount of site
coverage.
Land, Parcel of: Any quantity of land capable of being described with such definiteness that its
location and boundaries may be established. Also, a unit of land created by a partition.
Landscape Management Corridor: The required yards abutting Highway 26 within the C-2, I-I
and I-2 zoning districts where the Development Code requires native conifer and deciduous
landscaping, creating the appearance of a forested corridor; openings or breaks in the landscape
corridor are minimized, allowing for transportation access and framed views into development
sites.
Landscaping: The arrangement of trees, grass, bushes, shrubs, flowers, gardens, fountains,
patios, decks, outdoor furniture, and paving materials in a yard space. It does not include the
placing or installation of artificial plant materials.
Legislative Decision: Involves formulation of policy and as such, it is characteristic of the
actions by a city council. Ex-parte contact requirements are not applicable to legislative hearings.
Personal notice to citizens advising them of proposed changes is not required in most cases,
although the Sandy Development Code specifies that in some cases notice shall be mailed to
property owners if a decision will change the land-use designation. In general, the burden of
being informed rests on the citizen. (See definition for “Limited Land Use Decision” and “Quasijudicial
Decision”.)
Lien Foreclosure: A lien foreclosure, foreclosure of a recorded contract for the sale of real
property or creation of cemetery lots.
Limited Land Use Decision: A land use decision made by staff through an administrative
process and that qualifies as a Limited Land Use Decision under ORS 197.015.
Loading Space: An off-street space within a building or on the same lot with a building for the
temporary parking of commercial vehicles or trucks while loading or unloading merchandise or
materials and which space has direct access to a street.
Lot Area: The total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot.
Lot, Corner: A lot situated at the intersection of 2 streets, the interior angle of such intersection
not exceeding 135 degrees.
17.10 - 21
Revised by Ordinance 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
Lot Corner Example
Lot Coverage: Unless otherwise noted in a zoning district, percent of a development site
covered, including all gravel and paved surface areas and areas encompassed by buildings.
Lot Depth: The distance from the midpoint of the front lot line to the midpoint of the rear lot
line.
Lot, Interior: A lot other than a corner lot having frontage on only one street.
Lot Line: The property line bounding a lot.
Lot Line, Front: In the case of an interior lot, a property line that abuts the street. In the case of
a corner lot, the front line shall be determined by orientation of the structure based on at least
two of the following factors: location of the front door, location of the driveway, or legal street
address.
Lot Line, Side: Any lot boundary not a front or rear lot line (see figure under “Lot Line, Rear”).
Lot Line, Rear: The recorded lot line or lines most distant from and generally opposite the front
lot line. In the case of an interior triangular lot or lot with more than four sides, however, the rear
lot line shall mean a straight line 10 feet in length that: a) is parallel to the front lot line or its
chord and, b) intersects the other lot lines at points most distant from the front line (see figure
below).
17.10 - 22
Revised by Ordinance 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
Rear Lot Line Example
Lot of Record: A lot or parcel created through applicable land division regulations before
adoption of this Code.
Lot, Reversed Corner: A corner lot whose rear line borders the side yard of another lot,
whether or not separated by an alley.
Lot, Tax: One parcel of real property shown on the County Assessor’s map, and identified by a
tax lot number. A tax lot may not necessarily be a lot of record.
Lot, Through: A lot of record whose front and rear lot lines both abut streets.
Lot Width: The horizontal distance between the midpoints of the side lot lines.
Lowest Floor: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including a “Basement”). An
unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or
storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor if the
building falls within the “Area of Special Flood Hazard,” provided that such enclosure is not
built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements
of this ordinance.
Mansard roof: A style of hip roof characterized by two slopes on each of its four sides with the
lower slope being much steeper, almost a vertical wall, while the upper slope, usually not visible
from the ground, is pitched at the minimum needed to shed water. This form may accommodate
an additional building story. Often the decorative potential of the Mansard is expressed through
the use of convex or concave curvature and with elaborate dormer window surrounds.
17.10 - 23
Revised by Ordinance 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
Mansard Roof Example
Manufactured Dwelling Park (also Mobile Home Park or Trailer Park): A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land with two or more manufactured dwelling lots for rent or sale. A
parcel under single ownership that has been planned and improved for the placement of
manufactured housing for dwelling purposes. Manufactured home park means a privately owned
place where four or more manufactured homes, mobile homes, or any combination of the above,
used for human occupancy are placed on a lot, tract of parcel of land under the same ownership.
Manufactured Dwelling: A dwelling constructed to U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD) standards since June 15, 1976, but not to State Building Code standard and
constructed for movement on public highways that has sleeping, cooking and plumbing facilities,
that is intended for human occupancy, that is used for residential purposes and was constructed,
and met the requirements of federal manufactured housing construction and safety standards and
regulations in effect at the time of construction. All manufactured homes are to meet the
requirements of the National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of
1974, as amended on August 22, 1981, consistent with HB 2863 Oregon Laws, 1989, and current
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Manufactured Home Construction and
Safety Standards as embodied in the most recent Federal Register. Within a “Special Flood
Hazard Area” a manufactured dwelling shall mean a structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term “manufactured dwelling”
does not include a “recreational vehicle.”
Manufactured Dwelling Space: Any portion of a manufactured dwelling park (See
“Manufactured Dwelling Park”) which is designated or used for occupancy of one manufactured
home or mobile home, including its accessory structures and its outdoor living areas, but
exclusive of space provided for the common use of tenants such as roadways and guest parking.
Manufactured Dwelling Stand: That portion of the manufactured home space reserved for the
location of the manufactured home or mobile home.
Marijuana Dispensary: Those facilities registered and/or licensed by the state of Oregon as
medical marijuana dispensaries and marijuana retailers.
Mean Sea Level: For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which Base Flood Elevations shown on a
community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
17.10 - 24
Revised by Ordinance 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
Medical Facility: A building or portion of a building designed and used for the diagnosis and
treatment of human patients or animals including clinic, hospital, and laboratory, but excluding
medical marijuana facility, as authorized by state law.
Medical Marijuana Grow Site: Those facilities defined, registered and/or licensed by Oregon
Health Authority to grow medical marijuana for more than one registered medical marijuana
cardholder.
Mini-storage Facility: A building or buildings consisting of individual, small, self-contained
units that are leased or owned for the storage of business and household goods or contractors
supplies.
Mobile Home: A residential structure intended for permanent human occupancy and constructed
for movement on the public highways, constructed prior to adoption of June 15, 1976 U.S.
Housing and Urban Development (HUD) standards, but meeting the requirements of Oregon’s
mobile home laws in effect between January 1, 1962 and June 15, 1976 which met the
construction requirements of Oregon Mobile Home Law in effect at the time of construction and
which exhibits an Oregon Department of Commerce Insignia of Compliance that indicates
conformance with U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, HUD, standards.
Modular Structure: A structure not built on-site, but which is placed on a permanent
foundation and meets the State Building Code standards.
Motel: A building or group of buildings on the same lot designed or used primarily for providing
sleeping accommodations for automobile travelers and providing automobile parking
conveniently located on the premises.
National Geodetic Vertical Datum: An elevation reference mark used in determining a flood
boundary and floodway maps, formerly referred to as Mean Sea Level.
New Construction (Area of Special Flood Hazard): For the purposes of determining insurance
rates, structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of
an initial Flood Insurance Rate Map or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes
any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, “new
construction” means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the
effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures.
Nonconforming Development: A lawful existing structure or use that does not conform to
requirements of the district, but which was already in existence on the effective date of this Code
or any amendment to it became effective.
Notice of Decision: A written communication that specifies the action of a hearing authority or
Director concerning a development proposal.
Nuisance: Activity or use that is annoying, unpleasant or obnoxious.
Nursing Home: Any home, place, or institution which operates and maintains facilities
providing convalescent or nursing care, or both, for a period exceeding twenty-four hours for six
or more ill or infirm patients not related to the nursing home administrator or owner.
17.10 - 25
Revised by Ordinance 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
Office: A place where the following civic and commercial uses are conducted: Administrative
services; business support services; financial, insurance and real estate services; medical
services; professional and research services.
On the Record: Refers to review by the Planning Commission or City Council based on written
submissions received by the Director or at the hearing and/or review of a non-verbatim transcript
of the prior proceedings and decision. If requested, the Planning Commission or City Council
shall allow the applicant and/or appellant to present an oral summary of the evidence and Code
sections that support their position. No new evidence shall be allowed. The Planning
Commission or City Council may allow further oral comments of a summary nature.
Open Space, Group: Areas intended for common use either privately owned and maintained or
dedicated to the City, designed for outdoor living and recreation or the retention of an area in its
natural state. Group open spaces may include swimming pools, recreation courts, patios, open
landscaped areas, and greenbelts with pedestrian, equestrian, and bicycle trails but do not include
off-street parking, maneuvering or loading areas or driveways.
Open Space, Private: Areas intended for the private use by residents of an individual dwelling
unit, designed for outdoor living and recreation or the retention of an area in its natural state.
Private open spaces may include patios and landscaped areas but does not include off-street
parking, maneuvering, loading or delivery areas.
Order: Final disposition of a case. It can be affirmative, negative, injunctive, or declaratory in
form. The grant, denial, or grant with conditions of an application for development is an order.
Other Marijuana Facility: Those facilities defined, registered and/or licensed by the state of
Oregon including marijuana processing sites, marijuana producers, marijuana processors,
marijuana wholesalers, and marijuana testing laboratories.
Overlay District: A development district created by ordinance in recognition of an area’s unique
characteristics such as environmental or historic resources, natural hazards, or an identified need
for redevelopment.
Overnight Lodging – A building or group of buildings designed and used primarily for
overnight lodging. This definition includes hotels, motels, hostels, bed breakfast inns and similar
uses.
Owner: The owner of record of real property as shown on the latest tax rolls of Clackamas
County, or by the deed records of such county, or a person who is purchasing property under
contract. In terms of violations and binding agreements between the city and owner, the owner
shall also mean leaseholder, tenant, or other person in possession or control of the premises or
property at the time of agreement or of violation of agreement or the provisions of this Code.
Owner shall also mean authorized representative.
Parapet: An extended wall surrounding a roof, typically a decorative wall constructed of the
same materials as the supporting wall. The parapet serves as building cap and may be stepped
(Stepped Parapet) to provide visual relief (articulation) and a transition between buildings of
dissimilar height.
17.10 - 26
Revised by Ordinance 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
Parking area, Private: A privately owned property, other than streets and alleys, on which
parking spaces are defined, designated, or otherwise identified for use by the tenants, employees,
or owners of the property for which the parking area is required by this title and not open for use
by the general public.
Parking area, Public: An area permanently available, other than streets and alleys, on which
parking spaces are defined, designated, or otherwise identified for use by the general public
which is open for use by the general public, either free or for remuneration. Public parking areas
may include parking lots, which may be required by this title for retail customers, patrons, and
clients.
Parking Bay: Rows of parking separated by an aisle. A parking bay may be single-loaded
(parking on one side only) or double-loaded (on both sides).
Parking Space: Parking space means an area permanently available for the parking of an
automobile.
Typical Parking Area Example
Participant: A person or entity that submitted written or oral comments in compliance with the
time lines set in the procedure type, or at the public hearing. Merely signing a petition does not
constitute participation.
Pedestrian-scale: The placement, proportioning, and detailing of building and site design
elements resulting in an environment that is comfortable and inviting to pedestrians. Examples of
elements that are regulated with the intent of creating pedestrian scale include, but are not limited
to: pedestrian ways, parking facilities, street furnishings, civic spaces, building entrances,
building articulation, divisions between first and second building stories, weather protecting
canopies or awnings, transparent storefront windows, fences, walls, and landscape screening and
buffering.
Percent of Slope: The ratio of vertical distance to horizontal distance (rise divided by run times
100). For example, a 1:4 slope (one-foot rise over a four foot run times 100) is a 25% slope.
Pergola: A structure forming a shaded walk or passageway. Pillars support cross beams and a
sturdy open lattice, upon which woody vines are typically trained. It may also be part of a
building, as protection for an open terrace or civic space.
17.10 - 27
Revised by Ordinance 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
Pergola Example
Person: An individual, corporation, governmental agency, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership, association, two or more people having a joint or common interest, or any other
legal entity.
Planned Development: A land development project comprehensively planned as an entity via a
unified site plan that permits flexibility in building siting, mixtures of building types and land
uses, useable open spaces, and the preservation of significant natural features. Planned
development means the proposed land development project as finally approved by the Planning
Commission, and shall include a plat, all covenants, grants of easement, and other conditions
relating to use, location and bulk of building, density of development, common open space and
public facilities. The plan shall include such information as required by this zoning title.
Plat: Refers to a final subdivision plat, replat or partition plat.
Plat, Partition: A final map, diagram, drawing, replat, or other writing containing all the
descriptions, locations, specifications, provisions and information concerning a partition.
Plat, Subdivision: A final map, diagram, drawing, replat, or other writing containing all the
descriptions, locations, specifications, dedications, provisions, and information concerning a
subdivision.
Portico: A porch leading to the entrance of a building, or extended as a colonnade, with a roof
structure over a walkway, supported by columns or enclosed by walls.
Practicable: Capable of being effected, feasible.
Preschool: A facility providing care for children 36 months of age to school age that is primarily
educational for four hours or less per day and where no preschool child is present at the facility
for more than four hours per day.
Primary structure/store/building: The structure or building housing the largest use on a site, as
determined by floor area, occupancy rating, trip generation, or similar criteria.
Professional Office: An office of a practitioner of an occupation or calling requiring the practice
of an art or science through specialized knowledge based on a degree issued by an institution of
higher learning.
17.10 - 28
Revised by Ordinance 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
Property Line Adjustment: The relocation of a common property boundary where an
additional unit of land is not created and where an existing unit of land reduced in size by the
adjustment complies with any applicable development district regulation.
Public Facility: Public facilities include, but are not limited to, sanitary sewer, water, storm
drainage, street, communication, electrical and natural gas facilities necessary to support
development. There are two types of public facilities:
• Public Facility, Major: Any public service improvement or structure developed by or
for a public agency that is not defined as a minor public facility, including but not
limited to electrical substations, sewer and water treatment plants, water reservoirs,
trunk lines, regional stormwater detention facilities, new or expanded public buildings
designed for human occupancy that increase traffic within a neighborhood, and active
park improvements such as ball fields or restroom facilities.
• Public Facility, Minor: Minor utility structures (e.g., poles, lines, pipes); minor
sewer, water and storm drainage structures and collection system improvements (e.g.,
pump stations, lines, manholes, valves, hydrants, drains, on-site detention facilities);
new or extended public streets (including lane additions); minor improvements to
existing streets (e.g., overlays, catch basins, signs, control devices, widening, curbs,
gutter, sidewalks); minor transit improvements (e.g., bus stops or shelters); passive
park improvements (e.g., trails, benches, native plantings or picnic areas); and
transportation improvements identified in the adopted Transportation System Plan.
Quasi-judicial Decision: Similar to a court proceeding where affected parties are afforded more
procedural safeguards. The quasi-judicial process is characteristic of most meetings of the
Planning Commission. Personal notice must be mailed to property owners and occupants living
within a prescribed distance of the affected area. Unlike legislative decisions, Planning
Commission members are expected to avoid outside discussion of the business at hand, and they
must declare ex parte contacts. (See “Legislative Decision.)
Recreational Vehicle: A vacation trailer or other vehicle or portable unit built on a single
chassis, which is either self-propelled or towed or is carried by a motor vehicle and which is
designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
Recreational Vehicle (Area of Special Flood Hazard): A vehicle which is:
A. Built on a single chassis;
B. 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
C. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
D. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Recreational Vehicle Park: Any lot of land upon which two or more recreational vehicle sites
are located, established, or maintained for occupancy for recreational vehicles of the general
17.10 - 29
Revised by Ordinance 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
public as temporary living quarters, for recreation or vacation purposes. An RV park is intended
for use on a temporary basis by campers, vacationers, or travelers.
Remand: A remand shall be conducted in compliance with the procedure type issued by the
decision maker upon its initial review of the application unless otherwise specified in the remand
order.
Replat, Major: The reconfiguring of lots in a recorded subdivision plat that results in either the
creation of 4 or more additional lots, deletion of 4 or more lots, or reconfiguring of 4 or more
lots.
Replat, Minor: The reconfiguring of a portion of the lots in a recorded subdivision or partition
plat that results in 3 or fewer lots being created, deletion of 3 or fewer lots, or reconfiguring of 3
or fewer lots.
Reserve Strip: A narrow strip of land overlaying a dedicated street reserved to the City for
control of access until such time as additional right-of-way is accepted by the City for
continuation or widening of the street.
Residential Facility: A residential care facility, residential training facility, residential treatment
facility, residential training facility, residential training home or residential treatment home
licensed by or under the authority of the Department of Human Resources under ORS 443.000 to
443.825 which provides residential care alone or in conjunction with treatment or training or a
combination thereof for five or fewer individuals who need not be related. Required staff persons
shall not be counted in the number of residents and need not be related to each other, the
residents or the facility owner or operator. This definition includes adult foster homes. All
exclusions set forth in ORS 443.715 are excluded from this definition.
Restaurant, Drive-In: A retail outlet where food or beverages are sold to a substantial extent for
consumption by customers in parked motor vehicles.
Restaurant, Fast Food: An establishment that offers quick food service of items already
prepared and held for service, or prepared, fried, griddled quickly or heated in a device such as a
microwave oven. Orders are not generally taken at the customer’s table and food is generally
served in disposable wrapping or containers.
Retention Facility: A facility to collect and hold stormwater runoff with no surface outflow.
Right-of-way: A public way dedicated for vehicular, bicycle or pedestrian use.
17.10 - 30
Revised by Ordinance 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
Right-of-way example
Riparian Area: The area adjacent to a river, lake, or stream, consisting of the area of transition
from an aquatic ecosystem to a terrestrial ecosystem.
Row House: More than 2 units, often with 2 stories and with ground floor access, on individual
lots.
Rusticated: A texture produced in ashlar (i.e., dressed stone work) masonry with deep cut 'V' or
square joints to contrast with smooth masonry.
Rusticated stone work example
Sandy Style: An architectural style developed in the City of Sandy, Oregon that expresses
elements of or reflects Cascadian Architecture by adapting appropriate elements of English Arts
and Crafts Style (1900-1920) and Oregon Rustic Style (1915-1940) or similar elements.
School: A facility that provides a curriculum of elementary and secondary academic instruction,
including kindergartens, elementary schools, junior high or middle schools, and high schools.
Sediment: Any material that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its
site of origin by water, wind, or gravity as a result of erosion.
Senior Housing Complex: A housing development designed for or occupied solely of persons
over the age of sixty years.
Service Building: A structure in a manufactured (mobile) home or recreational vehicle park
containing laundry, restrooms or showers, intended to serve the needs of the residents of the
park.
17.10 - 31
Revised by Ordinance 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
Setback: The minimum allowable horizontal distance from a given point or line of reference,
which for purposes of this ordinance shall be the property line, to the nearest vertical wall of a
building or structure, fence, or other elements as defined by this Code.
Shed dormer: Often used in gable-roofed structures, a shed dormer has a single-planed roof,
pitched (sloping away from the structure) at a shallower angle than the main roof.
Shopping Center: A grouping of retail business and service uses on a single site with common
parking facilities.
Sidewalk Café: An area adjacent to and directly in front of a street-level eating or drinking
establishment located within the sidewalk area or pedestrian plaza area of the public right-of-way
and used exclusively for dining, drinking, and pedestrian circulation.
Site Plan: A plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete dimensioning, the
boundaries of a site and the location of all buildings, structures, uses, and principal site
development features proposed for a specific parcel of land.
Site Plan Example
Site: The property subject to a development permit or erosion control plan.
Span (roof): The horizontal distance between the outside faces of bearing wall plates measured
at the shortest dimension across the building.
Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA): See “Area of Special Flood Hazard.”
Split-face concrete: Concrete masonry units or blocks with a split face, a technique that results
in two blocks being manufactured as one unit and later split into two. This gives the blocks a
rough face replicating the appearance of natural, quarried stone.
17.10 - 32
Revised by Ordinance 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
Split-face Concrete Example
Standing seam: A raised joint or rib on a sheet of metal roofing; provides visual relief and may
help manage rainwater and snow.
Start of Construction (Area of Special Flood Hazard): Includes substantial improvement and
means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days
from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of
piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations
or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the
main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
Stepped parapet: A parapet with breaks in elevation, usually in a symmetrical pattern, that
provides visual relief along a building elevation and a transition between buildings of dissimilar
height. May also screen rooftop equipment such as electrical and mechanical equipment.
Stockpile: On-site storage of any soil, sand, gravel, clay, mud, debris, vegetation, refuse or any
other material, organic or inorganic, in a concentrated state.
Story: That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper
surface of the floor next above, except that the top story shall be that portion of a building
included between the upper surface of the top floor and the ceiling above.
Stream Bank, Top Of: The land area immediately above and regularly confining a water body,
including a stream, river or associated wetland. The bank has a notably steeper slope than the
surrounding landscape. The ‘bankfull stage” means the stage or elevation at which water
overflows the natural banks or streams or other waters of this state and begins to inundate the
upland. In the absence of physical evidence, the two-year recurrence interval flood elevation may
be used to approximate the bankfull state. The first major break in the slope between the top of
the bank at waterline and the surrounding landscape, shall be the "top of bank."
17.10 - 33
Revised by Ordinance 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
Stream: A channel such as a river or creek that carries flowing surface water, including
perennial streams and intermittent streams with defined channels, and excluding man-made
irrigation and drainage channels.
Street: Designated in the City of Sandy Transportation System Plan as follows:
A. Arterial Highways: These consist of state highways, which carry nearly all vehicle
trips entering, leaving, or passing through the Sandy area.
B. Arterial Streets: These interconnect and support the arterial highway system and link
major commercial, residential, industrial, and institutional areas.
C. Residential Minor Arterial: A hybrid between minor arterial and collector street
which allows moderate to high traffic volumes on streets where over 90 percent of the
fronting lots are residential. Intended to provide some relief to the strained arterial
system while ensuring a safe residential environment. Paved width of 38 feet to 50
feet, minimum three-lane cross section, and may include on-street parking.
D. Collector Streets: These provide both access and circulation within residential
neighborhoods and commercial/industrial areas.
E. Local Streets: The primary function is to provide access to immediately adjacent
land. Service to through-traffic movement on local streets is discouraged.
F. Cul-de-Sac: A local street with only one outlet and having a bulb at the opposite end.
Structure: A building or other improvement that is built, constructed or installed, not including
minor improvements, such as fences, utility poles, flagpoles, or irrigation system components
that are not customarily regulated through zoning ordinances.
Structure (Area of Special Flood Hazard): For floodplain management purposes, a structure is
a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above
ground, as well as a manufactured dwelling.
Substantial Damage: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of
restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial Improvement: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, repair, or other
improvement of a structure the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of
the structure, before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures
which have incurred “Substantial Damage,” regardless of the actual repair work performed.
This term does not, however, include either:
1. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or
local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the
Director or his or her designee and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe
living conditions; or
17.10 - 34
Revised by Ordinance 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
2. Any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the alteration will not preclude
the structure’s continued designation as a “historic structure.”
Surface Water Management System: All natural and constructed facilities used to regulate the
quantity and quality of surface water, including drainage easements, culverts, storm drains, catch
basins, drainage ditches, natural drainage ways, stream corridors, rivers, ponds, wetlands and
impoundments. A surface or stormwater facility serves one or more of three primary functions:
• Detention Facility: A facility to temporarily store stormwater runoff and subsequently
release it at a slower rate than would otherwise occur.
• Retention Facility: A facility to collect and hold stormwater runoff with no surface
outflow.
• Water Quality Facility: A facility, which physically, chemically or biologically
removes pollutants and sediments from stormwater before reaching natural wetlands
or streams.
T1-11 Siding: A composite panel (plywood) siding material with vertical grooves used
extensively in the 1980s; prone to dry rot if not sealed and maintained properly.
Temporary use: A use, intended for limited duration, to be located in a zoning district not
permitting such use and not constituting or continuing a nonconforming use or building.
Trailer: A structure constructed for movement on public highways that has sleeping, cooking,
and plumbing facilities, that is intended for human occupancy, that is being used for residential
purposes and that was constructed before January 1, 1962, and, in the case of a mobile home,
met the construction requirements of Oregon Mobile Home Law in effect at the time of
construction, but has not been demonstrated to conform to the requirements of the building code
for other residences.
Transfer of development rights: The conveyance of development rights by deed, easement, or
other legal instrument authorized by local or state law to another parcel of land and the recording
of that conveyance.
Tree: Any living, standing woody plant having a trunk six inches or more in diameter, maximum
cross section, at a point 24 inches above mean ground level at the base of the trunk.
Truck Terminal: Land and buildings used as a relay station for the transfer of a load from one
vehicle to another or one party to another. The terminal cannot be used for permanent or longterm
accessory storage for principal land uses at other locations. The terminal facility may
include storage areas for trucks and buildings or areas for the repair of trucks associated with the
terminal.
Use: An activity or a purpose, for which land or a structure is designed, arranged or intended, or
for which it is occupied or maintained.
Variance, Area: A dispensation permitted on individual parcels of property as a method of
alleviating unnecessary hardship by allowing a deviation from dimensional (i.e., height, bulk,
yard, setbacks) requirements of the Code because of unusual or unique conditions.
17.10 - 35
Revised by Ordinance 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
Variance (Area of Special Flood Hazard): A grant of relief by a community from the terms of
a floodplain management regulation.
Variance, Special: A dispensation permitted for use of structures or buildings as a method of
alleviating unnecessary hardship by allowing a reasonable use of a building or structure, which
because of unusual or unique circumstances, is denied by the terms of the Code. This type of
variance should not be utilized as a substitute for the rezoning process.
Vegetation, Native: Vegetation that appears on a list of native vegetation species on file in the
Planning Department. In contrast to native vegetation, invasive, exotic or introduced vegetation
was imported to Sandy over the last few centuries, and can crowd out native vegetation species.
Vegetation Removal: Removal of vegetation within constrained or unbuildable areas governed
by the FSH Overlay District.
Vehicle: A device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported upon a
public highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails
or tracks.
Vicinity Map: A drawing or diagram, to scale, showing the location of the proposed
development in relation to abutting properties, major streets and other known landmarks.
Violation (Area of Special Flood Hazard): The failure of a structure or other development to
be fully compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure or
other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of
compliance required in this ordinance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
Visible (Building Elevation): A building elevation that can be seen from an abutting public
street or civic space. See related figure for “Facing (Building Elevation)”
Vision Clearance Area: A triangular area located at the intersection of two streets or a street
and an alley; two sides of which are measured from the curb line, or when curbs are absent from
the edge of asphalt. Specific distances and prohibitions on visual obstructions within vision
clearance areas are contained in Chapter 17.74. The third side of the triangle is a line across the
corner of the lot joining the ends of the other two sides.
Vision Clearance Example
17.10 - 36
Revised by Ordinance 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
Visual Obstruction: Any fence, hedge, tree, shrub, device, wall, or structure between the
elevations of 3 feet and 8 feet above the adjacent curb height or above the elevation of gutter line
of street edge where there is no curb, as determined by the City Engineer, and so located at a
street, drive, or alley intersection as to limit the visibility of pedestrians or persons in motor
vehicles on said streets, drives, or alleys.
Warehousing and Distribution: A use engaged in storage, wholesale and distribution of
manufactured products, supplies and equipment, but excluding bulk storage or materials that are
inflammable or explosive or that create hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions.
Water Area: The area between the banks of a lake, pond, river, perennial or fish-bearing
intermittent stream, excluding man-made farm ponds.
Water Quality: Water quality for any stream or wetland is measured in terms the Oregon Water
Quality Index (OWQI). The higher the OWQI score, the higher the quality of the water. The
OWQI considers the following parameters:
(a) water temperature;
(b) percentage and concentration of dissolved oxygen;
(c) biochemical oxygen demand;
(d) pH;
(e) total suspended solids;
(f) ammonia and nitrate nitrogens;
(g) total phosphorous; and
(h) fecal coliforms.
Water quality is degraded when the mean OWQI score for a stream or wetland decreases (or can
be expected to decrease) below existing conditions as a result of development.
Wetland: Wetlands generally include, but are not limited to, swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar
wet areas. Wetlands are areas inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a
frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation. Hydrophytic
vegetation typically is adapted for life in saturated soils, and under normal circumstances would
be found in wetlands.
Wetland, Locally Significant: A wetland that meets the criteria for a “locally significant
wetland” in OAR 141-86-340 “Procedures for Identifying Locally Significant Wetlands” and
which is identified as such on the City of Sandy Local Wetlands Inventory (2001).
Wheel Stop: A physical obstruction used to prevent a car from moving beyond a predetermined
point, usually installed on the pavement.
Yard: An open space unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise provided in this
Code.
X Zone (floodway): Area of minimal to moderate flood hazards as depicted on the FIRM.
Yard, Exterior Side: A yard extending from the front lot line to the rear lot line on the street
side of a corner lot.
17.10 - 37
Revised by Ordinance 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
Side Yard (Exterior) Example
Yard, Front: A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the
minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and a line parallel thereto at the nearest
point of the main building.
Front Yard Example
Yard, Rear: A yard extending across the full width of the lot between the rear main building and
the nearest point of the rear lot line.
Rear Yard Example
Yard, Side: A yard between the main building and the side lot line extending from the front yard
or front lot line where no front yard is required, to the rear lot line. The width of the required side
yard shall be measured horizontally form the nearest point of the side lot line to the nearest part
of the main building.
17.10 - 38
Revised by Ordinance 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
Side Yard Example
Zoning District: An area of land within the Sandy City limits, designated for specific types of
permitted developments, subject to the development requirements of that district.
17.12 - 1
Revised by Ordinance 2013-11 effective 12/18/13
CHAPTER 17.12 - PROCEDURES FOR DECISION MAKING
17.12.00 TYPES OF PROCEDURES FOR TAKING PUBLIC ACTION
Three separate procedures are established for processing quasi-judicial development applications
(Types I, II, and III) and one procedure (Type IV) is established for processing both legislative
public actions which do not involve land use permits or which require consideration of a plan
amendment, land use regulation or city policies and quasi-judicial applications.
17.12.10 TYPE I – Administrative Review
Type I decisions are made by the Planning Director or someone he or she designates without
public notice or a public hearing. The Type I procedure is used when applying standards and
criteria to an application requires no use of discretion. A decision of the Director under the Type
I procedure may be appealed by an affected party or referred by the Director in accordance with
Chapter 17.28.
Administrative Decision Requirements. The City Planning Official or designee’s decision
shall address all of the approval criteria, including applicable requirements of any road authority.
Based on the criteria and the facts contained within the record, the City Planning Official shall
approve or deny the requested permit or action. A written record of the decision shall be
provided to the applicant and kept on file at City Hall.
Type of Applications:
A. Design review for single-family dwellings, duplex dwellings, manufactured homes on
individual lots, manufactured homes within MH parks, accessory dwellings and structures.
B. Design review for exterior building remodel or addition on a commercially or industrially
zoned lot, where the proposed remodel or addition meets criteria in Section 17.90.40(A).
C. Adjustments less than 10% of a quantifiable dimension which does not increase density
D. Flood Slope and Hillside Development-Uses listed in 17.60.40 A.
E. Minor Alteration of an Historic Resource
F. Property Line Adjustments
G. Tree removal involving less than 50 trees
H. Type I FSH Review
I. Minor Partition (no new street created)
J. Administrative Variance
17.12.20 TYPE II – Noticed Administrative Review
Type II decisions are made by the Planning Director or designee with public notice, and an
opportunity for a public hearing if appealed. An appeal of a Type II decision is heard by the
Planning Commission according to the provisions of Chapter 17.28. Notification of a Type II
decision is sent according to the requirements of Chapter 17.22. If the Director contemplates
persons other than the applicant can be expected to question the application’s compliance with
the Code, the Director may elevate an application to a Type III review.
Types of Applications:
17.12 - 2
Revised by Ordinance 2013-11 effective 12/18/13
A. Design Review, except Type I Design Reviews under 17.12.10(B) and Type III Design
Reviews under 17.12.30.
B. Historic Preservation Provisions Procedures for Alteration of an Historic Resource
C. Adjustments & Variances of up to 20% of a Quantifiable Dimension which does not increase
density
D. Subdivisions in compliance with all standards of the Development Code
E. Partitions and Minor Replats
F. Flood, Slope and Hillside Development and Density Transfer-Uses listed in 17.60.40
G. Request for Interpretation
H. Tree Removal Permit (greater than 50 trees)
I. Minor Conditional Use Permit
17.12.30 TYPE III
Type III decisions generally use discretionary approval criteria and are made by the Planning
Commission after a public hearing, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.20. Appeal
of a Type III decision is heard by the City Council according to the provisions of Chapter 17.28.
Notification of a Type III decision is sent according to the requirements in Chapter 17.22. The
Planning Commission may attach certain development or use conditions beyond those warranted
for compliance with the standards in granting an approval if the Planning Commission
determines the conditions are necessary to avoid imposing burdensome public service
obligations on the City, to mitigate detrimental effects to others where such mitigation is
consistent with an established policy of the City, and to otherwise fulfill the criteria for approval.
If the application is approved, the Director will issue any necessary permits when the applicant
has complied with the conditions set forth in the Final Order and other requirements of this
Code.
Types of Applications:
A. Appeal of a Director’s decision
B. Conditional Use Permit
C. Design Review for projects on commercially or industrially zoned lots where the applicant
has requested Type III Design Review or the Director has determined that the request
involves one or more deviations from the design standards in Chapter 17.90.80 or 17.90.90
(C-1 Design Standards and C-2/I-1/I-2 Design Standards) and such deviation is not subject to
an Adjustment or Variance process under 17.66.
D. Flood, Slope, and Hillside Development-Uses not listed in 17.50.60 A & B
E. Major Amendment to a Specific Area Plan
F. Special Variance
G. Subdivisions and Major Replats that are elevated by the Director or not in conformance with
the Development Code
H. Variances greater than 20% of a quantifiable dimension or variances which increase density
I. Village Concept Plan and Village Master Plan
J. Zoning map amendment, where the proposal comprises one parcel (or multiple parcels
covering a small area) and the proposed zoning conforms to the Comprehensive Plan Map.
17.12.40 TYPE IV
Type IV decisions are usually legislative but may be quasi-judicial.
17.12 - 3
Revised by Ordinance 2013-11 effective 12/18/13
Type IV (Quasi-Judicial) procedures apply to individual properties. This type of application is
generally considered initially by the Planning Commission with final decisions made by the City
Council.
Type IV (Legislative) procedures apply to legislative matters. Legislative matters involve the
creation, revision, or large-scale implementation of public policy (e.g., adoption of land use
regulations, zone changes, and comprehensive plan amendments that apply to entire districts, not
just one property). Type IV matters are typically considered first by the Planning Commission
with final decisions made by the City Council. Occasionally, the Planning Commission will not
consider a legislative matter prior to its consideration by the City Council.
Applications processed under a Type IV procedure involve a public hearing pursuant to the
requirements of Chapter 17.20. Notification of this public hearing shall be noticed according to
the requirements of Chapter 17.22 with appeal of a Type IV decision made to the state Land Use
Board of Appeals according to the provisions of Chapter 17.28.
A. The City Council shall consider the recommendation of the Planning Commission and shall
conduct a public hearing pursuant to Chapter 17.20. The Director shall set a date for the
hearing. The form of notice and persons to receive notice are as required by the relevant
sections of this Code. At the public hearing, the staff shall review the report of the Planning
Commission and provide other pertinent information, and interested persons shall be given
the opportunity to present new testimony and information relevant to the proposal that was
not heard before the Planning Commission and make final arguments why the matter should
or should not be approved and, if approved, the nature of the provisions to be contained in
approving action.
B. To the extent that a finding of fact is required, the City Council shall make a finding for each
of the applicable criterion and in doing so may sustain or reverse a finding of the Planning
Commission. The City Council may delete, add or modify any of the provisions pertaining to
the proposal or attach certain development or use conditions beyond those warranted for
compliance with standards in granting an approval if the City Council determines the
conditions are appropriate to fulfill the criteria for approval.
C. To the extent that a policy is to be established or revised, the City Council shall make its
decision after information from the hearing has been received. The decision shall become
effective by passage of an ordinance.
D. Types of Applications
1. Appeal of Planning Commission decision
2. Comprehensive Plan text or map amendment
3. Zoning District Map changes
4. Planned Developments
5. Village Specific Area Plan (master plan)
6. Annexations
7. Extension of City Services Outside the City Limits
8. Vacating of Public Lands and Plats
9. Zoning Map Overlay Districts
E. Timing of Requests. The City accepts legislative requests twice yearly, in March and
September. The City Council may initiate its own legislative proposals at any time.
17.14 - 1
Revised by Ordinance 2008-05 effective 04/02/08
CHAPTER 17.14 - REQUEST FOR INTERPRETATION
17.14.00 INTENT
Property owners and developers often seek interpretations of the Development Code or
Comprehensive Plan from the Director or other city staff persons. These interpretations may be
”major” in that they apply to a large geographic area, for example, all properties within a given
zoning district, or they may be ”minor,” applying only to a specific site or area. Through the
process identified in this chapter an applicant can obtain an official written interpretation from
the City.
Requests for interpretation may be made for the following purposes:
A. Reconcile potential conflicts in the code where some terms or phrases may have two or more
meanings.
B. Assure uniformity of Code and Comprehensive Plan interpretations through a formal
process; and
C. Provide for a reasonable opportunity to appeal staff interpretations while protecting owners,
users, or developers of property from appeals that might otherwise be filed after an
unreasonable delay.
17.14.10 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
Any person may file a request for interpretation of provisions of these regulations. Requests shall
be in writing that is legible, reproducible and readily understood. The form of the request shall be
as specified by the Director.
17.14.20 ACCEPTANCE OF APPLICATION
The Director shall review a request for interpretation within 10 working days to verify that the
request meets the requirements specified above. If a request for interpretation does not meet the
requirements, the applicant shall be notified and given the opportunity to correct the deficiency.
The Director may consult with the City Attorney to determine whether the request is “major” or
“minor.”
17.14.30 PUBLIC NOTICE PRIOR TO MINOR INTERPRETATION DECISION
A. Once a request has been accepted for review, the Director shall notify affected parties that a
request for a minor interpretation has been filed.
B. “Affected parties” shall mean any owner and occupants of property within 100 feet of the
subject property and any other resident owner of property whom the Director determines is
affected by the application. In addition, notice shall be provided to any neighborhood or
community organization recognized by the City whose boundaries include or are adjacent to
the site.
17.14 - 2
Revised by Ordinance 2008-05 effective 04/02/08
C. The notice shall state that all comments concerning the interpretation must be in writing and
received by the Director within 14 calendar days from the date of mailing the notice. The
notice shall include the following:
1. Street address or other easily understood geographical reference to the subject property;
2. Applicable criteria for decision;
3. Place, date and time comments are due;
4. Indicate that copies of all evidence relied upon by the applicant is available for review,
and that copies can be obtained at cost;
5. Name and phone number of staff contact person;
6. Statement that notice of the decision shall be provided to the applicant and any person
who submits comments;
7. An explanation of appeal rights;
8. A summary of the local decision making process.
17.14.40 STAFF EVALUATION
After accepting a request for an interpretation meeting the requirements specified above, the
Director may route copies of the request to other City departments for comments or suggestions
regarding the interpretation.
17.14.50 ACTION BY DIRECTOR
A. Within 30 calendar days after acceptance of a completed request for interpretation, the
Director shall respond with a written interpretation. The Director shall clearly state the
interpretation being issued and basis for such interpretation.
B. Interpretations by the Director are advisory only and do not bind the Planning Commission or
City Council in making the final decisions.
C. The Director may modify previously issued interpretations if there are specific circumstances
that warrant such modification.
17.14.60 NOTICE OF DECISION
A notice of decision and all applicable information shall be available in the Planning &
Development office. Notification of the decision shall also be provided to the public in the
following ways:
A. Major Interpretation: Where the Director finds that an interpretation applies to a large
geographic area, for example, all properties within a given zoning district, notice of the
decision shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in Sandy that includes a
statement of the decision and reasons leading to it, and appeal period deadline.
B. Minor Interpretation: Where the Director finds that an interpretation applies only to an
individual site or small area of the City, the Director shall provide the applicant with a notice
of decision that includes a written statement of the decision, a reference to findings leading to
it, any conditions of approval, and appeal period deadline. A notice of the decision shall also
be mailed to persons who provided written comment on the mailed notice.
17.14.70 APPEALS
17.14 - 3
Revised by Ordinance 2008-05 effective 04/02/08
The decision of the Director may be appealed to the Planning Commission in accordance with
Chapter 17.28-Appeals.
17.14.80 EFFECTIVE DATE
The decision of the Director shall become effective 10 days from the date that the notice of
decision is published, unless an appeal is filed.
17.14.90 REGISTRY OF INTERPRETATIONS
A written record of the decision shall be kept on file with the Planning Department. As
appropriate, interpretations will be incorporated into the Code through a code amendment.
17.16 - 1
CHAPTER 17.16 - AUTHORIZATION OF SIMILAR USES
17.16.00 INTENT
The intent of this section is to provide for those uses not specifically listed in commercial or
industrial zoning districts but which are similar in character, scale and performance to permitted
uses specified therein. Zoning districts in which a similar use may be authorized are:
• Central Business District C-1
• General Commercial C-2
• Village Commercial C-3
• Industrial Park I-1
• Light Industrial I-2
• Heavy Industrial I-3
17.16.10 SIMILAR USE TO A LISTED PERMITTED USE
This is processed as a Type I or Type II procedure as determined by the Director.
17.16.20 SIMILAR USE TO A LISTED CONDITIONAL USE
This is processed as a Type III procedure.
17.16.30 APPLICATION MATERIALS
A. An application for authorization of a similar use shall be filed with the Director and
accompanied by the appropriate fee.
B. Narrative addressing the review criteria.
C. List of affected property owners
17.16.40 REVIEW CRITERIA
A similar use may be authorized provided that the applicant demonstrates that the proposed use
satisfies the following criteria:
A. The use is consistent with the purpose of the underlying zoning district and is similar in
character, scale and performance to permitted uses specified in the underlying district.
B. The use conforms to the applicable standards and limitations of the underlying zoning
district.
17.16.50 CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL
In approving an application for a similar use, conditions may be imposed as necessary and
appropriate to ensure that the intent of this section is carried out.
17.16.60 COMPLIANCE WITH CONDITIONS
17.16 - 2
Compliance with conditions imposed in approval of a similar use and adherence to an approved
plot plan shall be required. Any departure from these conditions of approval and approved plans
constitutes a violation of this Code. Approval of any similar use may be revoked for failure to
comply with any condition imposed in approval of the similar use or for any other violation of
this Code.
17.16.70 INCORPORATION INTO THE DEVELOPMENT CODE
Upon authorization of use, either permitted or conditional, the use shall be incorporated into the
Development Code during the next major update of the Code. Until this incorporation occurs, a
list of similar uses shall be maintained at the City for use in reviewing development proposals.
17.18 - 1
Revised by Ordinance 2013-11 effective 12/18/13
CHAPTER 17.18 - PROCESSING APPLICATIONS
17.18.00 PROCEDURES FOR PROCESSING LAND USE APPLICATIONS
An application shall be processed under a Type I, II, III or IV procedure. The differences
between the procedures are generally associated with the different nature of the decisions as
described in Chapter 17.12.
When an application and proposed development is submitted, the Director shall determine the
type of procedure the Code specifies for its processing and the potentially affected agencies.
If a development proposal requires an applicant to file a land use application with the city (e.g. a
design review application) and if there is a question as to the appropriate procedure to guide
review of the application (e.g. a Type II versus a Type III design review process), the question
will be resolved in favor of the lower type number.
If a development proposal requires an applicant to file more than one land use application with
the city (e.g. a design review application and a variance) and if the development code provides
that the applications are to be reviewed under separate types of procedures (e.g. a Type II design
review and a Type III variance):
• the Director will generally elevate all of the required applications to the highest number
procedure for review (e.g. the Type II design review application would be reviewed by
the Planning Commission along with the Type III variance).
In situations where an applicant has attended a pre-application conference and has reviewed the
application with the Director prior to submitting the applications, the Director may exercise
his/her discretion to review the Type II application(s) at the staff level and only schedule a public
hearing for the Type III portion(s) of the development proposal.
17.18.10 COORDINATION OF PERMIT PROCEDURE
The Director shall be responsible for the coordination of the permit application and decisionmaking
procedure and shall issue any necessary permits to an applicant whose application and
proposed development is in compliance with the provisions of this Code. Sufficient information
shall be submitted to resolve all determinations that require furnishing notice to persons other
than the applicant. In the case of a Type II or Type III procedure, an applicant may defer
submission of details demonstrating compliance with standards where such detail is not relevant
to the approval under those procedures. Before issuing any permits, the Director shall be
provided with the detail required to establish full compliance with the requirements of this Code.
17.18.20 PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE
A pre-application conference is required for all Type II, III, and IV applications unless the
Director determines a conference is not needed. A request for a pre-application conference shall
be made on the form provided by the city and will be scheduled following submittal of required
materials and payment of fees. The purpose of the conference is to acquaint the applicant with
the substantive and procedural requirements of the Code, provide for an exchange of information
regarding applicable elements of the Comprehensive Plan and development requirements,
arrange such technical and design assistance which will aid the applicant, and to otherwise
17.18 - 2
Revised by Ordinance 2013-11 effective 12/18/13
identify policies and regulations that create opportunities or pose significant constraints for the
proposed development. The Director will provide the applicant with notes from the conference
within 10 days of the conference. These notes may include confirmation of the procedures to be
used to process the application, a list of materials to be submitted, and the applicable code
sections and criteria that may apply to the application. Any opinion expressed by the Director or
City staff during a pre-application conference regarding substantive provisions of the City’s code
is advisory and is subject to change upon official review of the application.
17.18.30 LAND USE APPLICATION MATERIALS
Unless otherwise specified in this code, an application shall consist of the materials specified in
this section, plus any other materials required by this Code.
A. A completed application form and payment of fees.
B. List and mailing labels of Affected Property Owners.
C. An explanation of intent, stating the nature of the proposed development, reasons for the
request, pertinent background information, information required by the Development Code
and other material that may have a bearing in determining the action to be taken.
D. Proof that the property affected by the application is in the exclusive ownership of the
applicant, that the applicant has the consent of all parties in ownership of the affected property,
or the applicant is the contractual owner.
E. Legal description of the property affected by the application.
F. Written narrative addressing applicable code chapters and approval criteria.
G. Vicinity Map showing site in relation to local and collector streets, plus any other significant
features in the nearby area.
F. Site plan of proposed development
G. Number of Copies to be Submitted:
1. One copy of items A through D listed above;
2. Type I: 2 copies of site plan and other materials required by the Code.
3. Type II: 8 copies of site plan and other materials required by the Code
4. Type III: 15 copies of site plan and other materials required by the Code
5. Type IV 20 copies of site plan and other materials required by the Code
The Director may vary the quantity of materials to be submitted as deemed necessary.
17.18.40 APPLICATION ACCEPTANCE AND COMPLETENESS REVIEW
A. Acceptance. When an application is received by the City, the Director or designee shall
determine whether the following essential items are present. If the following items are not
present, the application shall not be accepted by the City and it shall be returned to the
applicant;
17.18 - 3
Revised by Ordinance 2013-11 effective 12/18/13
1. The required form;
2. The required fee;
3. The signature of the applicant on the required form and signed written authorization of
the property owner of record if the applicant is not the owner.
B. Completeness Review. After an application is accepted, the Director or designee shall review
the application for completeness. If the application is incomplete, the Director or designee
shall notify the applicant in writing of what information is missing within 30 days of receipt
of the application and allow the applicant to submit the missing information.
C. Application deemed complete for review. In accordance with the application submittal
requirements, the application shall be deemed complete upon the receipt by the Director or
designee of:
(1) All of the missing information identified by the Director; or
(2) Some of the missing information and written notice that no other information will be
provided to the City; or
(3) Written notice that none of the missing information will be provided to the City.
D. Application void. On the 181st day after first being submitted, the application is void if the
Director has notified the applicant of missing information and the applicant has not
responded as described in subsection C (1) – (3) above.
17.18.50 REFERRAL AND REVIEW OF APPLICATIONS
Within 10 working days of accepting an application as complete, the Director shall:
A. Transmit one copy of the application, or appropriate parts of the application, to each referral
agency for review and comment, including those responsible for determination of compliance
with state and federal requirements.
B. If a Type II, III or IV procedure is required, provide for notice and hearing as set forth in
Chapters 17.20 and 17.22.
17.18.60 STAFF EVALUATION
The Director shall prepare a report that evaluates whether the proposal complies with the review
criteria.
17.18.70 TYPE II DEVELOPMENT DECISION
A. Within 60 days of the date of accepting an application, the Director shall grant or deny the
request. The decision of the Director shall be based upon the application, the evidence,
comments from referral agencies and affected property owners, and approvals required by
others. After the decision is made, the Director shall notify the applicant and, if required,
others entitled to notice of the disposition of the application. The notice shall indicate the
date that the decision will take effect and describe the right of appeal pursuant to Chapter
17.28.
17.18 - 4
Revised by Ordinance 2013-11 effective 12/18/13
B. The Director shall approve a development if he finds that applicable approvals by others have
been granted and the proposed development otherwise conforms to the requirements of this
Code.
C. The Director shall deny the development if required approvals are not obtained or the
application otherwise fails to comply with Code requirements. The notice shall describe the
reason for denial.
17.18.80 TYPE III OR IV DECISION
The Director shall schedule a public hearing in accordance with procedures listed in Chapter
17.20.
17.18.90 REAPPLICATION FOLLOWING DENIAL
Upon final denial of a development proposal or a denial of an annexation request by the City
Council or the voters, a new application for the same development or any portion thereof or the
same annexation or any portion thereof may not be heard for a period of one year from the date
of denial. Upon consideration of a written statement by the applicant showing how the proposal
has been sufficiently modified to overcome the findings for denial or that conditions have
changed sufficiently to justify reconsideration of the original of a similar proposal, the Director
may waive the one-year waiting period.
17.18.100 LEGISLATIVE ENACTMENTS NOT RESTRICTED
Nothing in Chapter 17 shall limit the authority of the City Council to make changes in zoning
districts or requirements as part of some more extensive revision of the Comprehensive Plan or
the implementing ordinances. Nothing in this article shall relieve a use or development from
compliance with other applicable laws.
17.18.110 EXPEDITED LAND DIVISION
A land division shall be processed pursuant to the expedited land division procedures set forth in
ORS Chapter 197 if (a) the land division qualifies as an expedited land division as that term is
defined in ORS Chapter 197 and (b) the applicant requests the land division to be processed as
an expedited land division.
17.18.120 120-DAY RULE; TIME COMPUTATION
Final Decision. Except as allowed for Type IV decisions and applications subject to Section
17.18.110, a land use decision on a “permit” as that term is defined in state law must be
finalized, including resolution of any local appeal by the City Council, no later than 120 days
from the date the application is deemed complete, unless the applicant requests an extension in
writing.
Time Computation. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this Code, the day
of the act or event from which the specified period of time begins to run shall not be included.
The last day of the period so computed shall be included, unless it is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal
holiday, including a holiday falling on Sunday, in which event, the period runs until close of
business the next day which is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday.
17.20 - 1
Revised by Ordinance 2008-05 effective 04/02/08
CHAPTER 17.20 - PUBLIC HEARINGS
17.20.00 BACKGROUND
The following procedures are established for the conduct of legislative and quasi-judicial public
hearings where such hearings are required by the provisions of this Code. In the event that this
Code and a specific provision of State law address the same subject, then the requirement of
State law shall be fulfilled in lieu of the procedure provided by this Code.
17.20.10 PURPOSE
A. Describe rules of conduct, notice requirements, order of proceedings, and action required for
legislative and quasi-judicial hearings; and
B. Provide clear and consistent rules to ensure the legal rights of individual property owners and
the general public are protected.
17.20.20 DETERMINATION OF HEARING TYPE
Within 7 days from the date of the Director’s request, the City Attorney shall determine whether
a legislative or a quasi-judicial hearing is required. Such decision shall be based upon a
construction of applicable State regulations and relevant court decisions.
When more than one application has been filed at one time for a specific property or
development, and any of those applications would ordinarily be heard by the Planning
Commission, all of the applications (Type II and Type III) may be heard by the Planning
Commission at the same meeting
17.20.30 RESPONSIBILITY OF DIRECTOR FOR HEARINGS
A. Schedule and assign the matter for review and hearing;
B. Conduct the correspondence of the hearing body;
C. Give notice;
D. Maintain a record and enter into the record relevant dates such as those of giving notice,
hearings, postponement and continuances and a summary of action taken by the hearings
body;
E. Prepare minutes to include the decision on the matter heard and the reasons for the decision;
F. Reduce the decisions of the hearings body to writing within a reasonable time;
G. Mail a copy of the decision to the party requesting the same upon payment of a reasonable
fee, if a fee has been established.
17.20.40 APPLICANT’S RESPONSIBILITY
17.20 - 2
Revised by Ordinance 2008-05 effective 04/02/08
A. Documents and Evidence. All documents or evidence relied upon by the applicant shall be
submitted to the local government and be made available to the public. All documents and
evidence should be submitted at least 20 days in advance of the public hearing. If the
applicant submits additional information, any party with standing may request that the
scheduled public hearing be postponed to allow opportunity for noticed persons to review
and comment.
B. Burden and Nature of Proof. Except for legislative determinations, the burden of proof is
upon the applicant. The proposal must be supported by proof that it conforms to any
applicable elements of the Comprehensive Plan and to provisions of this Code, especially the
specific criteria set forth for the particular type of decision under consideration.
C. Neighborhood Meetings. Applicants intending to develop a major project within the City are
strongly urged to conduct their own informational meetings in the neighborhood affected
prior to submitting their application to the City.
17.20.50 PUBLIC HEARING ORDER OF PROCEEDINGS
A. The presiding officer shall state the case and call the public hearing to order. The presiding
officer may establish the time allowed for presentation of information;
B. Any objections on jurisdictional grounds shall be noted in the record. If there is objection, the
person presiding has the discretion to proceed or terminate;
C. Disqualification shall be determined. Members shall announce all potential conflicts of
interest;
D. Declaration of Ex Parte Contacts. Members of the hearing body may view the area in dispute
with or without notification to the parties, shall place the time, manner and circumstances of
such view in the record;
E. At the commencement of a hearing under a Comprehensive Plan or land use regulation, a
statement shall be made to those in attendance that:
1. Lists the applicable substantive criteria;
2. States that testimony and evidence must be directed toward the criteria in the Plan or land
use regulations which the person believes to apply to the decision; and
3. States that failure to raise an issue accompanied by statements or evidence sufficient to
afford the decision maker and the parties an opportunity to respond to the issue precludes
an appeal to the Council based on that issue.
F. Staff reports shall be presented. City staff may also present additional information whenever
allowed by the presiding officer during the proceedings;
E. Presentation of information or inquiries by the applicant or applicant’s representative(s);
F. Presentation of information or inquiries by those persons who support the proposed action;
G. Presentation of information or inquiries by those persons who oppose the proposed action;
17.20 - 3
Revised by Ordinance 2008-05 effective 04/02/08
H. Presentation of information or inquiries by those persons who do not necessarily support or
oppose the proposed action;
I. Persons who have testified supporting or opposing the proposed change may present rebuttal
testimony. The scope of material presented during rebuttal shall be limited to matters raised
during the course of the hearing. The applicant or the applicant’s representative followed by
those opposed to the proposed change shall first present rebuttal. The presiding officer shall
limit rebuttal to avoid repetition and redundancy;
J. Prior to the conclusion of the initial evidentiary hearing, any participant may request an
opportunity to present additional evidence or testimony regarding the application. The
Planning Commission or City Council, as applicable, shall grant such request by either
continuing the public hearing or leaving the record open for additional written evidence or
testimony. A continuance or extension granted pursuant to this subsection shall be subject to
the limitations of ORS 227.178 unless the continuance or extension is requested or agreed to
by the applicant. A party other than the applicant has the right to request only one extension
and this right is waived if it is not raised at the initial evidentiary hearing;
K. If the Planning Commission or City Council grants a continuance, the hearing shall be
continued to a date, time and place certain at least seven days from the date of the initial
evidentiary hearing. An opportunity shall be provided at the continued hearing for persons to
present and rebut new evidence and testimony. If new written evidence is submitted at the
continued hearing, any person may request, prior to the conclusion of the continued hearing,
that the record be left open for at least seven days to submit additional written evidence or
testimony for the purpose of responding to the new written evidence;
L. If requested by any participant in the initial hearing, when the public hearing is not to be
continued, the record shall remain open for submittal of additional written testimony for a
period of 7 days after the close of the hearing and may be permitted for a longer period at the
discretion of the hearing authority. If the Planning Commission or City Council leaves the
record open for additional written evidence or testimony, the record shall be left open for at
least seven days. Any participant may file a written request with the City for an opportunity
to respond to new evidence submitted during the period that the record is left open. If such a
request is filed, the Planning Commission or City Council shall reopen the record pursuant to
this section;
M. When the hearing has ended, the hearing body shall openly discuss the issue and may further
question a person submitting information or the staff if opportunity for rebuttal is provided;
N. Once a hearing has been closed, no further evidence shall be received except in response to
specific questions directed to staff or one of the parties to clarify earlier evidence.
O. If the hearing is closed, it shall be reopened only upon a majority vote of the hearing
authority and only after a reasonable showing that:
1. There is evidence that was not reasonably available at the time of the hearing;
2. Evidence is now available to the person seeking to reopen the hearing; and
3. The evidence is factual, substantial, and material.
17.20 - 4
Revised by Ordinance 2008-05 effective 04/02/08
P. When the Planning Commission or City Council reopens a record to admit new evidence or
testimony, any person may raise new issues, which relate to the new evidence, testimony or
criteria for decision-making, which apply to the matter at issue.
Q. The above requirements generally refer to quasi-judicial hearings. Except as may be
necessary under state law, these requirements do not apply to legislative hearings.
17.20.60 ACTION BY HEARING AUTHORITY
A. Following the hearing procedure, the hearing body shall approve or deny the application or if
the hearing is in the nature of an appeal, affirm, reverse or remand the decision that is on
appeal. If the applicant requests or assents to an extension, the 120-day rule is tolled for the
duration of the extension. Processing of a matter under consideration may be extended for a
reasonable period of time by the applicant but the total of all extensions may not exceed 245
days.
B. If a quorum of the hearing authority does not appear for a hearing, the hearing shall
automatically be continued to the date and time of the next regularly scheduled meeting;
C. The hearing body or its designee shall approve findings of fact to include:
1. A statement of the applicable criteria and standards against which the proposal was
tested, and of the hearing body's interpretation of what would be required to achieve
compliance with the criteria and standards;
2. Findings and conclusions individually numbered. The findings may require an
explanation of possible conflict between provisions of identified legal criteria and an
explanation of how any such conflicts were resolved;
3. A statement of the facts which the hearing body found establishing compliance or
noncompliance with each applicable criteria and assurance of compliance with applicable
standards;
4. The decision to deny or approve the proposed change with or without conditions;
All parties shall be encouraged to prepare and submit written findings for the
consideration of the hearing authority. The authority may direct staff to prepare proposed
findings or, in the event that the authority does not follow staff’s recommendation, the
prevailing party may be directed to prepare findings.
17.20.70 NOTICE OF DECISION
Following the signing of the Final Order and Findings of Fact, the Director shall issue a Notice
of Decision that describes the decision of the hearing authority, a reference to findings leading to
it, any conditions of approval, and application appeal period deadline. Subject to any
requirements of state law, the notice of decision will be issued to persons who submitted written
testimony and were not in attendance at the hearing, in addition to those persons who are entitled
to receive a notice of decision by other provisions of this Code.
17.20.80 PUBLIC INFORMATION
17.20 - 5
Revised by Ordinance 2008-05 effective 04/02/08
A. A copy of these provisions shall be made available to any interested person requesting such a
copy.
B. Copies of the Rules of Procedure shall be available to the public within the hearing room
prior to and during every public hearing conducted pursuant to this chapter.
17.20.90 RULES OF PROCEDURE
A. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply;
B. Written exhibits, visual aids, affidavits, maps, and the like may be submitted as part of the
evidence. Any signed writing presented to or received by any member of the hearing
authority or by any other city agency or official outside the public hearing may be received as
argument and placed in the record. Unless the hearing authority specifically allows later
filing of argument, no writings received after the close of the hearing will be considered;
C. All information received by the hearing authority shall be retained and preserved and shall be
transmitted to an appellate body in the event an appeal is filed in accordance with Chapter
17.28-Appeals. True copies of original information may be substituted for original
documents;
D. All evidence and argument shall be as brief as possible, consistent with full presentation;
E. Redundancy shall be avoided;
F. Each person presenting information or argument shall be permitted to complete the
presentation without interruption except by the presiding officer to enforce this Code;
G. Discussion of personalities shall be avoided to the extent possible in making a complete
presentation;
H. No person present shall engage in applause, cheers, or other vocal or outward expressions of
approval, or disapproval, agreement or disagreement. If any person persists in such conduct
after warning by the presiding officer, such person may be expelled from the hearing;
I. The presiding officer has complete authority to enforce these provisions to assure that a fair
hearing is held including the authority to expel from the public hearing and to bar from
further appearance at the public hearing any person who willfully violates any one or more of
these provisions.
17.20.100 FAILURE TO RECEIVE NOTICE
The failure of an affected property owner to receive notice as provided in this section shall not
invalidate such proceedings if the City can demonstrate by affidavit that such notice was given.
The notice provisions of this section shall not restrict the giving of notice by other means,
including posting, newspaper publication, radio and television.
17.20.110 RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITY OF HEARING BODY AND CITY
EMPLOYEES
17.20 - 6
Revised by Ordinance 2008-05 effective 04/02/08
A. Impartiality. Except for Type IV legislative hearings conducted by the governing body, a
party to a hearing or a member of a hearing body may challenge the qualifications of a
member of the hearing body to participate in the hearing and decision regarding the matter.
The challenge shall state the facts relied upon by the challenger relating to a person's bias,
pre-judgment, personal interest, or other facts from which the challenger has concluded that
the member of the hearing body cannot participate in an impartial manner.
B. Disqualification. Except for Type IV legislative hearings conducted by the governing body,
no member of a hearing body shall participate in a discussion of the proposal or vote on the
proposal when any of the following conditions exist:
1. The hearing body member or the member's spouse, brother, sister, child, parent, father-inlaw,
mother-in-law, any business in which the member is then serving or has served
within the previous two years, or any business with which the member is negotiating for
or has an arrangement or understanding concerning prospective partnership or
employment;
2. The member has a direct private interest in the proposal;
3. For any other valid reason, the member has determined that participation in the hearing
and decision cannot be done in an impartial manner.
C. Ex Parte Contacts. Except for Type IV legislative hearings conducted by the governing body,
the general public has a right to have hearing body members free from pre-hearing or ex
parte contacts on matters heard by them. It is recognized that a countervailing public right is
free access to public officials on any matter. Therefore, hearing body members shall reveal
any significant pre-hearing or ex parte contacts with regard to any matter at the
commencement of the public hearing on the matter. If such contacts have not impaired the
member's impartiality or ability to vote on the matter, the member shall so state and shall
participate or abstain in accordance with Chapter 17.20.120.
Ex parte contacts with a member of the decision making body shall not invalidate a final
decision or action of the decision making body, provided that the member receiving the
contact places the substance of the content of the ex parte communication in the record of the
hearing and makes a public announcement of the content of the communication and of the
right of the parties to rebut the content at the first hearing where action will be considered or
taken.
D. Abstention or Disqualification. Except for Type IV hearings conducted by the governing
body, disqualification for reasons other than the member's own judgment may be ordered by
a majority of the members of a hearing body present and voting. The member who is the
subject of the motion for disqualification may not vote on the motion.
E. Rights of Disqualified Member of the Hearing Body.
1. An abstaining or disqualified member of the hearing body may be counted for purposes
of forming a quorum. A member who represents personal interest at a hearing may do so
only by physically joining the audience and vacating the seat on the hearing body. He
shall make full disclosure of his status and position at the time of addressing the hearing
body and shall not vote;
2. If all members of a hearing body disqualify themselves all members present after stating
their reasons for abstention or disqualification shall by so doing be re-qualified and
proceed to resolve the issues;
17.20 - 7
Revised by Ordinance 2008-05 effective 04/02/08
3. Except for Type IV legislative hearings conducted by the governing body, a member
absent during the presentation of evidence in a hearing may not participate in the
deliberations or final decision regarding the matter of the hearing unless the member has
reviewed the evidence received.
F. Voting Eligibility. When a member of the hearing authority becomes ineligible to vote due to
absence from a portion of the public hearing on the proposed development, the member may
revive voting eligibility by listening to the completed audio or video tape recording of the
portion of the hearing missed. The member shall then announce to the hearing authority that
the tapes have been listened to, thus reviving voter eligibility.
17.20.120 RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS
The secretary to the hearing body shall be present at each hearing and shall cause the proceedings
to be recorded stenographically or electronically.
A. Testimony shall only be transcribed if required for judicial review or if ordered by the
hearing body;
B. The hearing body shall, where practicable, retain as part of the hearing record each item of
physical or documentary evidence presented and shall have the items marked to show the
identity of the person offering the same and whether presented on behalf of a proponent or
opponent. Exhibits received into evidence shall be retained in the hearing file until after the
applicable appeal period has expired, at which time the exhibits may be released to the
person identified thereon, or otherwise disposed of;
C. The findings and order shall be included in the record;
D. A person shall have access to the record of the proceeding at reasonable times.
17.22 - 1
Revised by Ordinance 2018-29 effective 12/05/18
CHAPTER 17.22 - NOTICES
17.22.00 INTENT
The requirement for notice to affected property owners, governmental agencies, public utility
providers, etc., is intended to provide those persons and entities an opportunity to comment on a
proposed development and to afford interested parties the opportunity to participate in the land
use decision making process.
17.22.10 TYPE II QUASI-JUDICIAL NOTICE
A. The applicant or authorized agent;
B. Any person who owns property within 300 ft., excluding street right-of-way, of the
development site;
C. Any other person, agency, or organization that may be designated by the Code;
D. Interested parties, such as counties, state agencies, public utilities, etc., that may be affected
by the specific development proposal shall receive notice of the scheduled public hearing.
E. Additional notices may also be mailed to other property owners or posted as determined
appropriate by the Director and based on the impact of the proposed development.
17.22.20 TYPE III QUASI-JUDICIAL NOTICE
Where a quasi-judicial hearing is required by this Code notice shall be mailed to the following:
A. The applicant or authorized agent;
B. Any person who owns property within 500 ft., excluding street right-of-way, of the
development site, except as otherwise authorized by this Code;
C. Tenants of any existing manufactured-dwelling park for which a zoning district change is
proposed;
D. Any other person, agency, or organization that has filed with the Director a request to receive
notices of hearings and has paid a reasonable fee to cover the cost of providing notice;
E. Any other person, agency, or organization that may be designated by the Code;
F. Any other person, agency, or organization that may be designated by the City Council or its
agencies;
G. Any other resident owner of property whom the Director determines is affected by the
application;
H. Any neighborhood or community organization recognized by the governing body and whose
boundaries include the site;
17.22 - 2
Revised by Ordinance 2018-29 effective 12/05/18
I. Interested parties, such as counties, state agencies, public utilities, etc., that may be affected
by the specific development proposal shall receive notice of the scheduled public hearing;
J. Additional notices may also be mailed to other property owners or posted as determined
appropriate by the Director and based on the impact of the proposed development.
17.22.30 TYPE IV LEGISLATIVE HEARING NOTICE
A. The Oregon Department of Land Conservation and Development (DLCD) shall be notified in
writing of proposed Comprehensive Plan amendments and Development Code amendments
before the first evidentiary hearing in accordance with OAR 660-018-0020. The notice to
DLCD shall include an affidavit of transmittal.
B. Notice shall be sent by mail at least 20 days, but not more than 40 days, prior to the first
evidentiary hearing to owners of property if the proposed action would “rezone” the property
according to ORS 227.186.
C. Additional notices may be mailed to other property owners or posted as determined
appropriate by the Director based on the impact of the proposed development.
17.22.40 CONTENTS OF NOTICE
The notice provided by the City shall:
A. Explain the nature of the application and the proposed use or uses which could be authorized;
B. List the applicable criteria from the ordinance and the Plan that apply to the application at
issue:
1. Nature of the proposed development and the proposed uses that could be authorized;
2. Legal description, address, or tax map designations;
3. Map showing the location of a zoning change, subdivision, or proposed development;
4. Name and telephone number of a staff member from whom additional information can be
obtained;
5. Where a zone change or subdivision is proposed, the notice shall include the statement
that the hearing body may consider modifications to what was requested by the applicant.
C. Set forth the street address or other easily understood geographical reference to the subject
property;
D. State the date, time and location of the hearing or the date by which written comments may
be submitted, as applicable to the type of land use action;
E. For quasi-judicial notices, state that failure to raise an issue, in person or by letter, or failure
to provide statements or evidence sufficient to afford the decision maker an opportunity to
respond to the issue, prior to the closing of the record of the proceeding, precludes an appeal
based on that issue;
F. State that a copy of the application, all documents and evidence submitted by or on behalf of
the applicant and applicable criteria are available for inspection at no cost and will be
provided at a reasonable cost;
17.22 - 3
Revised by Ordinance 2018-29 effective 12/05/18
G. For quasi-judicial notices, state that a copy of the staff report will be available for inspection
at no cost at least seven (7) calendar days prior to the hearing and will be provided at a
reasonable cost; and
H. Include a general explanation of the requirements for submission of testimony and the
procedures for conducting the hearing.
17.22.50 MAILING OF NOTICES
A. Type III and Type IV notices must be mailed at least:
1. Twenty days before the evidentiary hearing; or
2. If two or more evidentiary hearings are allowed, ten days before the first evidentiary
hearing.
B. Type II Limited Land Use Decision notices must be mailed at least:
1. Fourteen days in advance of a pending Type II decision.
17.22.60 PUBLICATION OF NOTICES
Notice of public hearings shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation at least 10
days in advance of the hearing.
17.22.70 CONTINUED HEARINGS
Where a hearing is continued to a date certain, no additional notice need be given.
17.22.80 LIST OF PROPERTY OWNERS
The applicant shall provide a certified list of property owners and mailing labels as required by
notice provisions of this Code. Unless otherwise provided, addresses for a mailed notice shall be
obtained from the County's real property tax records. Unless the address is on file with the
Director, a person whose name is not in the tax records at the time of filing of an application, or
of initiating other action not based on an application, need not be furnished mailed notice.
17.24 - 1
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
CHAPTER 17.24 - COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AMENDMENT PROCEDURES
17.24.00 BACKGROUND
The adopted Comprehensive Plan is the official statement of the City that sets forth major
policies concerning desired future development of the community. The Comprehensive Plan is
the controlling land use planning instrument for the City, and as such land development
regulations and related actions are required to conform to the plan.
This chapter pertains to lands within the City limits. Those portions of the Comprehensive Plan
that apply to areas outside the City limits but within the urban growth boundary shall be
amended in accordance with the provisions of Clackamas County and the Sandy Urban Growth
Management Agreement.
17.24.10 INTENT
This chapter sets forth review criteria and procedural requirements in order to:
A. Respond to changing conditions and community attitudes;
B. Ensure flexibility while at the same time maintain the integrity of the Comprehensive Plan;
and
C. Establish procedures by which the Plan text and map may be amended.
17.24.20 INITIATION
Comprehensive Plan amendments may be initiated by one of the following:
A. An application submitted by a property’s owners or their authorized agents for a specific
property; or
B. A majority vote of the City Council.
17.24.30 FREQUENCY OF PLAN AMENDMENTS
Applications for Comprehensive Plan amendments initiated by property owners shall be
reviewed semi-annually in March and September unless otherwise authorized by the City
Council. The City Council may initiate amendments to the Comprehensive Plan at any time.
Comprehensive Plan Amendments filed in conjunction with an annexation application shall be
reviewed concurrently. Comprehensive Plan amendments are exempt from the time limits
established in State law for development review processes and shall be exempt from time
restrictions set in this Code.
17.24.40 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
An application may be filed jointly by any or all of the property owners of record or their
authorized agents within the area of the proposed Comprehensive Plan amendment. Applications
shall be on forms provided by the Director and include a description and map of the area to be
affected by the proposed change, a statement of the reasons for the change, and other information
as may be necessary for an adequate review of the application. Notice shall be provided to the
Land Conservation and Development Commission (LCDC) of any proposed amendment or new
17.24 - 2
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
regulation as provided by State law. In addition, notice of any proposed amendment that may
affect private access to state roads, or that may impact a state transportation facility, shall be
provided to the Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT).
17.24.50 ACCEPTANCE OF APPLICATION
A. The Director shall review the application in accordance with Chapter 17.20-Public Hearings;
B. After accepting a complete application, the Director shall schedule a public hearing to be
held by the Planning Commission. Notice of the hearing shall be provided in accordance with
Chapter 17.22 Public Notices.
17.24.60 STAFF EVALUATION
The Director shall prepare a report that evaluates whether the proposal complies with the review
criteria in Chapter 17.24.70. The report should include a recommendation for approval or denial.
17.24.70 REVIEW CRITERIA
Comprehensive Plan amendments shall be reviewed to assure consistency with the purposes of
this chapter, policies of the Comprehensive Plan, and any other applicable policies and standards
adopted by the City Council. Amendments shall be approved only when the following findings
are made:
A. The change being proposed is the best means of meeting the identified public need; and
B. The change conforms to all applicable Statewide Planning Goals.
17.24.80 ACTION BY THE HEARING BODY
A. Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing in
accordance with Chapter 17.20-Public Hearings. Following the close of the public hearing,
the Commission shall make a recommendation to the City Council concerning the proposed
Comprehensive Plan map amendment. The Commission’s recommendations shall include
findings that specify how the proposal has or has not complied with the above review criteria.
B. City Council. Upon receipt of the Planning Commission’s recommendation the matter shall
be set for a de novo public hearing before the City Council. Following the close of the public
hearing, the City Council shall either deny the application or adopt an ordinance approving
the proposed Comprehensive Plan map amendment or a modification thereof. The City
Council’s decision shall include findings that specify how the proposal has or has not
complied with the above review criteria.
C. Notwithstanding any contrary code provision and in the City Council’s sole discretion, it may
allow an amendment to proceed directly to a public hearing before the City Council without a
hearing or recommendation from the Planning Commission.
17.24 - 3
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
17.24.90 NOTICE OF DECISION
The Director shall provide the applicant with a notice of decision that includes a written
statement of the City Council’s decision, a reference to findings leading to it, and appeal period
deadline. A notice of the decision shall also be mailed to persons who participated orally or in
writing at the public hearing and who in writing requested notice of the decision.
17.26 - 1
Revised by Ordinance 2008-05 effective 04/02/08
CHAPTER 17.26 - ZONING DISTRICT AMENDMENTS
17.26.00 INTENT
This chapter sets forth review criteria and procedural requirements for quasi-judicial and
legislative zoning map amendments to accomplish the following:
A. Maintain sound, stable, and desirable development within the City;
B. Permit changes in zoning district boundaries where appropriate;
C. Ensure zoning changes are consistent with the community’s land use policies and goals; and
D. Lessen the influence of private economic interests in the land use decision-making process.
17.26.10 BACKGROUND
The Zoning Map is consistent with the adopted Comprehensive Plan, as amended, and as such it
is a reflection of the City’s land use planning goals. The Zoning Map has been adopted as part of
the Development Code. Frequent and piecemeal amendments to the Zoning Map can threaten the
integrity of the Comprehensive Plan and the likelihood of its successful implementation.
Nevertheless, it may be necessary to amend the Zoning Map from time to time to correct errors
or to respond to changing conditions or unforeseen circumstances.
When a zoning district is amended there often must be a corresponding change to the
Comprehensive Plan map. There are, however, instances where more than one zoning district
matches the Comprehensive Plan designation. In these situations, the zoning district can be
amended without a Plan map change. The table below illustrates the relationship between the
Comprehensive Plan and the Zoning Map designations in the City.
Zoning district changes are classified as legislative or quasi-judicial, depending on the number of
properties involved. Changes to the Zoning Map are reviewed initially by the Planning
Commission with a recommendation forwarded to the City Council. The City Council conducts a
public hearing and considers adoption of changes. A Zoning Map application may be reviewed
in conjunction with a Comprehensive Plan map amendment or other land use application.
17.26.20 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN & CORRESPONDING ZONING MAP
DESIGNATIONS
PLAN MAP DESIGNATION ZONING MAP DESIGNATION
RESIDENTIAL RESIDENTIAL
LDR – Low Density Residential SFR Single Family (3-5.8 units/net acre)
R-1 Low Density (5-8 units/net acre)
MDR – Medium Density R-2 Medium Density (8-14 units/net acre)
HDR – High Density R-3 High Density (10-20 units/net acre)
COMMERCIAL C-1 Central Business District
C-2 General Commercial
C-3 Village Commercial
INDUSTRIAL INDUSTRIAL
I-1 Industrial Park
I-2 Light Industrial
I-3 Heavy Industrial
17.26.30 LEGISLATIVE AMENDMENT PROCEDURES
17.26 - 2
Revised by Ordinance 2008-05 effective 04/02/08
A zoning district change is considered a legislative act if the change applies uniformly to all
properties in the City or to a sufficiently large number of properties as determined by
contemporary legal principles.
A. Initiation-Legislative. A zoning district change that is legislative in nature may be initiated by
either a majority vote of the City Council or Planning Commission upon a finding that there
is sufficient cause to initiate a change.
B. Review Criteria. Legislative amendments shall be reviewed to:
1. Determine the effects on City facilities and services;
2. To assure consistency with the purposes and intent of this chapter;
3. To assure consistency with the policies of the Comprehensive Plan;
4. To assure consistency with the Statewide Planning Goals as may be necessary, and any
other applicable policies and standards adopted by the City Council.
17.26.40 QUASI-JUDICIAL AMENDMENT PROCEDURES
All zoning district changes not deemed legislative shall be quasi-judicial.
A. Initiation-Quasi-Judicial. Initiation of a zoning district change that is quasi-judicial in nature
may be accomplished by one of the following ways:
1. Filing of an application by the owner(s) of the subject property(ies); or
2. A majority vote of the City Council or Planning Commission following the same
procedures used for legislative amendments discussed above.
Where a motion by either the City Council or Planning Commission involves a Planned
Development designation, the motion need not include a conceptual or detailed
development plan.
B. Review Criteria. Quasi-judicial zoning district changes shall be reviewed to:
1. Determine the effects on City facilities and services;
2. To assure consistency with the purposes of this chapter;
3. To assure consistency with the policies of the Comprehensive Plan;
4. To assure consistency with the Statewide Planning Goals as may be necessary, and any
other applicable policies and standards adopted by the City Council.
C. Application Requirements. An application for quasi-judicial zoning district change shall be
made on forms provided by the Director and shall include the following where applicable:
1. Description of the land (address, lot, block, or similar description);
2. Narrative addressing how the application meets the review criteria;
3. Maps, drawings, and such other information as may be needed for an adequate review of
the application;
4. List of affected property owners, from current Clackamas County Assessor’s Office
records, within 300 feet of the boundaries of the parcel(s) proposed for a zoning district
change; and
5. If a proposed zoning district change is to include land in more than one ownership, the
application must be submitted jointly by all of the owners or authorized agents.
D. Acceptance of Application
1. The Director shall review the application in accordance with Chapter 17.18;
2. After accepting a complete application, the Director shall schedule a public hearing.
17.26 - 3
Revised by Ordinance 2008-05 effective 04/02/08
17.26.50 STAFF EVALUATION
A report shall be prepared by staff that evaluates whether the proposal complies with the
applicable review criteria. The report should include a recommendation for approval or denial
17.26.60 ACTION BY THE HEARING BODY
A. Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing in
accordance with Chapter 17.20-Public Hearings. Following the close of the public hearing
the Commission shall make a recommendation to the City Council concerning the proposed
Zoning Map amendment. The Commission’s recommendations shall include findings that
specify how the proposal has or has not complied with the above review criteria;
B. City Council. Upon receipt of the Planning Commission’s recommendation the matter shall
be set for a public hearing before the City Council. Following the close of the public hearing
the City Council shall either deny the application or adopt an ordinance approving the
proposed Zoning Map amendment or a modification thereof. The City Council’s decision
shall include findings that specify how the proposal has or has not complied with the above
review criteria.
C. Notwithstanding any contrary code provision and in the City Council’s sole discretion, it may
allow an amendment to the zoning map or to the development code to proceed directly to a
public hearing before the City Council without a hearing or recommendation from the
Planning Commission.
17.26.70 NOTICE OF DECISION
The Director shall provide the applicant with a notice of decision that includes a written
statement of the City Council’s decision, a reference to findings leading to it, and appeal period
deadline. A notice of the decision shall also be mailed to persons who participated orally or in
writing at the public hearing and, for legislative zone amendments, who in writing requested
notice of the decision.
17.26.80 APPEALS
The decision of the hearing authority may be appealed in accordance with Chapter 17.28-
Appeals
17.26.90 EFFECTIVE DATE
The decision of the City Council made in conjunction with a Zoning Map amendment shall
become effective 30 days after passage of the ordinance. No zoning district changes will take
effect, however, until and unless the necessary Comprehensive Plan amendment has been
implemented by the City Council, if needed.
17.28 - 1
Revised by Ordinance 2018-29 effective 12/05/18
CHAPTER 17.28 - APPEALS
17.28.00 INTENT
This chapter sets forth procedures for processing an appeal of a decision made by staff, the
Planning Commission or the City Council.
17.28.10 REQUEST FOR REVIEW-APPEAL OF DECISION
A. Type I or Type II Procedure. An affected party may appeal a Type I or Type II decision to
the Planning Commission. The party must file an appeal with the Director within 12
calendar days of the date the city mails notice of the decision. The notice of appeal shall
indicate the nature of the decision that is being appealed. The Director may create and
periodically amend an appeal form and require affected parties to use this form to appeal
Type I and II decisions.
B. Type III Procedure. An affected party may appeal a decision of the Planning Commission to
the City Council. The party must file an appeal within 12 calendar days of notice of the
decision. The notice of appeal shall indicate the decision that is being appealed. The Director
may create and periodically amend an appeal form and require affected parties to use this
form to appeal Type III decisions. The City Council’s decision regarding an appeal of a
Planning Commission decision is final for the purposes of an appeal to the Land Use Board
of Appeals.
C. Type IV Procedure. A Type IV decision of the City Council may be appealed to the Land
Use Board of Appeals (LUBA) or to other tribunals in accordance with Oregon law.
17.28.20 REQUIREMENTS OF APPEAL APPLICATION
A. An application for an appeal shall contain at least the following:
1. An identification of the decision sought to be reviewed, including the date of the
decision;
2. A statement of the interest of the person seeking review and that he/she was a party to the
initial proceedings;
3. The specific grounds relied upon for review;
4. If de novo review or review by additional testimony and other evidence is requested, a
statement relating the request to the factors listed in Chapter 17.28.50; and
5. Payment of required filing fees. Payment of required filing fees is jurisdictional and must
accompany an appeal at the time it is filed.
6. The name and mailing address of the person or entity appealing the decision.
17.28.30 SCOPE OF REVIEW
A. Except where a de novo hearing is required for review of Type II (Limited Land Use)
decisions, an appeal is limited to a review of the record and a hearing for receipt of oral
arguments regarding the record. At its discretion and if good cause has been demonstrated by
the appellant or City staff, the hearing body may allow an appeal to include new evidence
based upon circumscribed issues relevant to the appeal, or it may allow a de novo hearing.
17.28.40 REVIEW ON THE RECORD
17.28 - 2
Revised by Ordinance 2018-29 effective 12/05/18
Unless otherwise provided under subsection 17.28.50, review of the decision on appeal shall be
confined to the record of the proceeding as specified in this section. The record shall include:
A. A factual report prepared by the Director;
B. All exhibits, materials, pleadings, memoranda, stipulations and motions submitted by any
party and received or considered in reaching the decision under review;
C. The transcript of the hearing below, if previously prepared; otherwise, a detailed summary of
the evidence, but the details need not be set forth verbatim.
The reviewing body shall make its decision based upon the record after first granting the right of
argument but not the introduction of additional evidence to any party who has filed a notice of
appeal.
17.28.50 REVIEW CONSISTING OF ADDITIONAL EVIDENCE OR DE NOVO
REVIEW
A. Except where a de novo hearing is required for review of Type II (Limited Land Use)
decisions, the reviewing body may hear the entire matter de novo; or it may admit additional
testimony and other evidence without holding a de novo hearing if it is satisfied that the
additional testimony or other evidence could not reasonably have been presented at the prior
hearing. The reviewing body shall consider all of the following in making such a decision:
1. Prejudice to the parties;
2. Convenience or availability of evidence at the time of the initial hearing;
3. Surprise to opposing parties;
4. The competency, relevancy and materiality of the proposed testimony or other evidence.
B. "De novo hearing" shall mean a hearing by the review body as if the action had not been
previously heard and as if no decision had been rendered, except that all testimony, evidence
and other material from the record of the previous consideration shall be included in the
record of the review.
17.28.60 REVIEW BODY DECISION
Upon review, the review body may by order affirm, reverse or modify in whole or in part a
determination or requirement of the decision that is under review. When the review body
modifies or renders a decision that reverses a decision of the hearing body, the review body, in
its order, shall set forth its finding and state its reasons for taking the action encompassed in the
order. When the review body elects to remand the matter back to the hearing body for such
further consideration as it deems necessary, it shall include a statement explaining the error
found to have materially affected the outcome of the original decision and the action necessary to
rectify it.
17.30 - 1
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
CHAPTER 17.30 - ZONING DISTRICTS
17.30.00 ZONING DISTRICT DESIGNATIONS
For the purposes of this title, the city is divided into districts designated as follows:
DISTRICT SYMBOL
Parks and Open Space POS
Residential
Single Family Residential SFR
Low Density Residential R-1
Medium Density Residential R-2
High Density Residential R-3
Commercial
Central Business District C-1
General Commercial C-2
Village Commercial C-3
Industrial
Industrial Park I-1
Light Industrial I-2
General Industrial I-3
Overlay Districts
Planned Development PD
Cultural & Historic Resource CHR
Flood Slope Hazard FSH
Specific Area Plan Overlay SAP
17.30.10 ZONING MAP
The Zoning Map is incorporated herein and is deemed as much a part of this Code as if fully set
forth. If a conflict appears between the Zoning Map and the written portion of this Code, the
written portion shall control. The map and each amendment shall remain on file in the Planning
Director’s Office.
The boundaries of all districts are established as shown on the Zoning Map, which is made a part
of this Code. All notations and references and other matters shown shall be and are hereby made
part of this Code.
17.30.20 RESIDENTIAL DENSITY CALCULATION PROCEDURE
The number of dwelling units permitted on a parcel of land is calculated after the determination
of the net site area and the acreage of any restricted development areas (as defined by Chapter
17.60). Limited density transfers are permitted from restricted development areas to unrestricted
areas consistent with the provisions of the Flood and Slope Hazard Area Overlay District,
Chapter 17.60.
Calculation of Net Site Area (NSA): Net site area should be calculated in acres based upon a
survey of the property boundaries excluding areas dedicated for public use.
17.30 - 2
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
A. Minimum and Maximum Dwelling Units for Sites with No Restricted Areas
The allowable range of housing units on a piece of property is calculated by multiplying the
net site area (NSA) in acres by the minimum and maximum number of dwelling units
allowed in that zone.
For example: A site (NSA) containing 10 acres in the Single Family Residential Zoning
District requires a minimum of 30 units and allows a maximum of 58 units. (NSA x 3
units/acre = 30 units minimum) (NSA x 5.8 units/acre = 58 units maximum)
B. Minimum and Maximum Dwelling Units for Sites with Restricted Areas
1. Unrestricted Site Area: To calculate unrestricted site area (USA): subtract all restricted
development areas (RDA) as defined by Section 17.60.20(A) from the net site area
(NSA), if applicable.
NSA - RDA = USA
2. Minimum Required Dwelling Units: The minimum number of dwelling units required for
the site is calculated using the following formula:
USA (in acres) x Minimum Density (Units per Acre) of Zoning District = Minimum
Number of Dwelling Units Required.
3. Maximum Allowed Dwelling Units: The maximum number of dwelling units allowed on
a site is the lesser of the results of these two formulas:
a. NSA (in acres) x Maximum Density of Zoning District (units/acre)
b. USA (in acres) x Maximum Density of Zoning District (units/acre) x 1.5 (maximum
allowable density transfer based on Chapter 17.60)
For example: suppose a site in a zone with a maximum density of eight (8) units per acre
has 6 acres of unrestricted site area (USA= 6) and two acres of restricted development
area (RDA=2), for a total net site area of 8 acres (NSA= 8). Then NSA (8) x 8 units/acre
= 64 and USA (6) x 8 units/acre x 1.5 = 72, so the maximum permitted number of
dwelling units is 64 (the lesser of the two results).
C. Lot Sizes: Lot sizes shall comply with any minimum lot size standards of the underlying
zoning district.
D. Rounding: A dwelling unit figure is rounded down to the nearest whole number for all total
maximum or minimum figures less than four dwelling units. For dwelling unit figures greater
than four dwellings units, a partial figure of one-half or greater is rounded up to the next
whole number.
For example: A calculation of 3.7 units is rounded down to 3 units. A calculation of 4.2 units
is rounded down to 4 units and a calculation of 4.5 units is rounded up to 5 units.
17.32 - 1
Revised by Ordinance 2013-11 effective 12/18/13
CHAPTER 17.32 - PARKS & OPEN SPACE (POS)
17.32.00 INTENT
This district is intended to recognize those publicly-owned lands designated or proposed for
parks and open spaces. Parks include publicly developed parks and undeveloped park land
where typical uses include active and passive outdoor recreation activities, trails, open space,
cultural activities, park buildings and structures, concessions, general park operations and
maintenance, and storm drainage facilities. Open space includes publicly developed and
undeveloped lands and sensitive areas such as wetlands, steep slopes, forested areas, and stream
corridors.
17.32.10 PERMITTED USES
A. Primary Uses Permitted Outright:
1. Park improvements identified in the Parks Master Plan or Park Specific Master Plans
adopted by the City Council.
2. Trails in otherwise undeveloped open space.
3. Other uses similar in nature.
B. Accessory Uses Permitted Outright:
1. Accessory structures, detached or attached;
2. Educational activities in accordance with the primary purposes of the zone;
3. Interpretive displays;
4. Park furnishings, including arbors, barbeques, benches, bicycle racks, drinking fountains,
gazebos, kiosks, picnic tables, play equipment and signage.
5. Public driveways and parking areas for uses permitted in this zone.
6. Public restroom facilities.
17.32.20 MINOR CONDITIONAL USES AND CONDITIONAL USES
A. Minor Conditional Uses:
None
B. Conditional Uses:
1. Campgrounds;
2. Swimming pools;
3. Other uses similar in nature.
17.32.30 SANDY RIVER PARK
The above uses are inapplicable to the Sandy River Park property owned by the City of Sandy.
This section contains requirements specific to Sandy River Park. Development of the Sandy
River Park is guided by and limited to the uses identified in the Sandy River Park Master Plan
dated June 3, 2010. The primary uses specified in the plan include hiking, nature study, and
habitat restoration and the construction of a trail system to facilitate this use. Accessory
structures identified in the plan include installation of interpretative signage, benches, picnic
tables, restroom facilities, and limited parking.
17.32.40 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
17.32 - 2
Revised by Ordinance 2013-11 effective 12/18/13
A.
Parks & Open Space
Lot Area No minimum
Lot Dimension No minimum
Setbacks No minimum or maximum
Lot Coverage No maximum
Structure Height 35 ft. maximum
Off-Street Parking See Chapter 17.98
Design Review Standards See Section 17.90.120
17.32.50 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS
A. Where applicable, park improvements shall comply with city design standards.
B. Provisions for pedestrian and vehicular off-street access to adjoining properties shall be
included in park master plans
17.34 - 1
Revised by Ordinance 2013-11 effective 12/18/13
CHAPTER 17.34 - SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (SFR)
17.34.00 INTENT
The district is intended to implement the Low Density Residential Comprehensive Plan
designation by providing for low-density residential development in specific areas of the city.
The purpose of this district is to allow limited development of property while not precluding
more dense future development, as urban services become available. Density shall not be less
than 3 or more than 5.8 units per net acre.
17.34.10 PERMITTED USES
A. Primary Uses Permitted Outright:
1. Single detached dwelling subject to design standards in Chapter 17.90;
2. Single detached manufactured dwelling subject to design standards in Chapter 17.90;
B. Accessory Uses Permitted Outright:
1. Accessory dwelling unit subject to the provisions in Chapter 17.74;
2. Accessory structure, detached or attached subject to the provisions in Chapter 17.74;
3. Family day care, as defined in Chapter 17.10 subject to any conditions imposed on the
residential dwellings in the zone;
4. Home business subject to the provisions in Chapter 17.74;
5. Livestock and small animals, excluding carnivorous exotic animals: The keeping, but not
the propagating, for solely domestic purposes on a lot having a minimum area of one
acre. The structures for the housing of such livestock shall be located within the rear yard
and at a minimum distance of 100 feet from an adjoining lot in any residential zoning
district;
6. Minor utility facility;
7. Other development customarily incidental to the primary use.
17.34.20 MINOR CONDITIONAL USES AND CONDITIONAL USES
A. Minor Conditional Uses:
1. Accessory structures for agricultural, horticultural or animal husbandry use in excess of
the size limits in Chapter 17.74;
2. Single detached or attached zero lot line dwelling;
3. Duplex;
4. Projections or free-standing structures such as chimneys, spires, belfries, domes,
monuments, fire and hose towers, observation towers, transmission towers, flagpoles,
radio and television towers, masts, aerials, cooling towers and similar structures or
facilities not used for human occupancy exceeding 35 feet in height;
5. Other uses similar in nature.
B. Conditional Uses:
1. Community services;
2. Funeral and interment services, cemetery, mausoleum or crematorium;
3. Golf course and club house, pitch-and-putt, but not garden or miniature golf or golf
driving range;
17.34 - 2
Revised by Ordinance 2013-11 effective 12/18/13
4. Hospital or home for the aged, retirement, rest or convalescent home;
5. Lodges, fraternal and civic assembly;
6. Major utility facility;
7. Preschool, orphanage, kindergarten or commercial day care;
8. Residential care facility [ORS 443.000 to 443.825];
9. Schools (public, private, parochial or other educational institution and supporting
dormitory facilities, excluding colleges and universities);
10. Other uses similar in nature.
17.34.30 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Type Standard
B. Minimum Average Lot Width
- Single detached dwelling
60 ft.
C. Minimum Lot Frontage 20 ft. except as allowed by Section
17.100.160
A. Minimum Lot Area - Single detached dwelling 7,500 square ft.
Other permitted uses No minimum
D. Minimum Average Lot Depth No minimum
E. Setbacks (Main Building)
Front yard
Rear yard
Side yard (interior)
Corner Lot
10 ft. minimum
20 ft. minimum
7.5 ft. minimum
10 ft. minimum on side abutting the street 1
F. Setbacks (Garage/Carport) 22 ft. minimum for front vehicle access
15 ft. minimum if entrance is perpendicular
to street (subject to Section 17.90.220)
5 ft. minimum for alley or rear access
G. Projections into Required Setbacks See Chapter 17.74
H. Accessory Structures in Required Setbacks See Chapter 17.74
I. Structure Height 35 ft. maximum
J. Building Site Coverage No minimum
K. Off-Street Parking See Chapter 17.98
17.34.40 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS
A. Must connect to municipal water.
B. Must connect to municipal sewer if service is currently within 200 feet of the site. Sites more
than 200 feet from municipal sewer, may be approved to connect to an alternative disposal
system provided all of the following are satisfied:
1. A county septic permit is secured and a copy is provided to the city;
2. The property owner executes a waiver of remonstrance to a local improvement district
and/or signs a deed restriction agreeing to complete improvements, including but not
limited, to curbs, sidewalks, sanitary sewer, water, storm sewer or other improvements
which directly benefit the property;
1 Must comply with clear vision requirements of Chapter 17.74.
17.34 - 3
Revised by Ordinance 2013-11 effective 12/18/13
3. The minimum size of the property is one acre or is a pre-existing buildable lot, as
determined by the city;
4. Site consists of a buildable parcel(s) created through dividing property in the city, which
is less than five acres in size.
C. The location of any real improvements to the property must provide for a future street
network to be developed.
D. Must have frontage or approved access to public streets.
17.34.50 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS
A. Design review as specified in Chapter 17.90 is required for all uses.
B. Lots with 40 feet or less of street frontage shall be accessed by a rear alley or a shared private
driveway.
C. Lots with alley access may be up to 10 percent smaller than the minimum lot size of the
zone.
D. Zero Lot Line Dwellings: Prior to building permit approval, the applicant shall submit a
recorded easement between the subject property and the abutting lot next to the yard having
the zero setback. This easement shall be sufficient to guarantee rights for maintenance
purposes of structures and yard, but in no case shall it be less than 5 ft. in width.
17.36 - 1
Revised by Ordinance 2013-11 effective 12/18/13
CHAPTER 17.36 - LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (R-1)
17.36.00 INTENT
This district is intended to implement the Low Density Residential Comprehensive Plan
designation by providing for an urban level of low-density residential development. It is to be used
as a transition between the Single Family Residential zone and the higher densities of a village. The
uses are to be fully serviced by public facilities. This zone is intended to provide walkable
neighborhoods with excellent linkage between residential areas, schools, parks, and village
commercial. This zone is one of four zones included in a village area and is designed as a mixed-use
neighborhood with a range of housing types and accessible commercial areas. Density shall not be
less than 5 or more than 8 units per net acre.
17.36.10 PERMITTED USES
A. Primary Uses Permitted Outright:
1. Single detached dwelling (subject to design standards in Chapter 17.90);
2. Single detached manufactured dwelling (subject to design standards in Chapter 17.90);
3. Single detached or attached zero lot line dwelling;
4. Duplex;
5. Row houses;
6. Manufactured home parks (see Chapter 17.96).
B. Accessory Uses Permitted Outright:
1. Accessory dwelling unit;
2. Accessory structure, detached or attached in accordance with specified size limitations
(see Chapter 17.74);
3. Family day care homes, subject to any conditions imposed on the residential dwellings in
the zone;
4. Home business (see Chapter 17.74);
5. Livestock and small animals, excluding carnivorous exotic animals: The keeping, but not
the propagating, for solely domestic purposes on a lot having a minimum area of one
acre. The structures for the housing of such livestock shall be located within the rear yard
and at a minimum distance of 100 feet from an adjoining lot in any residential zoning
district;
6. Minor utility facility;
7. Other development customarily incidental to the primary use.
17.36.20 MINOR CONDITIONAL USES AND CONDITIONAL USES
A. Minor Conditional Uses:
1. Accessory structures for agricultural, horticultural or animal husbandry use in excess of
the size limits in Chapter 17.74;
2. Projections or free-standing structures such as chimneys, spires, belfries, domes,
monuments, fire and hose towers, observation towers, transmission towers, flagpoles,
radio and television towers, masts, aerials, cooling towers and similar structures or
facilities not used for human occupancy exceeding 35 feet in height;
3. Other uses similar in nature.
17.36 - 2
Revised by Ordinance 2013-11 effective 12/18/13
B. Conditional Uses:
1. Community services;
2. Funeral and interment services, cemetery, mausoleum or crematorium;
3. Golf course and club house, pitch-and-putt, but not garden or miniature golf or golf
driving range;
4. Hospital or home for the aged, retirement, rest or convalescent home;
5. Lodges, fraternal and civic assembly;
6. Major utility facility;
7. Preschool, orphanage, kindergarten or commercial day care;
8. Residential care facility [ORS 443.000 to 443.825];
9. Schools (public, private, parochial or other educational institution and supporting
dormitory facilities, excluding colleges and universities);
10. Other uses similar in nature.
17.36.30 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Type Standard
 

B. Minimum Average Lot Width
- Single detached dwelling
- Single detached zero lot line dwelling
- Single attached zero lot line dwelling
- Other permitted uses
50 ft.
40 ft.
30 ft.
No minimum
C. Minimum Lot Frontage
20 ft. except as allowed by Section
17.100.160
A. Minimum Lot Area
– single detached dwelling 5,500 square ft.
- single detached zero lot line 5,000 square ft.
- Other permitted uses No minimum
D. Minimum Average Lot Depth No minimum
E. Setbacks
- Front yard
- Rear yard
- Side yard (interior)
- Corner Lot
- Garage
10 ft. minimum
15 ft. minimum
5 ft. minimum1
10 ft. minimum on side abutting the street 2
22 ft. minimum for front vehicle access
15 ft. minimum if entrance is perpendicular
to the street (subject to Section 17.90.220)
5 ft. minimum for alley or rear access
Projections into Required Setbacks See Chapter 17.74
Accessory Structures in Required Setbacks See Chapter 17.74
Structure Height 35 ft. maximum
Building Site Coverage No minimum
Off-Street Parking See Chapter 17.98
17.36.40 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS
1 Excluding zero-lot line development
2 Must comply with clear vision requirements of Chapter 17.74
17.36 - 3
Revised by Ordinance 2013-11 effective 12/18/13
A. Must connect to municipal water.
B. Must connect to municipal sewer if service is currently within 200 feet of the site. Sites more
than 200 feet from municipal sewer, may be approved to connect to an alternative disposal
system provided all of the following are satisfied:
1. A county septic permit is secured and a copy is provided to the city;
2. The property owner executes a waiver of remonstrance to a local improvement district
and/or signs a deed restriction agreeing to complete improvements, including but not
limited, to curbs, sidewalks, sanitary sewer, water, storm sewer or other improvements
which directly benefit the property;
3. The minimum size of the property is one acre or is a pre-existing buildable lot, as
determined by the city;
4. Site consists of a buildable parcel(s) created through dividing property in the city, which
is less than five acres in size.
C. The location of any real improvements to the property must provide for a future street
network to be developed.
D. Must have frontage or approved access to public streets.
17.36.50 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS
A. Design review as specified in Chapter 17.90 is required for all uses.
B. Lots with 40 feet or less of street frontage shall be accessed by a rear alley or a shared private
driveway.
C. Lots with alley access may be up to 10 percent smaller than the minimum lot size of the
zone.
D. Zero Lot Line Dwellings: Prior to building permit approval, the applicant shall submit a
recorded easement between the subject property and the abutting lot next to the yard having
the zero setback. This easement shall be sufficient to guarantee rights for maintenance
purposes of structures and yard, but in no case shall it be less than 5 feet in width.
17.38 - 1
Revised by Ordinance 2013-11 effective 12/18/13
CHAPTER 17.38 - MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (R-2)
1738.00 INTENT
This district intended to implement the Medium Density Residential Comprehensive Plan
designation by providing for medium density single-family and multiple-family uses in suitable
locations, where public sewer, water and other services are readily accessible. All development
shall also provide access to the surrounding neighborhood with excellent linkage between
residential areas, schools, and parks. Density shall not be less than 8 or more than 14 units per net
acre.
17.38.10 PERMITTED USES
A. Primary Uses Permitted Outright:
1. Single detached dwelling (subject to design standards in Chapter 17.90);
2. Single detached manufactured dwelling (subject to design standards in Chapter 17.90)
3. Single detached or attached zero lot line dwelling (subject to design standards in
Chapter 17.90);
4. Row house;
5. Duplex;
6. Multi-family dwelling;
7. Manufactured home parks (see Chapter 17.96).
B. Accessory Uses Permitted Outright:
1. Accessory dwelling unit subject to the provisions in Chapter 17.74;
2. Accessory structure, detached or attached subject to the provisions in Chapter 17.74;
3. Family day care homes, subject to any conditions imposed on the residential dwellings in
the zone (see Chapter 17.74);
4. Home business (see Chapter 17.74);
5. Livestock and small animals, excluding carnivorous exotic animals: The keeping, but not
the propagating, for solely domestic purposes on a lot having a minimum area of one
acre. The structures for the housing of such livestock shall be located within the rear yard
and at a minimum distance of 100 feet from an adjoining lot in any residential zoning
district;
6. Minor utility facility;
7. Other development customarily incidental to the primary use.
17.38.20 MINOR CONDITIONAL USES AND CONDITIONAL USES
A. Minor Conditional Uses:
1. Accessory structures for agricultural, horticultural or animal husbandry use in excess of
the size limits in Chapter 17.74;
2. Projections or free-standing structures such as chimneys, spires, belfries, domes,
monuments, fire and hose towers, observation towers, transmission towers, flagpoles,
radio and television towers, masts, aerials, cooling towers and similar structures or
facilities not used for human occupancy exceeding 35 feet in height;
3. Other uses similar in nature.
17.38 - 2
Revised by Ordinance 2013-11 effective 12/18/13
B. Conditional Uses:
1. Community services;
2. Congregate housing;
3. Funeral and interment services, cemetery, mausoleum or crematorium;
4. Golf course and club house, pitch-and-putt, but not garden or miniature golf or golf
driving range;
5. Hospital or home for the aged, retirement, rest or convalescent home;
6. Lodges, fraternal and civic assembly;
7. Major utility facility;
8. Preschool, orphanage, kindergarten or commercial day care;
9. Residential care facility [ORS 443.000 to 443.825];
10. Schools (public, private, parochial or other educational institution and supporting
dormitory facilities, excluding colleges and universities);
11. Other uses similar in nature.
17.38.30 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Type Standard
Minimum Lot Area No minimum
Minimum Average Lot Width
- Single detached dwelling
- Single detached zero lot line dwelling
- Single attached zero lot line dwelling
- Other permitted uses
50 ft.
40 ft.
30 ft.
No minimum
Minimum Lot Frontage 20 ft. except as allowed by Section
17.100.160
Minimum Average Lot Depth No minimum
Setbacks
- Front yard
- Rear yard
- Side yard (interior)
- Corner Lot
- Garage
10 ft. minimum
15 ft. minimum
5 ft. minimum 1
10 ft. minimum on side abutting the street 2
20 ft. minimum for front vehicle access
15 ft. minimum if entrance is perpendicular
to the street (subject to Section 17.90.220)
5 ft. minimum for alley or rear access
Projections into Required Setbacks See Chapter 17.74
Accessory Structures in Required Setbacks See Chapter 17.74
Multi-family - Landscaping
- Setbacks
25% minimum
See Section 17.90.230
Structure Height 35 feet maximum
Building Site Coverage No minimum
Off-Street Parking See Chapter 17.98
17.38.40 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS
1 Excluding zero lot line development
2 Must comply with clear vision requirements of Chapter 17.74
17.38 - 3
Revised by Ordinance 2013-11 effective 12/18/13
A. Must connect to municipal water
B. Must connect to municipal sewer if service is currently within 200 hundred feet of the site.
Sites more than 200 feet from municipal sewer, may be approved to connect to an alternative
disposal system provided all of the following are satisfied:
1. A county septic permit is to be secured and a copy is provided to the city;
2. The property owner executes a waiver of remonstrance to a local improvement district
and/or signs a deed restriction agreeing to complete improvements
3. The minimum size of the property is one acre or is a pre-existing buildable lot, as
determined by the city.
4. Site consists of a buildable parcel(s) created through dividing property in the city, which
is less than five acres in size.
C. The location of any real improvements to the property must provide for a future street
network to be developed.
D. Must have frontage or approved access to public streets.
17.38.50 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS
A. Design review as specified in Chapter 17.90 is required for all uses.
B. Lots with 40 feet or less of street frontage shall be accessed by a rear alley or a shared private
driveway.
C. Zero Lot Line Dwellings: Prior to building permit approval, the applicant shall submit a
recorded easement between the subject property and the abutting lot next to the yard having
the zero setback. This easement shall be sufficient to guarantee rights for maintenance
purposes of structures and yard, but in no case shall it be less than 5 feet in width.
17.40 - 1
Revised by Ordinance 2013-11 effective 12/18/13
CHAPTER 17.40 - HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (R-3)
17.40.00 INTENT
This district is intended to implement the High Density Residential Comprehensive Plan designation
by providing for housing in close proximity to retail, public amenities; major transportation routes
and transit services where public sewer, water and other services are readily accessible. R-3 uses
are designed to be a transition area between commercial and industrial uses and low density single
family uses. Pedestrian connections are required to ensure a direct walking route to retail shops. All
development shall also provide access to the surrounding neighborhood with excellent linkage
between residential areas, schools, parks, and commercial. Density shall not be less than 10 or
more than 20 units per net acre.
17.40.10 PERMITTED USES
A. Primary Uses Permitted Outright:
1. Single Detached, if located on an existing lot of record or in conjunction with a planned
development;
2. Single Detached (Zero Lot Line), if located in conjunction with a planned development;
3. Single Attached Zero Lot Line;
4. Duplex;
5. Row houses;
6. Multi-family dwellings;
7. Manufactured home parks;
8. Boarding houses and rooming houses;
9. Residential facility.
B. Accessory Uses Permitted Outright:
1. Accessory dwelling unit (see Chapter 17.74);
2. Accessory structure, detached or attached (see Chapter 17.74);
3. Family day care homes, subject to any conditions imposed on the residential dwellings in
the zone;
4. Home business (see Chapter 17.74);
5. Livestock: The keeping, but not the propagating, of one horse, or one cow, or two sheep
for solely domestic purposes on a lot having a minimum area of one acre. The structures
for the housing of such livestock shall be located within rear yard and at a minimum
distance of 100 feet from an adjoining lot in any residential zoning district;
6. Minor utility facility;
7. Other development customarily incidental to the primary use.
17.40.20 MINOR CONDITIONAL USES AND CONDITIONAL USES
A. Minor Conditional Uses:
1. Accessory structures for agricultural, horticultural or animal husbandry use in excess of
the size limits in Chapter 17.74;
2. Projections or free-standing structures such as chimneys, spires, belfries, domes,
monuments, fire and hose towers, observation towers, transmission towers, flagpoles,
radio and television towers, masts, aerials, cooling towers and similar structures or
facilities not used for human occupancy exceeding 35 feet in height;
17.40 - 2
Revised by Ordinance 2013-11 effective 12/18/13
3. Other uses similar in nature.
B. Conditional Uses:
1. Community services;
2. Congregate housing;
3. Funeral and interment services, cemetery, mausoleum or crematorium;
4. Golf course and club house, pitch-and-putt, but not garden or miniature golf or golf
driving range;
5. Hospital or home for the aged, retirement, rest or convalescent home;
6. Lodges, fraternal and civic assembly;
7. Major utility facility;
8. Preschool, orphanage, kindergarten or commercial day care;
9. Residential care facility [ORS 443.000 to 443.825];
10. Schools (public, private, parochial or other educational institution and supporting
dormitory facilities, excluding colleges and universities);
11. Other uses similar in nature.
17.40.30 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Type Standard
Minimum Average Lot Width
- Single detached dwelling
- Single detached zero lot line dwelling
- Single attached zero lot line dwelling
- Other permitted uses
40 ft.
30 ft.
20 ft.
No minimum
Minimum Lot Frontage 20 ft. except as allowed by Section 17.100.160
Minimum Average Lot Depth No minimum
Setbacks
- Front yard
- Rear yard
- Side yard (interior)
- Corner Lot
- Garage
10 ft. minimum
15 ft. minimum
5 ft. minimum 1
10 ft. minimum on side abutting the street 3
20 ft. minimum for front vehicle access
15 ft. minimum if entrance is perpendicular to
the street (subject to Section 1.79.220)
5 ft. minimum for alley or rear access
Projections into Required Setbacks See Chapter 17.74
Accessory Structures in Required Setbacks See Chapter 17.74
Multi-family – Landscaping
Setbacks
25% minimum
See Section 17.90.230
Structure Height 35 ft. maximum
Building Site Coverage No maximum
Landscaping See Chapter 17.92
Off-Street Parking See Chapter 17.98
1 Excluding zero lot line development
3 Must comply with clear vision requirements of Chapter 17.74
17.40 - 3
Revised by Ordinance 2013-11 effective 12/18/13
17.40.40 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS
A. Must connect to municipal water.
B. Must connect to municipal sewer.
C. The location of any real improvements to the property must provide for a future street
network to be developed.
D. Must have frontage or approved access to public streets.
17.40.50 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS
A. Design review as specified in Chapter 17.90 is required for all uses.
B. Lots with 40 feet or less of street frontage shall be accessed by a rear alley or a shared private
driveway.
C. Zero Lot Line Dwellings: Prior to building permit approval, the applicant shall submit a
recorded easement between the subject property and the abutting lot next to the yard having
the zero setback. This easement shall be sufficient to guarantee rights for maintenance
purposes of structures and yard, but in no case shall it be less than 5 feet in width.
17.42 - 1
Revised by Ordinance 2013-11 effective 12/18/13
CHAPTER 17.42 - CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (C-1)
17.42.00 INTENT
This district is intended to provide the community with a mix of retail, personal services, offices
and residential needs of the community and its trade area in the city's traditional commercial
core. This district is not intended for intensive automobile or industrial uses. This district is
intended to provide the principal focus for civil and social functions within the community.
This commercial district is intended for civic uses and to provide all basic services and amenities
required to keep the downtown the vital center of our community. While the district does not
permit new low density building types, it is not intended to preclude dwelling units in buildings
containing commercial activities. All development and uses shall be consistent with the intent of
the district, as well as compatible with the space, access and exposure constraints and
opportunities of the central city.
17.42.10 PERMITTED USES
A. Primary Uses Permitted Outright – Residential:
1. Attached row houses existing prior to adoption of this Code;
2. Duplexes existing prior to adoption of this Code;
3. Residential Care Facility;
4. Residential dwellings attached to a commercial business;
5. Single Attached (Zero Lot Line, 2 Units) existing prior to adoption of this Code;
6. Single Detached existing prior to adoption of this Code;
7. Single Detached (Zero Lot Line) existing prior to adoption of this Code.
B. Primary Uses Permitted Outright – Commercial in buildings with up to 30,000 square feet of
gross floor area and without drive-through facilities:
1. Retail uses, including but not limited to:
a. Automotive trailer, recreational vehicle, motorcycle sales and rental;
b. Convenience market/store;
c. Eating and drinking establishment including fast-food and high-turnover sit down
restaurants but excluding drive-up/drive-through uses;
d. Grocery store or supermarket;
2. Service and professional businesses and organizations, including but not limited to:
a. Athletic club, indoor recreation, or entertainment;
b. Automotive repair and service;
c. Commercial day care facility;
d. Community services;
e. Education facility (e.g., pre-school, school, college);
f. Financial institution;
g. Medical facility (e.g., clinic, hospital, laboratory);
h. Professional or general business office;
i. Self-service storage;
j. Social organization;
3. Manufacturing, assembly, processing, and production that do not produce significant
levels of noise or odor beyond the boundaries of the site;
a. Brewery, distillery, or winery with pub/tasting room;
17.42 - 2
Revised by Ordinance 2013-11 effective 12/18/13
4. Bus station or terminal;
5. Group care and assisted living;
6. Minor public facility;
7. Nursery/greenhouse;
8. Outdoor recreation;
9. Overnight lodging;
10. Park and ride station;
11. Parking lot or garage (when not an accessory use);
12. Public park, plaza, playground or recreational area, and buildings;
13. Warehousing and distribution facilities for wholesale merchandise;
14. Other uses similar in nature.
C. Accessory Uses Permitted Outright:
7. A use customarily incidental and subordinate to a principal use permitted outright;
8. Outdoor display or storage of merchandise covering no more than 10% of the total retail
sales area;
9. Accessory dwelling unit;
10. Accessory structures, detached or attached;
11. Family day care homes, subject to any conditions imposed on the residential dwellings in
the zone;
12. Home businesses;
13. Parking lot or garage (when associated with development).
17.42.20 MINOR CONDITIONAL USES AND CONDITIONAL USES
A. Minor Conditional Uses:
1. Brewery, distillery, or winery without pub/tasting room;
2. Congregate housing;
3. Outdoor product display or storage of merchandise covering greater than 10% of the total
retail sales area;
4. Other uses similar in nature.
B. Conditional Uses:
A. Automotive fueling station;
B. Buildings designed for one or more occupants with more than 30,000 square ft. of gross
floor area;
C. Drive-up/drive-in/drive-through (drive-up windows, kiosks, ATM, restaurants, car wash,
quick vehicle servicing, and similar uses);
D. Major public facility;
E. Multi-family dwellings not contained within a commercial building;
F. Wholesale lumber or building materials;
G. Other uses similar in nature.
17.42.30 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
A.
Residential - Not Above Commercial Building
Type Standard
Density/Lot Dimension In conformance with Chapter 17.40 (R-3)
17.42 - 3
Revised by Ordinance 2013-11 effective 12/18/13
Setbacks In conformance with Chapter 17.40 (R-3)
Lot Coverage No maximum
Structure Height 45 ft. maximum
Landscaping 20% minimum
Off-Street Parking See Chapter 17.98
Commercial
Lot Area No minimum
Lot Dimension No minimum
Setbacks No minimum 4; maximum 10 ft.
Lot Coverage No maximum
Landscaping 10% minimum (includes required civic space in
Section 17.90.110.)
Structure Height 45 ft. maximum
Off-Street Parking See Chapter 17.98
Design Review Standards See Section 17.90.110
B. Special Setbacks - Side or Rear Yard Abutting a More Restrictive District.
1. Property abutting a more restrictive zoning district shall have the same yard setback as
required by the abutting district. An additional 10 ft. shall be added for each 10 foot
increment in building height over 35 ft.
2. Measurement of the height transition area shall be made between the foundation of the
proposed building and the property line of the abutting district.
3. When the proposed structure has different sections that have different heights, the height
transition area shall be measured for each vertical surface as if it were to be freestanding.
The building then must be located on the site so that no section is closer to the abutting
property line than it would be if the section was freestanding.
4. The required buffering and screening and utilities may be located within the height
transition area. Off-street parking, accessory structures and incidental development may
be located within the height transition area but not any areas designated as buffering and
screening area.
4 Unless abutting a more restrictive zoning district or as required to maintain vision clearance.
17.44 - 1
Revised by Ordinance 2019-21 effective 11/20/19
CHAPTER 17.44 - GENERAL COMMERCIAL (C-2)
17.44.00 INTENT
This district is intended to provide for a wide range of commercial activities in a community
scale shopping center and for commercial uses and related services and businesses, which require
large land areas for structures and parking facilities and direct automobile access. This district is
not intended for exclusively residential uses, although mixed-use developments are encouraged.
17.44.10 PERMITTED USES
A. Primary Uses Permitted Outright – Residential:
1. Multi-family dwellings above a commercial business.
B. Primary Uses Permitted Outright in buildings with less than 60,000 square ft. of gross floor
area:
1. Retail businesses, including but not limited to:
a. Automotive fueling station;
b. Automotive, trailer, recreational vehicle, and motor cycle sales and rental;
c. Convenience market/store;
d. Drive-up/drive-in/drive-through (drive-up windows, kiosks, ATM, restaurants, car
wash, quick vehicle servicing, and similar uses);
e. Eating and drinking establishments including fast-food and high-turnover sit down
restaurants;
f. Grocery store or supermarket;
2. Service and professional businesses and organizations, including but not limited to:
a. Athletic club, indoor recreation, or entertainment;
b. Automotive repair and service;
c. Commercial day care facility;
d. Community services;
e. Education facility (e.g., pre-school, school, college);
f. Financial institution;
g. Medical facility (e.g., clinic, hospital, laboratory);
h. Professional or general business office;
i. Self-service storage;
j. Social organization;
3. Manufacturing, assembly, processing, and production that do not produce significant
levels of noise or odor beyond the boundaries of the site, including but not limited to:
a. Brewery, distillery, or winery, with or without pub or tasting room;
4. Bus station or terminal;
5. Group care and assisted living;
6. Minor public facility;
7. Nursery/greenhouse;
8. Outdoor recreation;
9. Overnight lodging;
10. Park and ride station;
11. Parking lot or garage (when not an accessory use);
12. Public park, plaza, playground or recreation area, and buildings;
13. Trucking terminal, distribution center, or transit center;
17.44 - 2
Revised by Ordinance 2019-21 effective 11/20/19
14. Warehousing and distribution facilities for wholesale merchandise;
15. Wholesale lumber or building materials yard;
16. Other uses similar in nature.
C. Accessory Uses Permitted Outright:
1. A use customarily incidental and subordinate to a use permitted outright;
2. Outdoor product display or storage of merchandise covering no more than 20% of the
total lot area;
3. Parking lot or garage (when associated with development).
17.44.20 MINOR CONDITIONAL USES AND CONDITIONAL USES
A. Minor Conditional Uses:
1. Outdoor product display or storage of merchandise covering greater than 20% of the total
lot area;
2. Other uses similar in nature.
B. Conditional Uses:
1. Buildings designed for one or more occupants with more than 60,000 square ft. of gross
floor area;
2. Major public facility;
3. Planned unit developments, including but not limited, to single-family attached and
detached residential and multi-family developments, in conjunction with recreation or
supportive commercial facilities. Residential uses are limited to a maximum of 50% of
the total gross acreage;
4. Traveler accommodation facilities including campgrounds, overnight travel parks, and
recreational vehicle parks;
5. Other uses similar in nature.
17.44.30 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
A.
Lot Area No minimum
Lot Dimension No minimum
Setbacks 5
Front …………………………….
Side ……………………………..
Rear ……………………………..
Corner …………………………..
10 ft. minimum; 50 ft. maximum
None
None
15 ft.
Outside Display/Sales Lot Area 80% maximum
Lot Coverage - Impervious Area No maximum
Landscaping 20% (includes required civic space in Section
17.90.120)
Structure Height 55 ft.
Off-Street Parking See Chapter 17.98
Design Review Standards See Section 17.90.120
5 Unless abutting a more restrictive zoning district, or as required under Section 17.90.120 Design Standards for C-2.
17.44 - 3
Revised by Ordinance 2019-21 effective 11/20/19
B. Special Setbacks - Side or Rear Yard Abutting a More Restrictive District.
1. Property abutting a more restrictive zoning district shall have the same yard setback as
required by the abutting district. An additional 10 ft. shall be added for each 10 foot
increment in building height over 35 ft;
2. Measurement of the height transition area shall be made between the foundation of the
proposed building and the property line of the abutting district;
3. When the proposed structure has different sections that have different heights, the height
transition area shall be measured for each vertical surface as if it were to be freestanding.
The building then must be located on the site so that no section is closer to the abutting
property line than it would be if the section was free-standing;
4. The required buffering and screening and utilities may be located within the height
transition area. Off-street parking, accessory structures and incidental development may
be located within the height transition area but not any areas designated as buffering and
screening area.
17.46 - 1
Revised by Ordinance 2013-11 effective 12/18/13
CHAPTER 17.46 - VILLAGE COMMERCIAL (C-3)
17.46.00 INTENT
The intent of the village commercial district is primarily oriented to serve residents of the village
and the immediately surrounding residential area. The Village Commercial area is intended to help
form the core of the villages. Allowing a mixture of residential uses beside and/or above
commercial uses will help create a mixed-use environment, which integrates uses harmoniously and
increases the intensity of activity in the area. The orientation of the uses should integrate pedestrian
access and provide linkages to adjacent residential areas, plazas and/or parks, and amenities.
17.46.10 PERMITTED USES
A. Primary Uses Permitted Outright – Residential:
1. Single family dwelling above, beside or behind a commercial business;
2. Multi-family dwellings above, beside or behind a commercial business.
B. Primary Uses Permitted Outright – Commercial (in buildings with up to 7,500 square ft. of
gross floor area):
1. Retail uses, including but not limited to:
a. Automotive, trailer, recreational vehicle, motorcycle sales and rental;
b. Convenience market/store;
c. Eating and drinking establishment including fast-food and high-turnover sit down
restaurant but excluding drive-through;
d. Grocery store or supermarket;
2. Service and professional businesses and organizations, including but not limited to:
a. Athletic club, indoor recreation, or entertainment;
b. Automotive repair and service;
c. Commercial day care facility;
d. Community services;
e. Education facility (e.g., pre-school, school, college);
f. Financial institution excluding drive-through;
g. Medical facility (e.g., clinic, hospital, laboratory);
h. Professional or general business office;
i. Social organization;
3. Manufacturing, assembly, processing, and production that do not produce significant
levels of noise or odor beyond the boundaries of the site;
a. Brewery, distillery, or winery with pub/tasting room;
4. Bus station or terminal;
5. Group care and assisted living;
6. Minor public facility;
7. Overnight lodging;
8. Park and ride station;
9. Parking lot or garage (when not an accessory use);
10. Other uses similar in nature.
C. Accessory Uses Permitted Outright:
1. A use customarily incidental and subordinate to a principal use permitted outright;
17.46 - 2
Revised by Ordinance 2013-11 effective 12/18/13
2. Outdoor display or storage of merchandise covering no more than 10% of the total retail
sales area;
3. Accessory dwelling units, detached or attached;
4. Accessory structures;
5. Family day care homes, subject to any conditions imposed on the residential dwellings in
the zone;
6. Home businesses;
7. Parking lot or garage (when associated with development).
17.46.20 MINOR CONDITIONAL USES AND CONDITIONAL USES
A. Minor Conditional Uses:
1. Congregate housing;
2. Multi-family dwellings not located above a commercial business and occupying no more
than 30% of the C-3 district area in a village;
3. Nursery/greenhouse;
4. Outdoor product display or storage of merchandise covering greater than 10% of the total
retail sales area;
5. Outdoor recreation;
6. Public park, plaza, playground or recreational area, and associated buildings;
7. Other uses similar in nature.
B. Conditional Uses:
1. Automotive fueling stations;
2. Buildings designed for one or more occupants with more than 7,500 square feet of gross
floor area;
3. Drive-through facilities in conjunction with a bank, savings and loan, credit union, or an
eating and drinking establishment on a site abutting a state highway, subject to all other
applicable provisions of the Sandy Development Code and the following special
conditions:
a. No drive-through facility will be permitted unless the development site is at least 2
acres in size and only one drive-through facility shall be allowed on each
development site.
b. Each drive-through facility shall be oriented to the adjacent public street and shall be
otherwise designed to prioritize pedestrian access and circulation over vehicular
access and circulation. Pedestrians shall not have to cross drive-through lanes to
access entry doors.
c. A drive-through facility may be conditioned to operate during hours that do not
negatively impact adjacent residential uses in terms of noise and lighting.
d. Each drive-through facility may have only one (1) drive-through lane, which shall not
be positioned between the primary building and a local residential street.
4. Major public facility;
5. Other uses similar in nature.
17.46.30 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
A.
Residential - Not in Conjunction with a Commercial Business
Type Standard
Lot Dimension In conformance with Chapter 17.40 (R-3)
17.46 - 3
Revised by Ordinance 2013-11 effective 12/18/13
Setbacks In conformance with Chapter 17.40 (R-3)
Lot Coverage No minimum
Structure Height 45 ft. maximum
Landscaping 20%
Off-Street Parking See Chapter 17.98
Commercial
Lot Area No minimum or maximum
Lot Width No minimum
Lot Depth Maximum 100 ft. recommended;
Lot Coverage No maximum
Setbacks 6 No minimum; maximum 20 ft.
Structure Height 45 ft.
Landscaping 10% (includes required civic space per 17.90.110.)
Off-Street Parking See Chapter 17.98
Design Review Standards See Section 17.90.110
B. Special Setbacks - Side or Rear Yard Abutting a More Restrictive District
1. Property abutting a more restrictive zoning district shall have the same yard setback as
required by the abutting district. An additional 10 ft. shall be added for each 10 foot
increment in building height over 35 ft.;
2. Measurement of the height transition area shall be made between the foundation of the
proposed building and the property line of the abutting district. When the proposed
structure has different sections that have different heights, the height transition area shall
be measured for each vertical surface as if it were to be free-standing. The building then
must be located on the site so that no section is closer to the abutting property line than it
would be if the section was free-standing;
3. The required buffering and screening and utilities may be located within the height
transition area. Off-street parking, accessory structures and incidental development may
be located within the height transition area but not any areas designated as buffering and
screening area.
6 Unless abutting a more restrictive zoning district or as required to maintain vision clearance.
17.48 - 1
Revised by Ordinance 2016-06 effective 11/08/16
CHAPTER 17.48 - INDUSTRIAL PARK (I-1)
17.48.00 INTENT
It is the intent of this district to allow desirable and beneficial mixing of light industrial and
warehousing businesses and commercial uses totally enclosed within buildings on large,
landscaped sites, which will blend harmoniously with their surroundings, and adjacent land uses.
This district is intended primarily for light manufacturing, select warehousing and wholesaling,
storage and office uses, with limited provisions for limited commercial uses which, due to their
activity and space requirements, are compatible in industrial areas without causing use or other
activity conflicts with the primary uses. Commercial uses located in this district are those whose
activities are compatible with industrial uses, those which supplement and support surrounding
industrial activity and the needs of the employees of nearby firms and those which have
extensive space and land area requirements.
17.48.10 PERMITTED USES
A. Primary Uses Permitted Outright in buildings with less than 60,000 square ft. of gross floor
area:
1. Manufacturing, assembly, processing, and production (that do not produce significant
levels of noise or odor beyond the boundaries of the site), including but not limited to:
a. Brewery, distillery, or winery, with or without pub or tasting room;
2. Service and professional businesses and organizations, including but not limited to:
a. Athletic club, indoor recreation, or entertainment;
b. Automotive repair and service;
c. Commercial day care facility;
d. Community services;
e. Education facility (e.g., pre-school, school, college);
f. Financial institution;
g. Medical facility (e.g., clinic, hospital, laboratory);
h. Professional or general business office;
i. Self-service storage;
j. Social organization;
3. Retail businesses, including but not limited to:
a. Automotive fueling station;
b. Automotive, trailer, recreational vehicle, and motorcycle sales and rental;
c. Convenience market/store;
d. Drive-up/drive-in/drive-through (drive-up windows, kiosks, ATM, restaurants, car
wash, quick vehicle servicing, and similar uses);
e. Eating and drinking establishments including fast-food and high-turnover sit down
restaurants;
f. Grocery store or supermarket;
4. Bus station or terminal;
5. Group care and assisted living;
6. Overnight lodging;
7. Minor public facility;
8. Nursery/greenhouse;
9. Outdoor recreation;
17.48 - 2
Revised by Ordinance 2016-06 effective 11/08/16
10. Park and ride station;
11. Parking lot or garage (when not an accessory use);
12. Public park, plaza, playground or recreation area, and buildings;
13. Trucking terminal, distribution center, or transit center;
14. Warehousing and distribution facilities for wholesale merchandise;
15. Wholesale lumber or building materials yard;
16. Other uses similar in nature.
B. Accessory Uses Permitted Outright:
1. Use customarily incidental and subordinate to a use permitted outright;
2. Outdoor product display or storage of merchandise covering no more than 15% of the
total lot area;
3. Parking lot or garage (when associated with development).
17.48.20 MINOR CONDITIONAL USES AND CONDITIONAL USES
A. Minor Conditional Uses:
1. Outdoor product display or storage of merchandise covering greater than 15% of the total
lot area;
2. Other uses similar in nature.
B. Conditional Uses:
1. Buildings designed for one or more occupants with more than 60,000 square ft. of gross
floor area;
2. Major public facility;
3. Medical marijuana grow site;
4. Planned unit developments, including but not limited, to single-family attached and
detached residential and multi-family developments, in conjunction with recreation or
supportive commercial facilities. Residential uses are limited to a maximum of 50 % of
the total gross acreage;
5. Traveler accommodation facilities including campgrounds, overnight travel parks, and
recreational vehicle parks;
6. Other uses similar in nature.
17.48.30 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
A.
Lot Area – Park No minimum
Lot Area - Individual Lot No minimum
Lot Dimension No minimum
Setbacks
Front ……………………………
Side …………………………….
Rear ……………………………....
Corner ……………………………
10 ft. minimum; 50 ft. maximum
None - Unless abutting a more restrictive
district; if abutting, the min. setback is 30 ft.
None
15 ft.
Lot Coverage 80% maximum
Landscaping Requirement 20% minimum (includes required civic space
per Section 17.90.120)
17.48 - 3
Revised by Ordinance 2016-06 effective 11/08/16
Structure Height 45 ft. maximum
Off-Street Parking See Chapter 17.98
Design Review Standards See Section 17.90.120
B. Special Setbacks - Side or Rear Yard Abutting a More Restrictive District
1. An additional 10 ft. shall be added for each 10 ft. increment in building height over 35 ft.;
2. Measurement of the height transition area shall be made between the foundation of the
proposed building and the property line of the abutting district;
3. When the proposed structure has different sections that have different heights, the height
transition area shall be measured for each vertical surface as if it were to be freestanding.
The building then must be located on the site so that no section is closer to the abutting
property line than it would be if the section was free-standing;
4. The required buffering and screening and utilities may be located within the height
transition area. Off-street parking, accessory structures and incidental development may
be located within the height transition area but not any areas designated as buffering and
screening area.
C. Special Requirements for Medical Marijuana Grow Sites. A medical marijuana grow site
shall be further restricted as follows:
1. In addition to requiring compliance with all State requirements, medical marijuana grow
sites shall be located at least 250 feet from all of the following uses: K-12 school,
preschool, after school program, or day care facility;
2. For purposes of this subsection, distances are measured by a straight line between any
point on the boundary line of the real property containing the medical marijuana grow
site and the boundary line of the property containing the K-12 school, preschool, after
school program, or day care facility;
3. In addition to the requirements of Chapter 17.22, Notices, notice shall be provided to
property owners within 1,000 feet, excluding street right-of-way, from the property
containing the proposed medical marijuana grow site.
17.50 - 1
Revised by Ordinance 2016-06 effective 11/08/16
CHAPTER 17.50 - LIGHT INDUSTRIAL (I-2)
17.50.00 INTENT
It is the intent of this district to provide locations in suitable areas for manufacturing and
warehousing business, or other commercial uses that do not depend on high visibility.
Commercial or retail uses must be compatible with an environment that includes heavy truck
traffic and outdoor storage of industrial materials. Because building design standards are less
restrictive in this zone than in other zones, buildings (regardless of use) shall be screened from
view from arterial streets and highways.
17.50.10 PERMITTED USES
A. Primary Uses Permitted Outright:
1. Manufacturing, assembly, processing, and production that do not produce significant
levels of noise or odor beyond the boundaries of the site, including but not limited to:
a. Brewery, distillery, or winery, with or without tasting room or tap room;
2. Service and professional businesses and organizations, including but not limited to:
a. Automotive repair and service;
b. Commercial day care facility in conjunction with a permitted use;
c. Community services;
d. Indoor recreation/sports arena, excluding athletic club/gym;
e. Laboratory;
f. Professional or general business office;
g. Self-service storage;
h. Social organization;
3. Retail businesses, limited to the following:
a. Any retail use that is incidental to, and associated with, the primary (permitted) use of
the building. The retail use shall occupy less than 35% of the gross floor area of the
building;
b. Automotive, trailer, recreation vehicle, and motorcycle, sales and rental;
c. Eating/drinking establishment, excluding fast-food restaurant, high-turnover sit down
restaurant, and drive-up/drive-through uses, and limited to no more than 40 seats;
d. Meat market, produce market, excluding grocery stores and convenience stores;
4. Bus station or terminal;
5. Group care and assisted living;
6. Minor public facility;
7. Nursery/greenhouse;
8. Outdoor recreation;
9. Park and ride station;
10. Parking lot or garage (when not an accessory use);
11. Public park, plaza, playground or recreation area, and buildings;
12. Salvage yards, including processing, storage or sales;
13. Trucking terminal, distribution center, or transit center;
14. Warehousing and distribution facilities for wholesale merchandise;
15. Wholesale lumber or building materials yard;
16. Other uses similar in nature.
17.50 - 2
Revised by Ordinance 2016-06 effective 11/08/16
B. Accessory Uses Permitted Outright:
1. A use customarily incidental and subordinate to a use permitted outright;
2. Caretaker quarters;
3. Parking lot or garage (when associated with development).
17.50.20 MINOR CONDITIONAL USES AND CONDITIONAL USES
A. Minor Conditional Uses:
None
B. Conditional Uses:
1. Automotive fueling station;
2. Concrete or asphalt batch plant;
3. Convenience market/store of less than 2,500 gross square feet
4. Drive-up/drive-in/drive-through (drive-up windows, kiosks, ATM, restaurants, car wash,
quick vehicle servicing, and similar uses);
5. Major public facility;
6. Medical marijuana grow site;
7. Stand-alone retail uses of less than 5,000 gross square feet;
8. Other uses similar in nature.
17.50.30 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Lot Area No minimum
Lot Dimension No minimum
Setbacks
Front ……………………………….
Side or Rear ……………………….
Corner ……………………………..
30 ft. minimum; 70 ft. maximum from a transit street
None, unless abutting a more restrictive district; if
abutting, the minimum setback is 50 ft.
15 ft.
Outdoor Display/Sales Lot Area 40% maximum
Lot Coverage 80% maximum
Landscaping Requirement 15% minimum
Structure Height 45 ft. maximum
Transit Street Setback See Chapter 17.82
Off-Street Parking See Chapter 17.98
A. Special Setbacks - Side or Rear Yard Abutting a More Restrictive District
1. An additional 10 ft. shall be added for each 10 ft. increment in building height over 35 ft.;
2. Measurement of the height transition area shall be made between the foundation of the
proposed building and the property line of the abutting district;
3. When the proposed structure has different sections that have different heights, the height
transition area shall be measured for each vertical surface as if it were to be freestanding.
The building then must be located on the site so that no section is closer to the abutting
property line than it would be if the section was free-standing;
4. The required buffering and screening and utilities may be located within the height
transition area. Off-street parking, accessory structures and incidental development may
17.50 - 3
Revised by Ordinance 2016-06 effective 11/08/16
be located within the height transition area but not any areas designated as buffering and
screening area.
B. Off-Street Parking. Parking shall not be located in a required standard 30’ setback area.
Where feasible, ingress and egress to parking shall be provided from side streets or alleys.
When access must be provided directly from a public right-of-way, driveways for ingress or
egress shall be limited to one per 150 ft. For lots with frontage of less than 150 ft. or less, a
shared driveway may be required.
C. Screening. All buildings (regardless of use) that are visible from an arterial street or highway
shall be screened from view by a vegetative buffer as specified below:
1. Minimum depth of the buffer shall be 20 feet measured from the property line and run the
entire length of the property.
2. Existing trees shall be preserved to the greatest extent possible.
3. Evergreen trees at least 8 feet in height and capable of growing to at least 30 feet in
height shall be planted at a density that will create a visual screen within five years.
4. If the property does not abut a highway or arterial street, the screening requirement can
be met by an offsite screen that has the effect of screening the property from view from
arterial streets and highways.
D. Special Requirements for Medical Marijuana Grow Sites. A medical marijuana grow site
shall be further restricted as follows:
1. In addition to requiring compliance with all State requirements, medical marijuana grow
sites shall be located at least 250 feet from all of the following uses: K-12 school,
preschool, after school program, or day care facility;
2. For purposes of this subsection, distances are measured by a straight line between any
point on the boundary line of the real property containing the medical marijuana grow
site and the boundary line of the property containing the K-12 school, preschool, after
school program, or day care facility;
3. In addition to the requirements of Chapter 17.22, Notices, notice shall be provided to
property owners within 1,000 feet, excluding street right-of-way, from the property
containing the proposed medical marijuana grow site.
17.50.40 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS
A. Design review is required for all buildings and external building modifications.
B. All processes and storage shall be entirely enclosed within a building. However, outdoor
storage of materials may be approved by the Director upon a finding that the proposed
storage is screened from view from public rights-of-way by buildings, landscaping, fences,
etc. All manufacturing operations shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building.
C. Reasonable provisions for pedestrian and vehicular off-street access to adjoining properties
shall be considered through the design review process.
17.52 - 1
Revised by Ordinance 2013-11 effective 12/18/13
CHAPTER 17.52 - GENERAL INDUSTRIAL (I-3)
17.52.00 INTENT
It is the intent of this district to provide locations in suitable areas for general manufacturing and
warehousing businesses which because of potential land use conflicts require large, isolated sites
removed from neighboring residential uses.
17.52.10 PERMITTED USES
A. Primary Uses Permitted Outright:
1. Any industrial use excluding uses with a primary function of storing, utilizing, or
manufacturing toxic or hazardous materials;
2. Administrative, educational or other related activities subordinate to a permitted use on
the same premises;
3. Carpentry, cabinetry, auto repair, painting, welding or machine shop not engaged in
manufacturing, sheet metal shop, tire or lube shops or other similar uses when enclosed in
a building;
4. Minor utility facility;
5. Truck, trailer and heavy equipment sales, rental or repair;
6. Vehicle repair shop, entirely within an enclosed building;
7. Warehousing and distribution facilities for wholesale merchandise, with indoor or
outdoor storage (not including mini-storage facilities);
8. Wholesale lumber or building materials yard with no retail sales;
9. Other uses similar in nature.
B. Accessory Uses Permitted Outright:
1. A use customarily incidental and subordinate to a principal use permitted outright.
17.52.20 MINOR CONDITIONAL USES AND CONDITIONAL USES
A. Minor Conditional Uses:
None
B. Conditional Uses:
1. Commercial uses which the Planning Commission finds meet the following criteria:
a. The use is supportive and complementary to the principal industrial uses in the
district;
b. The scale, activity and design of the use proposed is appropriate to the location and
trade area;
c. The use is designed and landscaped so as to blend harmoniously with the surrounding
area; and,
d. Access to the commercial use is provided by a signal-controlled intersection.
2. Any principal use involving storing, utilizing or manufacturing toxic or hazardous
materials, including but not limited to, cement; chemicals; explosives; fertilizers, organic
or inorganic; gas (all kinds (artificial, natural, liquefied or compressed); paint, lacquer or
varnish; paper; petroleum products of all kinds; rubber; and soap;
3. Any principal use involving the rendering of fats, the slaughtering of fish or meat, or the
fermenting of foods such as beer, wine, sauerkraut, vinegar or yeast;
17.52 - 2
Revised by Ordinance 2013-11 effective 12/18/13
4. Brewery, distillery or winery;
5. Concrete or asphalt batch plant;
6. Incineration or burning of industrial wastes or by-products;
7. Junkyards, including processing, storage or sales;
8. Meat or poultry slaughter or packing;
9. Night watchman or caretaker facility;
10. Transfer station or recycling facility;
11. Trucking terminal and distribution center;
12. Other uses similar in nature.
17.52.30 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Lot Area No minimum
Lot Dimension No minimum
Setbacks
Front
Side or Rear
Corner
30’ minimum; 70’ maximum from a transit street
None, unless abutting another more restrictive
district; if abutting, the minimum setback is 50’
15’
Outdoor Display/Sales Lot Area 60% maximum
Lot Coverage 85% maximum
Landscaping Requirement 10% minimum
Structure Height 45 ft. maximum
Transit Street Setback See Chapter 17.82
Off-Street Parking See Chapter 17.98
A. Special Setbacks - Side or Rear Yard Abutting a More Restrictive District
1. An additional 10 ft. shall be added for each 10 ft. increment in building height over 35 ft.;
2. Measurement of the height transition area shall be made between the foundation of the
proposed building and the property line of the abutting district;
3. When the proposed structure has different sections that have different heights, the height
transition area shall be measured for each vertical surface as if it were to be freestanding.
The building then must be located on the site so that no section is closer to the abutting
property line than it would be if the section was free-standing;
4. The required buffering and screening and utilities may be located within the height
transition area. Off-street parking, accessory structures and incidental development may
be located within the height transition area but not any areas designated as buffering and
screening area.
B. Off-Street Parking. Parking shall not be located in a required standard 30’ front setback area.
Where feasible, ingress and egress to parking shall be provided from side streets or alleys.
When access must be provided directly from a public right-of-way, driveways for ingress or
egress shall be limited to one per 150 ft. For lots with frontage of less than 150 ft. or less,
shared access may be required.
17.52.40 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS
A. Design review is required for all uses.
17.52 - 3
Revised by Ordinance 2013-11 effective 12/18/13
B. Reasonable provisions for pedestrian and vehicular off-street access to adjoining properties
shall be considered through the design review process.
17.54 - 4
Revised by Ordinance No. 2003-09 effective 10/15/03
CHAPTER 17.54 - SPECIFIC AREA PLAN OVERLAY
17.54.00 SPECIFIC AREA PLAN DEVELOPMENT AND APPROVAL PROCESS
A. Purpose. The purpose of a specific area plan overlay zone is to allow development and
approval of specific area plans in the city. A specific area plan is a master plan coordinating
and directing development in terms of transportation, utilities, open space and land use,
however, no phasing or timeline is required. Specific area plans may be located anywhere
within the Urban Growth Boundary and are intended to promote coordinated planning
concepts and pedestrian-oriented mixed-use development.
B. Initiation. The process to establish a specific area plan shall be initiated by the City Council.
The Planning Commission or interested property owners may submit requests to the City
Council to initiate the specific area plan process. If owners request initiation of a specific
area plan process, the City Council may require an application fee to cover the cost of
creating the plan.
C. Advisory Committee. The City Council may appoint an advisory committee to guide
development of the plan. The advisory committee may include persons representing affected
property owners, neighbors, city staff, agencies, special districts and the community at large.
The role of the committee is advisory to the Planning Commission and the City Council.
D. Adoption. A specific area plan shall be adopted through a Type IV process, and shall be
evaluated for compliance with the criteria for zoning district amendments and/or
comprehensive plan amendments where applicable.
E. Map identification. A specific area plan overlay zone is identified on the City of Sandy
Zoning Map with a specific border around the perimeter of the plan area and a letter “S”
depicted approximately in the center of the plan area. A report that includes the specific area
plan and relevant development standards shall be adopted as an exhibit to the ordinance
approving the overlay zone district.
F. Comprehensive Plan Amendment. A specific area plan is similar to a master plan and does
not automatically require a comprehensive plan amendment. A comprehensive plan
amendment shall only be required if a need for such an amendment is identified during
development of the specific area plan.
G. Compliance with Specific Area Plan Standards and Procedures. New construction and land
divisions shall meet any development, land division and design standards of the applicable
specific area plan. Base zone and land division standards shall apply where no different
standard is referenced for the specific plan area.
H. Specific Area Plan Standards. Specific standards for adopted specific area plans are defined
below.
17.54.10 SPECIFIC AREA PLAN CONTENT
At a minimum, a specific area plan shall include the following text and diagrams:
A. Plan Objectives. A narrative shall set forth the goals and objectives of the plan.
B. Site and Context. A map of the site and existing context shall identify the project area.
17.54 - 5
Revised by Ordinance No. 2003-09 effective 10/15/03
C. Land Use Diagram. The land use diagram shall indicate the distribution and location of
planned land uses, including open space and parks, within the area covered by the specific
area plan.
D. Density. If residential uses are proposed, a narrative shall describe planned residential
densities.
E. Facilities Analysis. The plan shall include an analysis of the general location and extent of
major components of sanitary sewer, water, and other essential facilities proposed to be
located within the specific plan area and needed to support the land uses and densities
described in the plan. A review of existing facilities master plans shall be sufficient if these
master plans indicate there is adequate capacity to serve the specific plan area.
F. Circulation/Transportation Diagram. The circulation diagram shall indicate the proposed
street pattern for the specific area plan area, including pedestrian pathways and bikeways.
Design standards and street cross sections shall be included, if different than normal City
standards.
G. Market Analysis. Specific are plans that include amendments to the zoning map affecting the
acreage of Village Commercial (C-3) land within the plan area shall include a market
analysis of supportable retail space that verifies demand for the proposed acreage of C-3
land. The analysis should include a market delineation, a regional and local economic review,
and a retail market evaluation.
H. Design and Development Standards. If standards differ from normal City standards, design
and development standards shall be included in the plan.
17.54.20 LAND USE REVIEW
The review procedures outlined in Chapter 17.12, Procedures for Decision Making, shall apply
for all development subject to a specific area plan overlay zone, unless modified below.
A. Type I. The Director, at his or her discretion, may refer a Type I application to the Planning
Commission for a public hearing. In addition to the procedures detailed in Section 17.12.10,
the following activities shall be reviewed administratively.
1. Administrative amendments to a specific area plan, as defined by Section 17.54.30 (A).
B. Type II. The Director, at his or her discretion, may refer a Type II application to the Planning
Commission for a public hearing. In addition to the procedures detailed in Section 17.12.20,
the following activities shall be reviewed administratively with notices to neighboring
property owners.
1. Minor amendments to a specific area plan, as defined by Section 17.54.30 (B).
C. Type III. In addition to the procedures detailed in Section 17.12.30, the following activities
shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission as either a quasi-judicial or legislative
amendment.
1. Major amendments to the specific area plan, as defined by Section 17.54.30 (C).
17.54.30 AMENDMENTS AND ADJUSTMENTS TO THE SPECIFIC AREA PLAN
17.54 - 6
Revised by Ordinance No. 2003-09 effective 10/15/03
Amendments to an approved specific area plan are classified as administrative, minor, or major
amendments.
A. Administrative Amendments. The City Planning Director may approve administrative
amendments pursuant to the Type I procedures of the Sandy Development Code.
Administrative amendments include:
1. Street, easement, sidewalk, and trail relocations that result in a location change of less
than 50 feet from what is depicted on specific area plan diagrams.
2. Public park relocations that result in a location change of less than 100 feet from what is
depicted on specific area plan diagrams.
3. Increases in the size of public neighborhood parks, provided that transportation
connections remain consistent with the specific area plan.
4. Reductions in the size of public neighborhood parks, provided the reductions are less than
10% of park area depicted on specific area plan diagrams.
5. Changes related to street trees, street furniture, fencing, or signage that were approved as
part of the specific area plan.
6. A change in the utility plan other than what would be necessary for other authorized
adjustments.
B. Minor Amendments. A minor amendment to a specific area plan shall be processed as a Type
II land use decision. The decision shall include findings demonstrating that the change will
not adversely affect:
1. The purpose and objectives of the specific area plan, and
2. The functioning of the specific area plan, and
3. The coordination of transportation and infrastructure provision to properties within the
specific plan area.
Minor amendments are those that result in any of the following:
a. A change in the circulation/transportation plan that requires a required transportation
element including local street, easement, sidewalk or trail to be shifted 50 to 100 feet in
any direction from what is depicted on the specific area plan circulation/transportation
diagram.
b. A change in the land use diagram that reduces the size of a public park or facility more
than 10%, or moves the location more than 100 feet from the location depicted on the
land use diagram.
C. Major Amendment. A major amendment to a specific area plan shall be processed as a Type
III Procedure affecting the existing specific area plan. The amendment shall follow either
quasi-judicial or legislative procedures and meet plan amendment and zone change criteria.
Findings must demonstrate that the change will not adversely affect:
1. The purpose and objectives of the specific area plan, and
17.54 - 7
Revised by Ordinance No. 2003-09 effective 10/15/03
2. The functioning of the specific area plan, and
3. The coordination of transportation and infrastructure provision to properties within the
specific plan area.
Major amendments are those that result in any of the following:
a. A change in a land use plan boundary or density, unless as part of the original approvals
an alternative design was approved outlining acceptable plan designation options (e.g. a
residential use may be approved on a park site).
b. A change in the circulation/transportation plan that causes a required transportation
element, including a trail, to be added, eliminated or moved more than 100 feet from the
location depicted on the specific area plan circulation/transportation diagram.
c. A change in the Parks Plan that adds or eliminates a designated public park or facility.
d. A change in development standards, except those set forth as minor or administrative
amendments.
e. Increase or decrease in density, as much as 20% over or under density permitted by an
underlying zoning district.
f. Other amendments to the specific area plan not defined as administrative or minor
amendments.
17.54.40 BORNSTEDT VILLAGE OVERLAY (BVO) DISTRICT
The City of Sandy developed a specific area plan for Bornstedt Village, a mixed-use
neighborhood located south of downtown Sandy surrounding the intersection of Hwy 211 and
Bornstedt Road, as depicted on the City of Sandy Zoning Map. The Bornstedt Village Specific
Area Plan Report, the background document that includes Figures referenced in this Chapter, is
available for review in the City of Sandy Planning Department.
17.54.50 BVO INTENT
The Bornstedt Village Overlay (BVO) district is intended to guide the development of a new,
pedestrian-oriented neighborhood in Sandy, and, implement the Comprehensive Plan’s village
policies. The district is intended to integrate land use, transportation, natural resource and
infrastructure planning in a way that recognizes and enhances the unique qualities of Bornstedt
Village. The district references other chapters within the Sandy Development Code in
combination with provisions that apply solely within Bornstedt Village. Where there is a conflict
between a referenced section of the Code and this chapter, the BVO district provisions
supercede.
The planning objectives for Bornstedt Village are to:
A. Create a Livable Village – Create a neighborhood-oriented village that fulfills the village
definition in the Sandy Comprehensive Plan, and, responds to the unique opportunities and
site conditions of Bornstedt Village.
17.54 - 8
Revised by Ordinance No. 2003-09 effective 10/15/03
B. Provide Transportation Options and a Local Street Network – Provide for transportation
improvements and a village setting that is conducive to walking, bicycling and transit, while
accommodating automobile traffic. Integrate planned land uses with existing and future
transportation modes.
C. Plan for a New, Village-Oriented Character for Hwy 211, Bornstedt and Jacoby Roads –
Evaluate ways to calm traffic, improve safety, create an attractive character, protect natural
resources and generally minimize adverse impacts from traffic on these high-speed roads.
D. Protect, Restore, and Enhance Natural Resources in Balance with Creating an Urban Village
– Plan for integration for land use, transportation, and natural resources in the village. This
objective seeks to protect, restore and enhance key resources and implement appropriate
green and sustainable development practices, all in balance with creating an urban village.
E. Plan for a Parks and Open Space – Provide parks that implement the City of Sandy Parks
Master Plan, and other open space opportunities that enhance the livability of the village.
F. Provide Housing Choices – Provide a variety of housing choices that meet the needs of a
broad spectrum of Sandy residents.
G. Ensure Attractive and Village-Oriented Design – Identify zoning and design guidelines that
will result in attractive design that supports the creation of a walkable village.
17.54.60 BVO APPLICABILITY
Development and land use within the Bornstedt Village Overlay district, as shown on the City of
Sandy Zoning Map (reflecting Figure 5 in the Bornstedt Village Specific Area Plan), shall be in
conformance with the provisions outlined in this chapter. Cascadia Village Subdivisions #1
through #6 are exempt from Sections 17.54.70-17.54.110.
17.54.70 BVO PERMITTED USES
Within the Bornstedt Village Overlay district, all uses shall be consistent with the underlying
zoning district, as referenced below. Uses are determined through the referenced zone district
unless specifically modified or exempted herein.
A. Single Family Residential (SFR) – see SDC 17.34. Single-family detached zero-lot-line
dwellings are not permitted. All other uses shall be consistent with Section 17.34.10 and
17.34.20.
B. Low Density Residential (R1) – see SDC 17.36. Single-family detached zero-lot-line
dwellings are not permitted. All other uses shall be consistent with Section 17.36.10 and
17.36.20.
C. Medium Density Residential (R2) – see SDC 17.38
D. High Density Residential (R3) – see SDC 17.40
17.54 - 9
Revised by Ordinance No. 2003-09 effective 10/15/03
E. Village Commercial (C-3) – see SDC 17.46. Multi-family dwellings above, beside or behind
a commercial business are permitted except as modified as follows: residential dwellings
shall only be permitted to be located above, beside or behind the commercial use(s) if a
minimum of 80% of the ground floor of each building footprint is occupied by the
commercial use(s). In such cases where the 80% standard is met, a maximum of 20% of the
ground floor of each building footprint may be used for residential purposes and to provide
access to residential dwellings located above, beside or behind the commercial uses(s).
17.54.80 BVO DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Residential Development Standards
Type SFR R1 R2 R3
Minimum
Average Lot
Width
50 ft. single
family detached;
40 ft. single
family detached;
50 ft. duplex; 30
ft. zero lot line;
30 ft. row house
40 ft. single
family detached;
30 ft. zero lot
line and duplex;
20 ft. row house
40 ft. single
family detached;
20 ft. zero lot
line, duplex and
row house
Lot Width at
Building Line
40 ft. single
family detached
40 ft. single
family detached;
50 ft. duplex; 20
ft. zero lot line;
20 ft. row house
40 ft. single
family detached;
30 ft. duplex; 20
ft. zero lot line
and row house
40 ft. single
family detached;
20 ft. zero lot
line, duplex and
row house
Minimum Lot
Frontage
20 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft.
Minimum Ave.
Lot Depth
No minimum No minimum No minimum No minimum
Setbacks
Front Yard
Rear Yard
Side Yard
(interior)
10 ft. min.
20 ft. min.
7.5 ft. min.
10 ft. min.
15 ft. min.
5 ft. min.
10 ft. min.
15 ft. min.
5 ft. min.
10 ft. min.
15 ft. min.
5 ft. min.
Corner Lot
Setback
10 ft. on side
abutting the
street
10 ft. on side
abutting the
street
10 ft. on side
abutting the
street
10 ft. on side
abutting the
street
Garage Setback 20 ft. min. 20 ft. min. 20 ft. min. 20 ft. min.
Projection into
Required
Setbacks
See Chapter
17.74
See Chapter
17.74
See Chapter
17.74
See Chapter
17.74
Accessory
Structures
See Chapter
17.74
See Chapter
17.74
See Chapter
17.74
See Chapter
17.74
Structure Height 35 ft. max. 35 ft. max. 35 ft. max. 35 ft. max.
Building Site
Coverage
No maximum Maximum - 80
percent
maximum for
manufactured
home parks
Maximum - 75
percent
maximum for
multi-family; 80
percent for
manufactured
home parks
Maximum - 75
percent
maximum for
multi-family; 80
percent for
manufactured
home parks
17.54 - 10
Revised by Ordinance No. 2003-09 effective 10/15/03
Type SFR R1 R2 R3
Off-Street
Parking
See Chapter
17.98
See Chapter
17.98
See Chapter
17.98
See Chapter
17.98
17.54.90 BVO Village Commercial Development Standards
Lot Area No minimum or maximum
Lot Width No minimum
Lot Depth Maximum 100’
Lot Coverage No maximum
Setbacks* No minimum front, side or corner setback; 10
ft. maximum.
Additional setbacks of up to 20 ft. may be
provided to accommodate small plazas and
outdoor seating
Structure Height 45 ft.
Landscaping 10%
Off-Street Parking See Chapter 17.98
*Unless abutting a more restrictive zoning district, then match abutting district’s setback
17.54.100 BVO Village Commercial - Residential in Conjunction with a Commercial
Business
Type Standard
Lot Dimension In conformance with Chapter 17.40 (R3)
Setbacks In conformance with Chapter 17.40 (R3)
Lot Coverage No minimum
Structure Height 45 ft. maximum
Landscaping 20%
17.54.110 BVO DESIGN STANDARDS
A. Design Review – Design review is required for all new uses and structures, and for exterior
remodels of commercial uses. The provisions of Chapter 17.90 and other relevant chapters
apply unless modified by the following provisions.
B. Single Family Residential Design Standards – All single family dwellings and manufactured
dwellings on individual lots of record shall utilize at least six of the following design features
to provide visual relief along the front of the home:
1. Dormers
2. Gables
3. Recessed entries
4. Covered front porches
5. Pillars or posts
6. Bay or bow windows
7. Eaves of 12 inches or greater
8. Off-set of 16 inches or greater on building face or roof
9. Window trim (minimum 4-inches-wide nominal) or shutters (minimum 8-inches-wide
nominal)
17.54 - 11
Revised by Ordinance No. 2003-09 effective 10/15/03
10. Balconies or porch rail
11. Shakes, shingles, brick or other similar decorative materials occupy at least 100 square
feet of the street façade
C. Variety of Housing Standard for Subdivisions and Planned Developments – In order to
reduce repetition of the same building type and promote housing choices, all subdivisions
and planned unit developments exceeding 40 platted lots, in the R-1, R-2 and R-3 zones,
must demonstrate that a variety of lot sizes and/or building types have been provided. This
standard is met by providing a different lot size or housing type for at least one-third (33.3%)
of the dwellings, by one or more of the following:
1. A mix of attached and detached dwellings.
2. A variety of lot sizes for detached dwellings where the “varied” lot sizes are at least 20%
larger or smaller than the average lot size for the remaining lots.
3. A mix of one and two story dwellings.
4. A mix of multi-family housing and detached dwellings, where allowed by the underlying
zoning district.
5. Other techniques as approved by the Planning Commission through a Type III review
process.
D. Garage Standards – The following standards apply to new single-family, duplex and zero-lotline
residential development. The purpose for these standards is to:
1. Ensure that there is a physical and visual connection between the living area and entrance
of the dwelling and the street.
2. Enhance public safety for residents and visitors and provide opportunities for community
interaction.
3. Provide for a more pleasant pedestrian environment by preventing garages and vehicle
areas from dominating the views of the neighborhood from the sidewalk.
Garages that are accessed from the front lot area of the dwelling must meet one of the four
options listed below, unless the garage is placed behind the dwelling.
a. The length of the garage wall may be up to 60% of the length of the street-facing
building façade when the garage does not extend closer to the front lot line than the
longest wall of the street-facing façade (Figure 10a in the Bornstedt Village SAP).
b. The length of the garage may be up to 70% of the length of the street-facing building
façade when the garage is recessed at a minimum of 2 feet from the longest wall of
the street-facing façade (Figure 10a in the Bornstedt Village SAP).
c. The garage may extend up to 6 feet in front of the longest street-facing wall when its
width does not exceed 50% of the total street-facing façade, and, the garage is not
closer to the street lot line than the front of the porch. As referenced here, the porch
must be at least 48 square feet in area, have a solid roof that is not more than 12 feet
above the porch (Figure 10b in the Bornstedt Village SAP).
d. A garage door that is oriented at least 90 degrees to the street lot line is not subject to
standards a-c above. Such side-oriented garages must have at least 15% of their
street-facing wall (measured in square feet) in windows (Figure 10b in the Bornstedt
Village SAP).
17.54 - 12
Revised by Ordinance No. 2003-09 effective 10/15/03
E. Access to Narrow Lots – In order to minimize the extent of curb cuts on each block, to deemphasize
front-facing garages, and mitigate turning movement conflicts, lots with less than
40 feet of frontage shall receive access from a rear public alley or a shared private driveway.
A shared private driveway may serve: 1) as many as 6 dwelling units, none of which takes
direct access on the public street; or 2) two dwelling units, where both dwelling units share a
common driveway approach on a public street (where permitted). The Planning Commission
may grant exceptions through a Type III Variance process where the applicant demonstrates
topography or other conditions preclude compliance with this standard.
F. Landscaping Standards Adjacent to Highway 211 – The street-side yard adjacent to the
Highway 211 Parkway (Figure 6 of the Bornstedt Village Specific Area Plan) shall be
landscaped to complement the parkway character. At a minimum, trees (minimum 2”) shall
be planted on 50-foot centers together with contiguous groundcover. Less than 50-foot
center spacing for trees is encouraged.
17.54.120 BVO CIRCULATION
New streets and vehicle access shall be developed consistent with the Bornstedt Village
Circulation Plan (Figure 7 of the Bornstedt Village Specific Area Plan). Through-roads shown
on the circulation plan are considered “required” street connections, however, there is flexibility
regarding the specific alignment of the streets. Proposed road “arrows” (shown on Circulation
Plan) are considered suggested locations for additional connections between the through streets,
recognizing that flexibility is needed for the specific number and location of additional streets.
The combination of development of the through streets and additional connections shall provide
circulation resulting in a logical and connected network of local neighborhood streets. Figure 8
of the Bornstedt Village Specific Area Plan is an illustrative, non-binding, plan of how this
standard could be implemented. Within the Bornstedt Village Overlay District, changes in the
Circulation/Transportation Plan that cause a required transportation element, including a trail, to
be added or moved more than 100 feet from the location depicted on the specific area plan
Circulation diagram, shall be subject to the amendment procedures of Section 17.54.30 (B) rather
than 17.54.30 (C). Changes in the Circulation/Transportation Plan that cause a required
transportation element, including a trail, to be eliminated, shall be subject to the amendment
procedures of 17.54.30 (C).
A. Highway 211 Parkway Section. Development shall be consistent with the design of the
Highway 211 Parkway cross-section (Figure 6 of the Bornstedt Village Specific Area Plan),
subject to ODOT approval. The parkway cross-section may be modified, as needed, to adjust
to topographic and other constraints. Modifications as part of the review of any land use
application or development permit shall be approved by City Engineer and are subject to
ODOT approval.
B. Traffic Calming on Bornstedt Road. The intersection of Bornstedt Road and Cascadia
Village Drive shall be stop controlled. Other traffic calming methods such as striping,
reflectors, narrowing of the pavement section, regrading, landscaping and other traffic
calming techniques shall be considered during land use reviews and public improvement
projects.
C. Boulevards.
17.54 - 13
Revised by Ordinance No. 2003-09 effective 10/15/03
1. The concept for the Barlow Road Boulevard is to build a neighborhood street that:
a. Follows the general alignment of the historic Barlow Road, as shown on Figures 7
and 11 of the Bornstedt Village Specific Area Plan; and
b. Includes a landscaped park-block section that is a minimum of 20 feet wide and
includes interpretive signage and a trail within the median. The conceptual design
recognizes that the historic road is no longer visible, but is still valuable and
important to incorporate into the design of the neighborhood; and
c. Minimizes access points by requiring residential access from a side street, rear public
alley, or from a shared private driveway; and
d. Encourages pedestrian accessibility by requiring the primary entrance of all
residential development adjacent to the boulevard to be oriented toward the boulevard
street. Buildings adjacent to the boulevard shall have a primary entrance connecting
directly between the boulevard street and building interior.
2. The concept for the Village Boulevard is to build a neighborhood street that:
a. Extends from the signalized intersection at Highway 211 approximately 1,000 feet to
the south and approximately 260 feet to the north; and
b. This street should include a landscaped park-block median that is a minimum of 20
feet wide; and
c. The existing hedgerow of trees located at south end of the boulevard should be
incorporated into this street design; and
d. Minimizes access points by requiring residential access from a side street, rear public
alley, or from a shared private driveway; and
e. Encourages pedestrian accessibility by requiring the primary entrance of all
residential and commercial development adjacent to the boulevard to be oriented
toward the boulevard street. Buildings adjacent to the boulevard shall have a primary
entrance connecting directly between the boulevard street and building interior.
3. The concept for Cascadia Village Drive, west of Bornstedt Road, is to build a
neighborhood street that:
a. Features a landscaped park-block median that is a minimum of 20 feet wide, except
where the street must avoid areas regulated by Chapter 17.60, the FSH Overlay
District; and
b. Minimizes access points by requiring residential access from a side street, rear public
alley, or from a shared private driveway; and
c. Encourages pedestrian accessibility by requiring the primary entrance of all
residential development adjacent to the boulevard to be oriented toward the boulevard
17.54 - 14
Revised by Ordinance No. 2003-09 effective 10/15/03
street. Buildings adjacent to the boulevard shall have a primary entrance connecting
directly between the boulevard street and building interior.
D. Green Streets – Vegetated swales and other green street features, per SDC 17.100, approved
by the City Engineer shall be used where practicable in Bornstedt Village.
17.54.130 BVO PARKS
The Open Space, Parks and Trails Map (Figure 9 of the Bornstedt Village Specific Area Plan)
illustrates both existing parks and the location of new neighborhood parks. The proposed parks
are conceptually located. The parks are an important element of the BVO district, however, they
do not bind the subject properties to use as only parkland. Rather, the exact location and size of
the parks shall be established through acquisition by the City, parkland dedication during
development reviews as required by Chapter 17.86, development agreements, or other means
that involve property owner participation. Within the Bornstedt Village Overlay District, changes
in the parks plan that cause a required park, path or trail to be added or moved more than 100
feet from the location depicted on the specific area plan parks diagram, shall be subject to the
Amendment procedures of Section 17.54.30 (B) rather than 17.54.30 (C). Changes in the parks
plan that cause a required park, path or trail to be eliminated, shall be subject to the Amendment
procedures of 17.54.30 (C).
17.54.140 BVO ENVIRONMENTAL STANDARDS
The BVO district shall utilize the existing environmental standards in the Sandy Development
Code. The principal regulations are:
1. Flood Slope and Hazard (FSH) Overlay – see Chapter 17.60
2. Hillside Development – see Chapter 17.56
3. Urban Forestry – see Chapter 17.102, except where modified by this Chapter
A. Tree Retention – The landowner is responsible for retention and protection of retained
trees as specified below:
1. Within Bornstedt Village at least 9 trees, 11 inches DBH or greater, shall be retained
for every one-acre of land under contiguous ownership within 300 feet of the FSH
Overlay District as depicted on the Zoning Map, and 6 trees per acre in other areas of
the village.
All other standards of Chapter 17.102 shall remain in effect.
17.56 - 1
CHAPTER 17.56 - HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENT
17.56.00 INTENT
The intent of this chapter is to comply with Statewide Planning Goal 7 (Natural Hazards) by
minimizing seismic and landslide hazards, and soil erosion associated with development on steep
or unstable slopes. Development may be permitted on potentially hazardous areas, provided that
the recommendations of approved studies are implemented as conditions of building permit or
land use approval.
17.56.10 APPLICABILITY
These regulations shall apply to any parcel with slopes greater than twenty-five percent (25%) as
shown on the Hillside Development Overlay District Map or with slope hazards mapped by the
Department of Geology and Mineral Industries (DOGAMI). This chapter shall apply only to
activities and uses that require a building, grading, tree removal and/or land use permit.
A. General. No person shall develop property in areas designated by SDC 17.56.10, without first
demonstrating compliance with this chapter.
1. As a condition of permit issuance or land use approval, the applicant shall agree to
implement the recommendations of approved studies and to allow all inspections to be
conducted.
2. Where a bond, letter of credit or other guarantee is required, the permit shall not be issued
until the bond or guarantee has been obtained and approved.
B. Exemptions:
1. An activity or use that avoids slopes of 25% or greater, DOGAMI slope hazard areas,
natural drainageways and potentially hazardous analysis areas as defined in Section
17.56.30.A.
2. The following activities, regardless of location:
a. An excavation that is less than three feet in depth, or which involves less than fifty
cubic yards of volume;
b. A fill that does not exceed three feet in depth or 50 cubic yards of volume;
c. New construction or expansion of a structure resulting in a net increase in ground
floor area of less than 1,000 square feet that does not involve grading;
d. Emergency actions required to prevent an imminent threat to public health or safety,
or prevent imminent danger to public or private property, as determined by the
Director; or
e. Any land use or activity that does not require a building, grading permit, or land use
approval.
17.56.20 APPROVAL PROCEDURES
A. Land Use Reviews. All applications for land use approval under the Sandy Development
Code shall be reviewed under the highest numbered procedure required for the development
proposal. For example, a Type II design review combined with hillside development review
would be considered under Type II procedure; similarly, a Type III conditional use permit
combined with hillside development review would be considered under Type III procedure.
17.56 - 2
B. Building Permits. The Building Official will process requests for building or grading permit
applications that do not require land use review under the Sandy Development Code.
17.56.30 REQUIRED MAP AND STUDIES
A. Topographic Map Required. To determine the location of potentially hazardous areas, the
applicant shall submit a scaled topographic map at two-foot contour intervals for the subject
property (site) and for land within 25 feet of the site perimeter. In addition to DOGAMI slide
hazard areas and slopes of 25% or greater, potentially hazardous “analysis areas” include
land within 25 feet of the top or toe of slopes of 25% or greater and the area 25 feet on either
side of drainageways that drain 20 acres or more. This map shall be prepared by a registered
engineer or land surveyor and shall show:
1. Slopes of 25-34%;
2. Slopes of 35% and greater;
3. The analysis that is within 25’ of slopes that are 25% or greater parallel to and within 25
feet of the top of the 25% slope break;
4. Mapped DOGAMI slide hazard areas;
5. The analysis area within 25 feet of the centerline of drainageways that drain at least 20
acres; and
6. The area (in square feet) for each category listed above for the subject property.
B. Types of Required Studies. There are three types of geological and engineering studies that
may be required by this chapter. See Table 1 under Section 17.56.40, below.
1. Geological Assessments are prepared and stamped by a Certified Engineering Geologist
and describe the surface and subsurface conditions of a site, delineate areas of a property
that may be subject to specific geologic hazards, and assess the suitability of the site for
development. Geotechnical Reports shall be conducted according to the requirements of
Appendix A (Geological Assessments), shall make recommendations as to whether
further studies are required, and may be incorporated into or included as an appendix to
the geotechnical report.
2. Engineering Geology Reports are prepared and stamped by a Certified Engineering
Geologist and provide detailed descriptions of the geology of the site, professional
conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect of geological conditions on the
proposed development, and opinions and recommendations covering the adequacy of the
site to be developed. Engineering Geology Reports shall be prepared in accordance with
the requirements of Appendix B (Guidelines for Preparing Engineering Geology Reports
in Oregon adopted by the Oregon State Board of Geologist Examiners) and may be
incorporated into or included as an appendix to the geotechnical report.
3. Geotechnical Reports are prepared and stamped by a Geotechnical Engineer, evaluate site
conditions, and recommend design measures necessary to reduce the development risks
and facilitate safe and stable development. Geotechnical Reports shall be conducted
according to the requirements of Appendix C (Geotechnical Reports), and may be
incorporated into or included as an appendix to the Engineering Geology Report.
17.56.40 WHERE STUDIES REQUIRED
Additional geological or engineering studies shall be required, or not required, under the
following circumstances:
17.56 - 3
TABLE 1: WHERE STUDIES ARE REQUIRED OR NOT REQUIRED
Situation
Type I Development
Applications; Single Family
Homes, Duplexes and
Accessory Uses
NON-EXEMPT Grading;
Type II or III Development
Applications
A. Proposed development
avoids slopes of 25% or
greater, drainageways,
DOGAMI slope hazard
areas and all analysis areas:
1. No further requirements 2. No further requirements
B. Development proposed
on slopes of 25-35% or
analysis areas, but avoids
drainageways, DOGAMI
hazard areas and slopes of
35% or greater:
1. Geological Assessment
required; Engineering
Geology or Geotechnical
Reports may be required*
2. Engineering Geology
Report required;
Geotechnical Report may
be required*
C. Development proposed
on DOGAMI hazard areas,
slopes of 35% or greater,
or drainageway areas:
1. Engineering Geology
Report required;
Geotechnical Report may be
required*
2. Engineering Geology
Report and Geotechnical
Report required
* Whether additional studies are necessary depends on recommendations of base required study.
17.56.50 COMPLIANCE WITH STUDY CONCLUSIONS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS REQUIRED
A. Professional Standards. The director shall determine whether Geological Assessments,
Engineering Geology Reports, or Geotechnical Reports have been prepared in accordance
with Section 17.56.30. The director may require additional information or analysis necessary
to meet study requirements.
B. Peer Review. The director may require peer review of any required report, in which case
regulated activities and uses shall be reviewed and accepted through the peer review process
before any regulated activity will be allowed.
1. A professional or professional firm of the city’s choice that meets the qualifications listed
in this chapter shall perform the review.
2. The review shall be at the applicant's expense.
3. Review of report submittals shall determine whether required elements are completed,
geologic report procedures and assumptions are accepted, and all conclusions and
recommendations are supported and reasonable.
C. Review Criteria. The approval authority shall rely on the conclusions and recommendations
of required reports, as modified by peer review, to determine compliance with this chapter.
D. Conditions of Approval. Conclusions and recommendations stated in approved reports shall
be directly incorporated as permit conditions or provide the basis for conditions of approval
for the regulated activity or use.
17.56 - 4
E. Expiration. Where an approved assessment or report as defined and required by this chapter
has been prepared within the last five years for a specific site, and where the proposed land
use activity and surrounding site conditions are unchanged, that report may be utilized and a
new report is not required. Should environmental conditions associated with the site or
surrounding the site change, or if the proposed land use activity or development has
materially changed, the applicant shall submit an amendment to the required assessment or
report, which may be reviewed and approved through the peer review process.
APPENDIX A
GEOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT REQUIREMENTS
The geological assessment is intended as an overview of site conditions. Its purpose is to identify
geologic hazards and considerations, and to provide an assessment of the suitability of the site
for the proposed project. It is the City’s policy to evaluate not only the development site and its
effect on adjacent properties, but also adjacent properties that may affect the site. The report
should include the items listed below in sufficient detail so that the City may determine whether
a more thorough engineering geology report or geotechnical report may be needed to complete
the evaluation of the suitability of the site for the proposed use.
The geologic assessment shall include the following:
GENERAL
• Name, address, and phone number.
• Client for whom the report was prepared.
• A description of the proposed project and its location.
• A review of the geologic history and the history of prior excavations and fills.
• A field reconnaissance of the site and vicinity.
• A discussion of geologic hazards, if any.
SITE INVESTIGATION
A site map of the area at a scale of 1":400' or larger. Geologic conditions, topography, and
location of proposed structures are to be shown. A geologic profile showing any referenced
subsurface conditions. A copy of published geologic maps shall also be provided.
• Suitability of the site for proposed development from a geologic standpoint.
• A description of the magnitude and extent of proposed grading or soil disturbance.
• If deemed necessary, subsurface exploration shall be conducted to assess unclear geologic
conditions.
• A description of all field mapping and exploration procedures.
• Additional information or analyses as necessary to evaluate the site.
• A bibliography of all references used.
GEOLOGIC PROCESSES
• A discussion of any unusual or extreme geologic processes at work on the site, for example:
rapid erosion, landslide hazard, flood hazard, rockfall, subsidence, or other features.
• A list of any geologic hazards that may affect the proposed land use, including slope
stability, debris flow, flooding, topography, erosion hazard, shallow groundwater, expansive
soils, subsidence, fault rupture, or any other geologic hazard discovered by the investigation.
17.56 - 5
• An identification of any areas of the site that you recommend be avoided for human occupied
structures.
• The effects of the geologic conditions on the proposed land use.
• The effects of the proposed land use on future geologic processes.
• The effects of the geologic conditions and proposed land use on surrounding properties.
RECOMMENDATIONS
• Discuss mitigation measures to address any anticipated geologic problems.
• Discuss potential future follow-up studies that should be recommended, such as engineering
geology reports, geotechnical reports, additional subsurface exploration or more extensive
soil reports.
• Geologic feasibility of the site for the proposed development.
CERTIFICATION
A signature, certification number, and stamp of a Registered Geologist who is certified in the
specialty of Engineering Geology under the provisions of ORS 672.505 to 672.705.
APPENDIX B
GUIDELINES FOR PREPARING
ENGINEERING GEOLOGIC REPORTS IN OREGON
Adopted by The Oregon State Board of Geologist Examiners
This is a suggested guide for the preparation of an engineering geologic report in Oregon. The
engineering geologic report should include sufficient facts and interpretation regarding geologic
materials, processes, and history to allow evaluation of the suitability of the site for the proposed
use. Because of the wide variation in size and complexity of projects and scope of work, the
guidelines are intended to be flexible and should be tailored to the specific project. The
guidelines are intended to be fairly complete; however, not all items would be applicable to small
projects or low-risk sites. In addition, some items may be addressed in separate reports prepared
by a geotechnical engineer, geophysicist, structural engineer, or hydrologist.
The guidelines are based on a publication developed by the Guidelines Committee of the Utah
Section of the Association of Engineering Geologists, a series of guidelines published by the
California Division of Mines and Geology in the CDMG Note series, and the Bulletin of the
Association of Engineering Geologists (Slosson, 1984).
GENERAL INFORMATION
The following items should be addressed:
• Client or party that commissioned the report.
• Name(s) of geologist(s) who did the mapping and other investigation on which the report is
based, and dates when the work was done.
• Location and size of area, and its general setting with respect to major or regional geographic
and geologic features.
• Purpose and scope of the report and geologic investigation, including the proposed use of the
site. Also, identify level of the study, i.e., feasibility, preliminary, final, etc.
• Topography and drainage within or affecting the area.
• General nature, distribution, and abundance of exposures of earth materials within the area.
17.56 - 6
• Nature and source of available subsurface information and geologic reports or maps. Suitable
explanations of the available data should provide a technical reviewer with the means of
evaluating the reliability. Reference to cited works or field observations should be made, to
substantiate opinions and conclusions.
• Disclosure of known or suspected geologic hazards affecting the area, including a statement
regarding past performance of existing facilities (such as buildings or utilities) in the
immediate vicinity.
• Location of test holes and excavations (drill holes, test pits, and trenches) shown on maps
and sections and described in the text of the report. The actual data, or processed data upon
which interpretations are based, should be included in the report to permit technical
reviewers to make their own assessments regarding reliability and interpretation.
• All field and laboratory testing procedures (by ASTM designation, if appropriate) and test
results.
• Disclosure statement of geologist's financial interest, if any, in the project or the client's
organization.
• The signature and seal of the certified engineering geologist who prepared the report.
GEOLOGIC MAPPING AND INVESTIGATION
• Geologic mapping of the area should be done at a scale which shows sufficient detail to
adequately define the geologic conditions present. For many purposes, available published
geologic maps are unsuitable to provide a basis for understanding the site conditions, so
independent geologic mapping is needed. If available published geologic maps are used to
portray site conditions, they must be updated to reflect geologic or topographic changes
which have occurred since map publication. It may be necessary for the geologist to extend
mapping into adjacent areas to adequately define significant geologic conditions.
• Mapping should be done on a suitable topographic base or aerial photograph, at an
appropriate scale with satisfactory horizontal and vertical control. The date and source of the
base should be included on each map or photo.
• The geologist doing the investigation and preparing the map should report the nature of
bedrock and surficial materials, the structural features and relationships, and the threedimensional
distribution of earth materials exposed and inferred within the area. A clear
distinction should be made between observed and inferred features and relationships.
• The report should include one or more appropriately positioned and scaled cross sections to
show subsurface relationships that cannot be adequately described in words alone. Fence or
block diagrams may also be appropriate.
GEOLOGIC DESCRIPTIONS
The report should contain brief but complete descriptions of all natural materials and structural
features recognized or inferred within the subject area. Where interpretations are added to the
recording of direct observations, the basis for such interpretations should be clearly stated.
Describe all field mapping and exploration procedures (surface geologic reconnaissance, drilling,
trenching, geophysical survey, etc.)
The following checklist may be useful as a general, though not necessarily complete, guide for
descriptions:
Bedrock
• Identification of rock types.
• Relative and absolute age and, where possible, correlation with named formations and other
stratigraphic units.
17.56 - 7
• Surface and subsurface expression, areal distribution, and thickness.
• Pertinent physical characteristics (e.g., color, grain size, nature of stratification, strength,
variability).
• Distribution and extent of zones of weathering; significant differences between fresh and
weathered rock.
• Special engineering geologic characteristics or concerns (e.g., factors affecting proposed
grading, construction, and land use).
Structural features - stratification, faults, discontinuities, foliation, schistosity, folds
• Occurrence, distribution, dimensions, orientation and variability; both within and projecting
into the area.
• Relative ages, where pertinent.
• Special features of faults (e.g., topographic expression, zones of gouge and breccia, nature of
offsets, age of movements, youngest faulted unit and oldest unfaulted unit).
• Other significant structural characteristics or concerns.
Surficial deposits - alluvial, colluvial, eolian, glacial, lacustrine, marine, residual, mass
movement, volcanic (such as cinders and ash), and fill.
• Identification of material, grain size, relative age, degree of activity of originating process.
• Distribution, dimensional characteristics, variations in thickness, degree of soil development,
surface expression.
• Pertinent physical and engineering characteristics (e.g., color, grain size, lithology,
compactness, cementation, strength, thickness, variability).
• Special physical or chemical features (e.g., indications of volume change or instability, such
as expansive clays or peat).
• Other significant engineering geologic characteristics or concerns.
Surface and shallow subsurface hydrologic conditions, including groundwater, springs, and
streams and their possible effect on the site. Indicate how conditions may be affected by
variations in precipitation, temperature, etc.
• Distribution, occurrence, and variations (e.g., drainage courses, ponds, swamps, springs,
seeps, aquifers).
• Identification and characterization of aquifers; depth to groundwater and seasonal
fluctuations, flow direction, gradient, recharge and discharge areas.
• Relationships to topographic and geologic features.
• Evidence for earlier occurrence of water at localities now dry (e.g., vegetation, mineral
deposits, historic records).
• Other significant engineering geologic characteristics or concerns, such as fluctuating water
table and the effects of proposed modifications on future hydrologic processes.
Seismic considerations.
• Description of the seismotectonic setting of the area (including size, frequency, and location
of historic earthquakes), current seismic zoning, and expected seismic risk.
• Potential for area to be affected by surface rupture (including sense and amount of
displacement, and width of surface deformation zone).
• Probable response of site to likely earthquakes (estimated ground motion).
• Potential for area to be affected by earthquake-induced landslides or liquefaction.
• Potential for area to be affected by regional tectonic deformation (subsidence or uplift.
17.56 - 8
ASSESSMENT OF GEOLOGIC FACTORS
Assessment of existing geologic conditions and processes with respect to intended use of the site
constitutes the principal contribution of the report. It involves 1) the effects of the geologic
features upon the proposed grading, construction, and land use, and 2) the effects of these
proposed modifications upon future geologic conditions and processes in the area.
The following checklist includes topics that ordinarily should be considered in discussions,
conclusions, and recommendations in geologic reports:
General suitability of proposed land use to geologic conditions.
• Areas to be avoided, if any, and mitigation alternatives.
• Topography and slope.
• Stability of geologic units.
• Flood and tidal inundation, erosion, and deposition.
• Problems caused by geologic features or conditions in adjacent properties.
• Other general problems.
Identification and extent of known or probable geologic conditions which may result in risk to
the proposed land use (such as flood inundation, shallow groundwater, storm surge, surface and
groundwater pollution, snow avalanche, landslide, debris flow, rock fall, expansive soil,
collapsible soil, subsidence, erosion, deposition, earthquake shaking, fault rupture, tectonic
deformation, liquefaction, seiche, tsunami, volcanic eruption).
Recommendations for site grading.
• Protection of what materials and structural features will be encountered in proposed cuts.
• Prediction of stability based on geologic factors; recommended avoidance or mitigation
alternatives to cope with existing or potential landslide masses.
• Excavation considerations (hard or massive rock, groundwater flows).
• General considerations of proposed fill masses in canyons or on sidehills.
• Suitability of on-site material for use as compacted fill.
• Recommendations for positioning fill masses, provision for subdrainage, buttressing, and the
need for erosion protection on fill slopes.
• Other recommendations required by the proposed land use, such as the angle of cut slopes,
position of drainage terraces, need for rock-fall and/or erosion protection on cut slopes.
Drainage considerations.
• Protection from inundation or wave erosion along shorelines.
• Soil permeability, suitability for septic systems.
• Protection from sheet flood or gulley erosion, and debris flows or mud flows.
Limitations of study, and recommendations for additional investigations. Considering the scope
of work and intended use of the site, provide a statement of the limitations of the study and the
need for additional studies outside the stated scope of work.
• Borings, test pits, and/or trenches needed for additional geologic information.
• Percolation tests needed for design.
17.56 - 9
• Program of subsurface exploration and testing that is most likely to provide data needed by
the soils or civil engineer.
• Program for long-term monitoring of the site to evaluate geologic conditions (survey hubs,
inclinometers, extensometers, etc.).
RECOMMENDED TECHNIQUES/SYSTEMS TO CONSIDER
• Engineering geology mapping can be done using the Genesis-Lithology-Qualifier (GLQ)
system (Keaton, 1984), rather than the conventional Time-Rock system commonly used in
geologic mapping. The GLQ system promotes communication of geology information to
non-geologists. The Unified Soil Classification System (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, 1960
- Tech. Memo 3-357, and American Society for Testing and Materials, 1984) has been used
in engineering for many years and has been incorporated into the GLQ system.
• The Unified Rock Classification System (Williamson, 1984) provides a systematic and
reproducible method of describing rock weathering, strength, discontinuities, and density in a
manner directly usable by engineers.
• Systems for mapping landslide deposits are described by Wieczorek (1984) and by McCalpin
(1984).
• Commonly accepted grading requirements are described in Chapter 70 of the Uniform
Building Code.
Direct your questions and comments regarding these guidelines to:
Oregon Board of Geologist Examiners
707 13th Street SE, Suite 275
Salem, OR 97301
(503) 566-2837
Fax: (503) 362-6393
REFERENCES
American Society for Testing and Materials, 1984, Standard practice for description and
identification of soils (visual-manual procedure): ASTM Standard D-2488-84, p. 409-423.
Keaton, J.R., 1984, Genesis-lithology-qualifier (GLQ) system of engineering geology mapping
symbols: Bulletin of the Association of Engineering Geologists, Vol. XXI, No. 3, p. 355-365.
McCalpin, James, 1984, Preliminary age classification of landslides for inventory mapping: 21st
Annual Symposium on Engineering Geology and Soils Engineering, Proceedings, University of
Idaho, Moscow, ID, p. 99-111.
Slosson, J.E., 1984, Genesis and evolution of guidelines for geologic reports: Bulletin of the
Association of Engineering Geologists, Vol. XXI, No. 3, p. 295-316.
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, 1960, The Unified Soil Classification System: U.S. Army
Technical Memorandum 3-357.
Utah Section of the Association of Engineering Geologists, 1986, Guidelines for preparing
engineering geologic reports in Utah: Utah Geologic and Mineral Survey Miscellaneous
Publication M, 2 p.
17.56 - 10
Wieczorek, G.F., 1984, Preparing a detailed landslide-inventory map for hazard evaluation and
reduction: Bulletin of the Association of Engineering Geologists, vol. XXI, No. 3, p. 337-342.
Williamson, D.A., 1984, Unified Rock Classification System: Bulletin of the Association of
Engineering Geologists, Vol. XXI, No. 3, p. 345-354.
APPENDIX C
GEOTECHNICAL REPORT REQUIREMENTS
The geotechnical report is intended to define the subsurface conditions and provide geotechnical
conclusions and recommendations for design and construction of the project. A geological
assessment or engineering geology report may be incorporated into or included as an appendix to
the geotechnical report for the purpose of providing geologic information for the geotechnical
engineer, explaining the implications of the subsurface conditions for appropriate project design
and construction. The investigation should include the following:
GENERAL
• Name, address, and phone number.
• Client for whom the report was prepared.
• A description of the proposed project and its location.
• A site map of the area at a scale of 1":400' or larger. Geologic conditions, topography,
and location of proposed structures are to be shown. A copy of published geologic maps
shall also be provided.
• A review of the geologic history and history of prior excavation and fills.
• A field reconnaissance of the site and vicinity.
• Discussion of geologic hazards.
• A discussion of the engineering aspects of the site and proposed project. The discussion
should address foundation types for proposed structures, retaining systems, grading
considerations, stability of cut-slopes and constructed embankments, settlement of the
site and adjacent sites due to existing conditions, proposed construction, and proposed
surface and subsurface drainage facilities.
• A bibliography of all references used.
FIELD INVESTIGATIONS
• Planned construction (type of structure and use, type of construction and foundation/ floor
system, number of stories, estimated structural loads).
• Scope (date of work done, investigative methods, sampling methods, logs of borings/ test
pits, elevations of borings/test pits for reference of materials and samples to finished grade or
footing elevations, identify real or assume elevations.
• Location of all samples taken, surface and subsurface.
• Groundwater conditions and potential (future natural and artificial seepage effects).
• Structural cross-sections (one or more appropriately positioned and referenced on map;
especially through critical areas, slopes and slides) of suitable size and engineering scale;
with labeled units, features and structures; and a legend. These sections should correlate with
surface and subsurface data showing representative dip components, projections and
stratigraphic/structural relationships.
17.56 - 11
ENGINEERING/MATERIAL CHARACTERISTICS AND TESTING
• Test methods used, type or condition of samples, applicable engineering graphics and
calculations, results of all tests, and sample locations of all test samples.
• Unified Soil Classifications of materials.
• Material competency and strength of existing soils/profile:
o Pertinent engineering geologic attributes (clayey, weak, loose; alignments, fissility,
planar boundaries; pervious or water-bearing parts; susceptibility to mass wasting,
erosion, piping, or compressibility).
o Effects and extent of weathering (existing and relationship to project design and future
site stability, material strength).
o Field densities of unconsolidated field areas and moisture content.
o Bearing capacity and/or shear strength of areas affected by future foundation placement
(drained or undrained conditions, effective stress or total stress analysis, in-situ or
remolded samples must be identified).
o Consolidation or settlement potential.
o Expansion potential.
• Maximum density-optimum moisture parameters of proposed fill material.
STABILITY FEATURES AND CONDITIONS
• Adequate mapping, sections and description dimensions and type of existing downslope
movement, soil/rock creep, flows, falls, slumps, slides, if any.
• Activity, cause or contributing factors of downslope movement features.
• Recent erosion, deposition, or flooding features.
• Subsidence/settlement, piping, solution or other void features or conditions.
• Groundwater and surface drainage characteristics or features:
o Surface expression (past and present); permeability/porosity of near surface materials.
o Actual or potential aquifers or conduits, perching situations, barriers or other controls to
percolation and groundwater movement and fluctuations of groundwater levels at the site.
FOUNDATION DESIGN CRITERIA
• Footing depth and width.
• Criteria for foundation material preparation.
• Allowable bearing values based on testing.
• Lateral pressures (active, passive, or at-rest conditions) and coefficient of friction.
• Settlement - total, differential, and rate of settlement.
REFERENCE
In supplemental or grading plan review reports referencing earlier reports, supply copies of those
referenced reports or applicable portions as required by the Director.
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
• Ground preparation (clearing, unsuitable material removal, scarification and moisturization).
• Fill support:
o Suitability and precompaction of in-situ materials (describe test results and other
pertinent data to be used to determine suitability).
o Densification and moisturization or dewatering measures (equipment, surcharge,
settlement monitoring, if applicable).
• Placement of fill:
o Material approval (on site, imported).
17.56 - 12
o Methods and standards (ASTM standards or approved equivalent).
o Testing (ASTM standards (D1556, D1557, D2167, D2922, D2937, D3017) or equivalent)
and frequency of field density testing by vertical intervals and/or volume of fill.
• Elimination of cut/fill or other different transitions beneath improvements.
• Opinion as to adequacy of site for the proposed development (this opinion should also be
summarized in the first part of the report).
• Other pertinent geotechnical information for the safe development of the site.
CERTIFICATION
• A signature, certification number, and stamp of a Professional Engineer, registered in the
State of Oregon as provided by ORS 672.002 to 672.325, who by training, education and
experience is qualified in the practice of geotechnical or soils engineering practices.
• A signature, certification number, and stamp of a Registered Geologist who is certified in the
specialty of Engineering Geology under the provisions of ORS 672.505 to 672.705 if a
geological assessment or engineering geology report is incorporated into or included as an
appendix to the geotechnical report.
17.60 - 1
Revised by Ordinance No. 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
CHAPTER 17.60 - FLOOD & SLOPE HAZARD (FSH) OVERLAY DISTRICT
17.60.00 INTENT
This chapter is intended to promote the public health, safety and general welfare by minimizing
public and private adverse impacts from flooding, erosion, landslides or degradation of water
quality consistent with Statewide Planning Goals 6 (Air, Land and Water Resources Quality) and
7 (Areas Subject to Natural Disasters and Hazards) and the Sandy Comprehensive Plan (SCP).
This chapter is also intended to minimize public and private losses due to flooding in flood
hazard areas by provisions designed to:
A. Protect human life and health;
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally
undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric,
telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in flood hazard areas;
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood
hazard areas so as to minimize blight areas caused by flooding;
G. Notify potential buyers that the property is in a Special Flood Hazard Area;
H. Notify those who occupy flood hazard areas that they assume responsibility for their actions;
and
I. Participate in and maintain eligibility for flood insurance and disaster relief.
17.60.10 INTERPRETATION AND MAPPING
The Director has the ultimate responsibility for maintaining the FSH Overlay District on the City
of Sandy Zoning Map, determining on-site measuring methods, and otherwise interpreting the
provisions of this chapter. Technical terms used in this chapter are defined in Chapter 17.10,
Definitions. This chapter does not regulate development on lots or parcels entirely outside the
FSH Overlay District.
A. FSH Overlay District. The only areas subject to the restrictions and prohibitions of the FSH
overlay district are those indicated on the City of Sandy Zoning Map on file in the Planning
Department and areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance
Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled, “Flood Insurance Study (FIS)
for Clackamas County, Oregon and Incorporated Areas,” dated January 18, 2019, with
17.60 - 2
Revised by Ordinance No. 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs). This chapter does not regulate lots or
parcels entirely outside the FSH Overlay District.
1. The FIS and FIRMs are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of Section
17.60 and are on file at the City of Sandy.
B. Development Approval Required. No development shall occur within the FSH overlay
district without first obtaining City approval under the provisions of this chapter. The
Director shall notify the Oregon Division of State Lands whenever any inventoried wetland
is proposed for development, in accordance with ORS 227.350. In riverine situations, the
Director shall notify adjacent communities and the State Coordinating Office prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit copies of such notification to the
administrator.
C. Interpretation
All provisions of the FSH overlay code shall be:
1. Considered as minimum requirements;
2. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
3. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
D. Applicant Responsibilities. The applicant for alteration or development within the FSH
overlay district shall be responsible for preparing a survey of the entire site, based on sitespecific
field surveys or Corps of Engineers data that precisely maps and delineates the
following areas:
1. The name, location and dimensions of affected streams or rivers, and the tops of their
respective banks.
2. Area of Special Flood Hazard boundaries and elevations as determined by the January 18,
2019 FIS for Clackamas County and Incorporated Areas.
3. The City of Sandy FSH overlay district boundary as depicted on the City of Sandy FSH
Map.
4. The water quality and slope setback area(s) as defined in Section 17.60.30.
5. The size and location of locally significant wetlands shall be determined based on the
City of Sandy Locally Significant Wetland Inventory (2002) unless modified by a
wetland delineation approved by the Oregon Division of State Lands and submitted to the
City. Wetland delineations that have formal concurrence from the Division of State
Lands shall be valid for the period specified in that agency’s administrative rules.
6. Steep slope areas where the slope of the land is 25% or greater within the FSH overlay
district boundary.
7. The area enclosed by a continuous line, measured 25 feet horizontally, parallel to and
upland from the top of a steep slope area, where the top of the steep slope is within the
FSH overlay district boundary.
8. Existing public rights-of-way, structures, roads and utilities.
9. Natural vegetation, including trees or tree clusters and understory within the FSH
Overlay District boundary.
10. Existing and proposed contours at 2-foot intervals.
17.60 - 3
Revised by Ordinance No. 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
17.60.20 PERMITTED USES AND ACTIVITIES
This chapter lists permitted uses, or uses allowed under prescribed conditions, within the FSH
overlay district. Where there are conflicts, this chapter supersedes the use provisions of the
underlying district.
A. Restricted Development Areas. Restricted development areas within the FSH overlay district
as shown on the City of Sandy Zoning Map include:
1. Slopes of 25% or greater that (a) encompass at least 1,000 square feet and (b) have an
elevation differential of at least 10 feet.
2. Protected water features, including locally significant wetlands, wetland mitigation areas
approved by the Division of State Lands, and perennial streams.
3. Required setback areas as defined in Section 17.60.30.
B. Permitted Uses. Permitted uses within restricted development areas are limited to the
following:
1. Open space and trails provided they are constructed consistent with standards on file in
the Planning Department.
2. Removal of refuse and permitted fill.
3. Planting of native vegetation species included on a list maintained by the Director.
4. Removal of non-native / invasive vegetation, dead or dying trees or vegetation that is
hazardous to the public.
5. Removal of up to two trees of 6 inches or greater dbh in a calendar year, provided that
each tree removed is replaced with two native trees, each of which must be 1.5 inches or
greater caliper and placed within the restricted development area of the site.
6. Construction or expansion of public facilities or private roads necessary to support
permitted development.
7. Construction or expansion of a single-family residence on a lot-of-record, under the
following prescribed conditions:
a) The applicant must demonstrate that the lot has received planning approval from
either Clackamas County or the City of Sandy and that there is insufficient buildable
land on the same lot to allow the proposed construction or expansion.
b) The site review, engineering, erosion control, water quality and re-vegetation
standards of this chapter have been fully satisfied.
c) The residence or addition has been sited so as to minimize excavation and disturbance
to native vegetation on restricted development areas.
d) The maximum impervious surface coverage resulting from development on restricted
development areas shall be 2,500 square feet. Exception: This standard may be
exceeded to allow a superior private driveway design and location that reduces
adverse impacts to protected areas. To exceed the standard, the applicant must
demonstrate that a longer driveway will avoid required setbacks from protected water
features, and that driveway construction will either: (a) more closely follow hillside
contours and thereby reduce overall cut and fill area by at least 20%; or (b) avoid tree
clusters and thereby reduce the number of 6-inch or greater dbh trees that must be
removed by at least 20%.
e) The option of an adjustment under Section 17.60.100 has been considered as a means
of avoiding or minimizing impacts on restricted development areas.
17.60 - 4
Revised by Ordinance No. 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
f) Development shall not result in cuts or fills in excess of 3 feet except for basement
construction unless specifically approved by the Director.
8. Replacement of a single-family dwelling constructed over substantially the same
footprint as the original dwelling.
9. Repair or stabilization of unstable slopes.
10. Stream bank restoration, subject to a stream bank restoration plan. This plan must:
a) Be prepared by a team of specialists in the fields of stream morphology, water quality
and riparian vegetation approved by the Planning Director.
b) Remove invasive vegetation and replace it with multi-layered native vegetation that
provides for stream shading within the entire stream bank.
c) Reduce the steepness of the bank along reaches that have been highly eroded.
d) Reduce the velocity of water carried by the stream.
e) Include guarantees and funding to assure at least a 90% survival rate of native plants
over a 3-year period.
11. Maintenance of existing landscaping on existing lots of record is permitted and is exempt
from the requirements of the FSH Overlay District.
12. Appurtenant structures as permitted under Section 17.60.70(J).
C. Platting of New Lots. No new lot shall be platted or approved for development that is
exclusively in restricted development areas as defined in subsection 17.60.20.A.
17.60.30 REQUIRED SETBACK AREAS
Setback areas shall be required to protect water quality and maintain slope stability near stream
corridors and locally significant wetlands. Setbacks are measured horizontally from, parallel to
and upland from the protected feature.
A. Required Setbacks. The required special setback(s) shall be:
1. 80 feet from the top of bank of Tickle Creek;
2. 50 feet from top of bank along other perennial streams, except for “No Name Creek” east
of Towle Drive, as provided in Section 17.60.30.C.2 below.
3. 25 feet around the edge of any mapped locally significant wetland; and
4. 25 feet from the top of any 25% slope break where the slope break occurs within the FSH
overlay district as mapped by the city.
17.60 - 5
Revised by Ordinance No. 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
B. Minimize Impacts. Natural vegetation shall be preserved and enhanced and excavation
minimized within required water quality setback areas.
C. Exceptions, Intent. Exception 1 below recognizes that existing hillside, stormwater detention
and erosion control measures are sufficient to maintain water quality and quantity in areas of
steep slopes separated from streams and wetlands by improved public streets in existing
rights-of-way. Exception 2 recognizes that “No Name Creek” east of Towle Drive has been
severely impacted by culverting, erosion and invasive plants, and has only a few remaining
infill sites adjacent to its banks. This exception is intended to encourage appropriate
development of these infill sites and the opening and restoration of this stream reach over
time.
1. Land lying within the FSH overlay district, but upland from an existing public right-ofway
with an improved public street, shall not be subject to the steep slope restrictions of
this chapter. Such land shall remain subject to applicable Section 17.56 Hillside
Regulations and shall comply with required setbacks set forth in subsection 17.60.30.A.3
above.
a. Applications for development that include only areas that meet this exception and
have existing improved public streets and have no locally significant mapped
wetlands are not subject to the provisions of this chapter.
2. The required setback for “No Name Creek” east of the Towle Drive crossing may be
reduced to 25 feet, subject to approval of a “stream bank restoration plan” that meets the
standards of Section 17.60.20.B.10.
17.60 - 6
Revised by Ordinance No. 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
17.60.40 REVIEW PROCEDURES
Review of development requests within the FSH Overlay District shall occur subject to the
following procedures. Unless otherwise indicated below, the Director may approve Type I
permits over the counter or following a field check. Type II and III development applications
shall be reviewed by the Director to ensure consistency with Section 17.60.60-70. Section
17.60.50 special reports shall also be required, unless specifically exempted by the Director.
A. Type I Procedure. The following uses shall be reviewed under a Type I procedure:
1. Planting of native plant species identified on the Native Plant list on file with the
Director.
2. Removal of permitted fill.
3. Removal of non-native / invasive vegetation, dead or dying vegetation that is hazardous
to the public, or up to two trees of 6 inches or greater dbh in a calendar year.
4. Appurtenant structures as permitted under Section 17.60.70(J).
B. Type II Procedure. The following uses shall be reviewed under a Type II review procedure:
1. Construction or expansion of major public facilities identified in sanitary, storm, water or
street or parks master plans or of minor public facilities necessary to support
development, where no other practical alternative exists.
2. Construction or expansion of trails.
3. Construction, expansion or replacement of a new single-family residence within a
restricted development area or floodway on a lot of record.
4. Repair and stabilization of unstable slopes. If emergency slope stabilization is required
and authorized by the City Engineer, Type II review shall be required within 60 days of
having taken the emergency action.
5. Stream bank restoration plans.
6. Exemption of Type II development applications from one or more required reports.
7. Development that is completely outside restricted development areas, as determined by
the Director based on site-specific information provided by the applicant consistent with
Section 17.60.10.C. Such site-specific information shall remain valid for five years from
the date approved by the Director, provided that topographical or hydrological changes
have not occurred on the site that could invalidate such information.
8. Development requests that are similar in scope and impact, as determined by the
Director. The Director shall include the justification for the classification decision in the
required notice to affected property owners.
C. Type III Procedure. The Planning Commission shall review all other public and private
development requests under a Type III procedure.
D. Establishment of Development Permit. A development permit shall be obtained before
construction or development begins, within any Area of Special Flood Hazard. Application
for a development permit may be made on forms provided by the Director and may include,
but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions and elevation of the area in question, existing or proposed structures, fill storage
17.60 - 7
Revised by Ordinance No. 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
of materials, drainage facilities and the location of the aforementioned. Specifically the
following information is required:
1. Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including basement
of all structures).
2. Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure
will be floodproofed.
3. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing
methods for any non-residential structure meet the floodproofing criteria detailed in
Section 17.60.70(F) below.
4. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result
of proposed development.
17.60.50 SPECIAL REPORTS
Where development is proposed on restricted development areas within the FSH overlay district
as defined in Section 17.60.20.A, the Director shall require submission of the following special
reports. These reports shall be in addition to other information required for specific types of
development, and shall be prepared by professionals in their respective fields.
The Director may require one of more of these reports where necessary to address potential
adverse impacts from development on buildable land within the FSH overlay district. The
Director may exempt Type II permit applications from one or more of these reports where
impacts are minimal and the exemption is consistent with the purpose of the FSH overlay zone as
stated in Section 17.60.00.
A. Hydrology and Soils Report. This report shall include information on the hydrological
conditions on the site, the effect of hydrologic conditions on the proposed development, the
proposed development’s impact on surface and groundwater flows to wetlands and streams,
and any hydrological or erosion hazards. This report shall also include soils characteristics of
the site, their suitability for development, carrying capacity, and erosion or slumping
characteristics that might present a hazard to life and property, or adversely affect the use or
stability of a public facility or utility. Finally, this report shall include information on the
nature, distribution and strength of existing soils; the adequacy of the site for development
purposes; and an assessment of grading procedures required to impose the minimum
disturbance to the natural state. A licensed professional engineer registered in Oregon shall
prepare the hydrology and soils report.
B. Grading Plan. The grading plan shall be specific to a proposed physical structure or use and
shall include information on terrain (two-foot intervals of property), drainage, direction of
drainage flow, location of proposed structures and existing structures which may be affected
by the proposed grading operations, water quality facilities, finished contours or elevations,
including all cut and fill slopes and proposed drainage channels. Project designs including
but not limited to locations of surface and subsurface devices, walls, dams, sediment basins,
storage reservoirs, and other protective devices shall form part of the submission. The
grading plan shall also include: 1) construction phase erosion control plan consistent with the
17.60 - 8
Revised by Ordinance No. 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
provisions of Chapter 15.44; and 2) schedule of operations. A licensed professional engineer
registered in Oregon shall prepare the grading and erosion control plan.
C. Native Vegetation Report. This report shall consist of a survey of existing vegetative cover,
whether it is native or introduced, and how it will be altered by the proposed development.
Measures for re-vegetation with native plant species will be clearly stated, as well as methods
for immediate and long-term stabilization of slopes and control of soil erosion. A landscape
architect, landscape designer, botanist or arborist with specific knowledge of native plant
species, planting and maintenance methods, survival rates, and their ability to control erosion
and sedimentation shall prepare the vegetation report. The applicant shall be responsible for
replacing any native plant species that do not survive the first two years after planting, and
for ensuring the survival of any replacement plants for an additional two years after their
replacement.
17.60.60 APPROVAL STANDARDS AND CONDITIONS
The approval authority may approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application based on
the provisions of this chapter. The approval authority may require conditions necessary to
comply with the intent and provisions of this chapter.
A. Approval Standards. The following approval standards apply to development proposed
within restricted development areas of the FSH overlay district.
1. Cumulative Impacts. Limited development within the FSH overlay district, including
planned vegetation removal, grading, construction, utilities, roads and the proposed use(s)
of the site will not measurably decrease water quantity or quality in affected streams or
wetlands below conditions existing at the time the development application was
submitted.
2. Impervious Surface Area. Impervious surface area within restricted development areas
shall be the minimum necessary to achieve development objectives consistent with the
purposes of this chapter.
3. Construction Materials and Methods. Construction materials and methods shall be
consistent with the recommendations of special reports, or third-party review of special
reports.
4. Cuts and Fills. Cuts and fills shall be the minimum necessary to ensure slope stability,
consistent with the recommendations of special reports, or third-party review of special
reports.
5. Minimize Wetland and Stream Impacts. Development on the site shall maintain the
quantity and quality of surface and groundwater flows to locally significant wetlands or
streams regulated by the FSH Overlay District.
6. Minimize Loss of Native Vegetation. Development on the site shall minimize the loss of
native vegetation. Where such vegetation is lost as a result of development within
restricted development areas, it shall be replaced on-site on a 2:1 basis according to type
and area. Two native trees of at least 1.5-inch caliper shall replace each tree removed.
Disturbed understory and groundcover shall be replaced by native understory and
groundcover species that effectively covers the disturbed area.
17.60 - 9
Revised by Ordinance No. 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
B. All development permits for areas partially or fully within the Area of Special Flood Hazard
shall be reviewed by the Director to determine that:
1. The permit requirements of Chapter 17.60 have been satisfied;
2. All other required state and federal permits have been obtained; and,
3. The site is reasonably safe from flooding.
C. Conditions. The required reports shall include design standards and recommendations
necessary for the engineer and landscape expert to certify that the standards of this chapter
can be met with appropriate mitigation measures. These measures, along with third party
reviewer and staff recommendations, shall be incorporated as conditions into the final
decision approving the proposed development.
D. Assurances and Penalties. Assurances and penalties for failure to comply with mitigation,
engineering, erosion and water quality plans required under this chapter shall be as stated in
Chapter 17.06.
17.60.70 FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
This section regulates development within the Area of Special Flood Hazard.
A. Residential and Non-residential Structures. No new residential structures (including
manufactured dwellings) with the exception of 17.60.40(B)(3), non-residential structures or
critical facilities shall be permitted in the Area of Special Flood Hazard.
B. Flood Storage Capacity. On-site flood storage capacity shall not decrease as a result of
development. The cumulative effects of any proposed development shall not reduce flood
storage capacity or raise base flood elevations on- or off-site.
C. Public Facilities and Private Roads. Generally, public facilities and private roads shall avoid
restricted development areas. However, where avoidance cannot be achieved consistent with
City-approved facilities master plans and sound engineering principles, the following
standards shall be met.
1. The facility shall be designed, located and constructed to minimize flood damage,
excavation and loss of native vegetation and to avoid raising flood levels. Facilities and
roads located within a floodway may be permitted only where a registered professional
engineer certifies based on hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance
with standard engineering practice that encroachments shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. Utilities necessary to serve
permitted development, or a single family home on a legally-approved lot-of-record, may
be permitted only where a registered professional engineer or architect certifies based on
hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with standard engineering
practice that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge, and that water quality will not be adversely
affected.
2. Water supply and sanitary sewer facilities shall be designed, located and constructed to
avoid infiltration of floodwaters into the system, and to avoid discharges from such
facilities to floodwaters, streams and wetlands.
17.60 - 10
Revised by Ordinance No. 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
3. On-site septic systems, waste disposal systems, and private wells shall be prohibited
within the FSH overlay district.
D. Structural Elevation Report. An application for any substantially improved structure,
nonresidential structure or manufactured dwelling within the area of special flood hazard
shall include the elevation, referenced to mean sea level, of the lowest floor, of the bottom of
the lowest horizontal structural member (for manufactured dwellings), or the elevation to
which the structure will be flood-proofed. The elevation of the lowest floor, and any
basement area and the elevation of the service facilities/mechanical equipment shall also be
provided. A professional engineer registered in Oregon shall prepare the structural elevation
certificate.
E. Existing Residential Structures (including new construction allowed per Section
17.60.40(B)(3)). Improvements and substantial improvements to an existing residential
structure (including manufactured dwellings) or replacement of a single family residence per
Section 17.60.20(B)(8) in a flood-prone area shall comply with the following:
1. Improvements shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy;
2. Materials used shall be resistant to flood damage;
3. Utilities shall be designed and/or located to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during flooding;
4. The lowest floor (including basement) shall be elevated at least one foot above the base
flood level;
5. Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor used solely for vehicle parking or building
access or storage in an area other than a basement shall be designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters and shall either be designed and certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria;
a. A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch
for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The
bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may
be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that
they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
F. Existing Non-Residential Structures. Improvements and substantial improvements to existing
non-residential structures within the floodplain shall comply with one of the following:
1. Elevate the lowest floor (including basement) at least one foot above the base flood level
and ensure that any area below the elevated lowest floor meets the requirements of
paragraph (E)(5) and (E)(5)(a)above;
2. Walls and utilities of structures below the base flood level shall be floodproofed so that
the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water
and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or
architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the
construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in
17.60 - 11
Revised by Ordinance No. 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable provisions of
NFIP Regulations per Volume 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
Upon completion of the structure, certification by a registered professional engineer or surveyor
that the elevation requirements of the lowest floor, including basement, of this section have been
satisfied shall be provided to the Director for verification; or certification by a registered
professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing requirements of this section are
satisfied, including the specific elevation in relation to mean sea level to which such structures
are floodproofed, shall be provided to the Director for verification.
G. Recreational Vehicles. Recreational Vehicles within the floodplain shall comply with one of
the following:
1. Be located on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and
2. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
3. Meet the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes dwellings and
permit requirements of NFIP Regulations.
H. Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements (including manufactured
dwellings) shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the
structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy.
I. Construction materials and methods.
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials
resistant to flood damage;
2. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods
and practices that minimize flood damage; and,
3. All new construction and substantial improvement shall be constructed with electrical,
heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities
that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
J. Appurtenant Structures (Detached Garages and Storage Structures).
Appurtenant structures used solely for parking of vehicles or storage may be constructed
such that the floor is below the Base Flood Elevation, provided the structure is designed and
constructed in accordance with the following requirements:
1. Use of the appurtenant structure must be limited to parking of vehicles or storage;
2. The portions of the appurtenant structure located below the Base Flood Elevation must be
built using flood resistant materials;
3. The appurtenant structure must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and
lateral movement;
4. Any machinery or equipment servicing the appurtenant structure must be elevated or
floodproofed to or above the Base Flood Elevation;
5. The appurtenant structure must meet the floodway requirements of Chapter 17.60 and
must not result in any increase in base flood elevations and this shall be demonstrated
17.60 - 12
Revised by Ordinance No. 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard
engineering practices;
6. The appurtenant structure must be designed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of
flood waters in accordance with Section 17.60.70(E)(5);
7. The appurtenant structure must not be used to store toxic material, oil or gasoline, or any
priority persistent pollutant identified by the Oregon Department of Environmental
Quality unless confined in a tank elevated at least one foot above Base Flood Elevation;
and
8. Shall not exceed the size requirements in the State of Oregon Residential and Structural
Specialty Codes and shall not exceed one story.
Detached garages, storage structures and other appurtenant structures not meeting the above
standards must be constructed in accordance with all applicable standards of Chapter 17.60.
17.60.80 NOTIFICATION TO OTHER ENTITIES AND RECORDKEEPING
A. Whenever a watercourse is to be altered or relocated, notification shall be sent to Clackamas
County and DLCD prior to such alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit
evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administrator through appropriate
notification means (i.e. submittal of a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR)), and assure that the
flood carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained.
B. Base Flood Elevations may increase or decrease resulting from physical changes affecting
flooding conditions. As soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the date such
information becomes available, the Director shall notify the Federal Insurance Administrator
of the changes by submitting technical or scientific data in accordance with Volume 44 Code
of Federal Regulations Section 65.3. Such a submission is necessary so that upon
confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and
floodplain management requirements will be based upon current data.
C. Notify the Federal Insurance Administrator in writing of acquisition by means of annexation,
incorporation or otherwise, of additional areas of jurisdiction.
D. Obtain and maintain the following for public inspection and make available as needed:
1. Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to the mean sea level) of the lowest
floor (including basements) of all new or substantially improved structures, and whether
or not the structure contains a basement.
2. For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
a. Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level), and
b. Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in Section 17.60.70(F).
3. Obtain and maintain certification for flood openings when certification is required under
Section 17.60.70(E)(5).
17.60.90 WATER QUALITY TREATMENT FACILITIES
17.60 - 13
Revised by Ordinance No. 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
Tickle Creek, the Sandy River and associated natural drainage ways are vital to Sandy's
recreationally based economy and to the quality of life of Sandy residents. Placement of water
quality facilities shall be limited as follows:
A. The water quality facility shall not be constructed in restricted development areas, except
where necessary to serve approved development within restricted development areas (e.g., a
road) and where no reasonable alternative exists in buildable areas of the site.
B. Where the approval authority determines that a more efficient and effective regional site
exists within the sub-basin, the water quality facility may be constructed off-site.
17.60.100 DENSITY TRANSFER PROVISIONS
Residential density transfer may be approved subject to the following:
A. Required Setback Areas. Density may be transferred from restricted development areas (i.e.,
steep slopes, protected water features and required setbacks) to buildable portions of the site.
B. Density Maximum. The maximum gross density for the buildable area of the site shall not
exceed 150% of the maximum density allowed by the underlying zoning district for that
buildable area.
C. Housing Types Not Permitted in Underlying Zoning District. Housing types not permitted in
the underlying zoning district may only be approved through the PD (planned development)
or SAP (specific area plan) process.
D. Transfer Area. Transfer of density may only occur within the same property and/or to
properties contiguous to the primary property. The terms “primary property” identify the
legal lot from which density is to be transferred to “secondary property(s)”. Further
development or land use action on the primary or secondary properties shall be reviewed
together in the same application.
17.60.110 ADJUSTMENTS
Variances to Chapter 17.60 provisions are not permitted. In contrast, adjustments to dimensional
standards of the underlying zoning district may be approved when necessary to further the intent
of this overlay district.
A. Adjustment Option. One or more adjustments to the setback, height or lot area standards of
the underlying zoning district may be approved to allow development consistent with the
intent of the FSH overlay district. The intent of the adjustment process is to reduce adverse
impacts on water quantity and quality, locally significant wetlands and perennial streams, and
on the potential for slope or flood hazards.
B. Adjustment Criteria. A special FSH adjustment may be requested when development is
proposed within the FSH overlay district. Adjustments are reviewed under the procedure type
17.60 - 14
Revised by Ordinance No. 2019-01 effective 1/07/19
applicable to the primary application. The applicant shall demonstrate that the following
criteria are fully satisfied:
1. The adjustment is the minimum necessary to allow a permitted use, while at the same
time minimizing disturbance to restricted development areas.
2. Explicit consideration has been given to maximizing vegetative cover, minimizing
excavation and minimizing impervious surface area on restricted development areas.
3. Design options have been considered to reduce the impacts of development, including but
not limited to multi-story construction, siting of residences close to streets to reduce
driveway distance, maximizing the use of native landscaping materials, minimizing
parking area and garage space.
4. In no case shall the impervious surface area (including the building footprint, parking
areas, accessory structures, swimming pools and patios) exceed 2,500 square feet of
restricted development area except for a private drive that reduces the disturbance to
restricted development areas.
5. Assurances are in place to guarantee that future development will not encroach further
onto restricted development areas under the same ownership.
6. The Planning Commission or Director may impose any reasonable condition necessary to
mitigate identified impacts resulting from development on otherwise restricted
development areas.
17.60.110 DISCLAIMER
The degree of hazard protection afforded by adherence to the provisions of this chapter is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes, and is based on the best available engineering and
scientific information available to the City. Larger floods than those anticipated by the chapter
may occur. Landslides may occur on rare occasions in areas outside of the delineated steep slope
and constrained slope boundaries. This chapter does not imply that areas outside FSH overlay
district or land use permitted within FSH boundaries will be free from any significant flooding,
mass movement, landslide damage, erosion or water pollution. This chapter shall not create
liability on the part of the City of Sandy for any damage that results from reliance on the
provisions of this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
17.62 - 1
CHAPTER 17.62 - CULTURAL AND HISTORIC RESOURCES
17.62.00 INTENT
This chapter is intended to provide procedures to protect and preserve structures, sites and
objects that represent a historical or cultural resource to the community and to provide
appropriate means for their protection and preservation. Any use, renovation, maintenance or
other alteration proposal shall be reviewed as required depending upon the required program for
preservation. The regulations are intended to:
A. Preserve, enhance and perpetuate landmarks and districts, which represent or reflect elements
of the city’s cultural, social, economic, political and architectural history.
B. Safeguard the city’s historic, aesthetic and cultural heritage as embodied and reflected in said
landmarks and districts.
C. Complement any National Register properties or historic districts.
D. Stabilize and improve property values in such districts.
E. Foster civic pride in the beauty and accomplishments of the past.
F. Protect and enhance the city’s attraction to tourists and visitors and the support and stimulus to
business and industry thereby provided.
G. Strengthen the economy of the city.
H. Promote the preservation of cultural and historic resources and landmarks for the education,
pleasure, energy conservation, housing and public welfare of the city’s current and future
citizens.
17.62.10 AREA OF APPLICATION
A Cultural or Historic Resource (CHR) designation may be applied to any site, structure or place
in any zone. The application of the CHR designation shall be considered on a case-by-case basis
based upon the criteria set forth in this chapter. Any use, renovation, maintenance, or other
alteration proposal shall be reviewed as required depending upon the requested program for
preservation.
The property owner may offer evidence on the effect of a CHR designation on the use of the
property including the economic impact, loss of revenue or valuation, costs of renovation and
maintenance, ease of marketing, and so on. The Planning Commission and City Council must
weigh any individual inconvenience against the importance to the community of maintaining the
resource in whole or in part.
17.62.20 DESIGNATION PROCEDURE
A. The property owner or the City may request designation as a CHR for any specific site,
structure or object. That person shall be considered the applicant and shall be required to pay
all the fees, including costs of any studies or special reports associated with the application.
17.62 - 2
Applications shall be considered a zone change and shall be reviewed as a Type IV
procedure. In addition to any other notice required, the property owner shall be notified by
certified mail of any pending action when the property owner is not the applicant.
B. No building, alteration, demolition or removal permits for any structure or site shall be issued
while an application or any appeal is pending.
17.62.30 CRITERIA FOR DESIGNATION
The Planning Commission and City Council shall use the following criteria and standards to
evaluate whether a particular object, site, structure or place merits a CHR designation. In order to
designate a CHR, the Planning Commission and City Council must find, through an Economic,
Social, Environmental and Energy (ESEE) analysis, that the benefits of designating the proposed
landmark outweigh the benefits of continuing the conflicting use or uses without the designation.
A. Association with historic or famous events; or
B. Unique architectural design or mode of construction because of:
1. Representative character of a period or a particular architectural style, building type or
method of construction.
2. Extraordinary or unusual architectural merit by reason of design, detail, use of materials
or craftsmanship or
3. Identification as the work of an architect, designer or master builder whose individual
work has influenced development in the nation, state or community; or
4. Significance as the only remaining, or one of the few remaining, resources of a particular
style, building type, design, material or method of construction.
5. Age of resource, or
C. Inclusion in an official Register of Historic Places; or
D. Relationship to the broad cultural history of the nation, state or community; or
E. Identification with a person or persons who have significantly contributed to the history of
the city; or
F. Identification as a unique object representing an aesthetic or educational feature of the
community.
G. Archaeological site designation.
H. Environmental Significance.
1. Significance as a visual landmark.
2. Integrity of surrounding land-use of the historic period represented.
3. Significance because the resource contributes to the continuity of historical character of the
street, neighborhood and/or community.
17.62.40 PROGRAM TO PRESERVE A SPECIFIC RESOURCE
17.62 - 3
The Planning Commission and City Council shall determine the most appropriate means to
preserve and protect the feature or features of the resource determined to be significant. The
program may include any of the following or any other program determined to be appropriate:
A. Site or Structure Preservation. The City Council, upon a recommendation from Planning
Commission, may determine that site or structure is so important as a community resource
that it should be preserved as nearly as possible in its original condition.
1. Permitted Uses
a) In any site or structure designated CHR, all uses permitted outright in the underlying
district shall be permitted.
b) In addition, Planning Commission may authorize any use as a conditional use which
can be shown to contribute to the preservation or reuse of the site or structure, subject
to the criteria of Chapter 17.68 Conditional use.
c) Any proposal for construction, alteration or renovation for any site or structure
designated CHR shall be referred to the Planning Commission and reviewed using the
standards of the Secretary of the Interior of Rehabilitation of Historic Structures as a
guideline. The State Historic Preservation Office shall also be consulted.
B. Facade Easements. The City may accept facade easements for all or part of a structure as a
method for retaining the original appearance of the structure, which has been determined to
the architecturally significant or other methods, deemed appropriate by the Planning
Commission.
C. Identification. Require that a sign be placed by the property owner or with the property
owner’s permission to identify the site or structure as a CHR. The sign shall state the name of
the resource and briefly describe its significance. The sign shall be subject to the
requirements of SMC 15.32.
D. Archival Record. The City Council may order the preparation of a file to include, where
appropriate, photographs, measured drawings, site or structure plans, maps, narrative and any
other pertinent documentation. The file shall be kept in the archives of the City as a
permanent record.
17.62.50 DESIGNATION OF A HISTORIC DISTRICT
In order to designate a geographic area as a historic district, the Planning Commission and City
Council shall find that:
A. The area includes a significant concentration or linkage of sites, building, structures or objects,
which are unified visually by style, plan or physical development and distinguished by
association with historic periods, events, people or cultural trends.
B. The area is of sufficient size and scope, and the component parts are cohesive enough to
adequately represent, demonstrate or commemorate the significant historic period, event,
people or trend.
17.62.60 EXTERIOR ALTERATIONS
The Director may approve any application for building permit for interior remodeling or ordinary
maintenance and repair of any exterior architectural feature that does not involve a change in
17.62 - 4
design, material or appearance. If the proposed work involves a change in design, material or
appearance or is beyond the normal scope of maintenance and repair, the Director may refer the
application to the Planning Commission for additional review.
Alterations, maintenance and repair, which may be approved without a Type III or Type IV
hearing include, but are not limited to:
A. Replacement of gutters and downspouts, or the addition of gutters and downspouts, using
materials that match those that were typically used on similar style buildings.
B. Repairing or providing a new foundation that does not result in raising or lowering the building
elevation unless the foundation materials and/or craftsmanship contribute to the historical and
architectural significance of the landmark.
C. Replacement of siding, when required due to deterioration of material, with material that is in
character with the original siding.
D. Repair and/or replacement of roof materials with the same kind of roof material existing, or
with materials which are in character with those of the original roof.
E. Application of storm windows made with wood, bronze or flat finished anodized aluminum, or
baked enamel frames, which complement or match the color detail and proportion of the
building.
F. Replacement of existing sashes with new sashes, when using material, which is consistent with
the original historic material and appearance.
G. Painting and related preparation.
H. Site maintenance such as pruning landscaping maintenance, brush clearing and removal of
debris.
17.62.70 EMERGENCY REPAIRS
The Director may authorize emergency repairs or any construction, reconstruction, demolition or
removal of any architectural features identified by the Building Official as necessary to protect
the public from unsafe or dangerous conditions.
17.62.80 PROCEDURE FOR DEMOLITION
A. If an application for a permit to demolish a designated landmark or any building within a
designated historic district is received the Building Official shall transmit a copy of the
application within 7 days to the Director.
B. Prior to the issuance of permit for demolition the Director shall first determine that the
applicant has met the following conditions:
1. Applicant has advertised said building for sale and/or removal from the site with an
advertisement running twice over two consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general
circulation.
2. Applicant has not refused the highest bona fide offer.
17.62 - 5
3. Applicant has posted a sign indicating that the property is for sale pending demolition
through a continuous period of ninety days from the date of application. The sign must be
posted in a prominent and conspicuous place within 10 feet of a public street abutting the
premises.
C. If after ninety days no party is interested in purchasing or moving the property, the Director
shall refer any request for demolition of a site or structure designated CHR to the Planning
Commission as a Type IV quasi-judicial procedure.
D. The Planning Commission shall make a recommendation based upon the criteria in this
chapter.
E. The decision of the Planning Commission shall be forwarded to the City Council for action.
The City Council shall hold a public hearing to consider the record from the Planning
Commission meeting and any additional evidence not available at the Planning Commission
hearing at a public hearing.
F. The City Council shall make written findings to support any decision. If City Council
determines that the public need is best served by granting a demolition permit, it may require
that:
1) A sign must be placed by the property owner or with the property owner’s permission to
identify the site or structure as a CHR. The sign shall state the name of the resource and
briefly describe its significance. The sign shall be subject to the requirements of SMC
15.32.
2) The City Council may order the preparation of a file to include, where appropriate,
photographs, measured drawings, site or structure plans, maps, narrative and any other
pertinent documentation. The file shall be kept in the archives of the City as a permanent
record.
3) Preservation of certain features for reuse.
G. When a request for demolition is approved, an ordinance removing the CHR designation
shall be passed, and the CHR designation removed and so noted in the Comprehensive Plan
and inventory.
17.62.90 CRITERIA FOR DEMOLITION OR REMOVAL OF CHR DESIGNATION
The importance to the public of retaining the object, site or structure shall be weighed against the
hardship to the owner and any potential hazard to the public if the site or structure is to be
retained.
The demolition of a historic building is an irrecoverable loss to the community, therefore special
criteria are established and shall be considered before issuing a permit for demolition.
The Planning Commission and City Council shall make findings based on, but not limited to, the
following:
A. The historic or architectural significance of the landmark.
17.62 - 6
B. The physical condition of the building.
C. The economic use of the building and economic reuse of the property.
D. The proposed new use.
E. The economic, social, environmental and energy consequences of allowing the demolition as
opposed to preserving the historic building.
F. If within a historic district, its contribution to the district and the subsequent integrity of the
district once the structure is demolished.
17.64 - 1
Revised by Ordinance 2005-02 effective 2/22/05
CHAPTER 17.64 - PLANNED DEVELOPMENT
17.64.00 INTENT
The Planned Development regulations are intended to:
A. Refine and implement village development patterns designated “V” on the Comprehensive
Plan Map.
B. Allow the relocation of zones within designated villages, provided that the overall intent of
the village designation is maintained.
C. Allow a mixture of densities between base zones within the planned development.
D. Promote flexibility in site planning and architectural design, placement, and clustering of
structures.
E. Provide for efficient use of public facilities and energy.
F. Encourage the conservation of natural features.
G. Provide usable and suitable recreation facilities and public or common facilities.
H. Allow coordination of architectural styles, building forms and relationships.
I. Promote attractive and functional business environments in non-residential zones, which are
compatibility with surrounding development.
17.64.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. Combined Review. The procedures of this chapter require review of both a Conceptual
Development Plan and a Detailed Development Plan. Requests may be made sequentially or
for a combined review. In the event of a combined review, the Planning Commission shall
forward a recommendation regarding the plans to the City Council, and the City Council
shall make a final decision approving, approving with conditions or denying the application.
B. Development Permit Issuance. Development permits are only issued following approval of a
Detailed Development Plan.
C. Planned Development Required if relocating Village zones. Areas designated “V” on the
Comprehensive Plan Map require a planned development application if any zone relocation
is requested. Development consistent with the “V” base zoning may proceed under the base
zone provisions, subject to design review, without application for a planned development.
17.64.20 AREAS OF APPLICATION
Planned developments are allowed in all zones.
17.64.30 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
A. Variation from Development Code Standards Generally. The development standards of the
base zone, overlay zone or planned development overlay apply unless they are superseded by
the standards of this chapter, or are modified during a Planned Development review. The
Planned Development and Specific Area Plan review processes allow modification of
development code standards that are dimensional and/or quantitative, however a base zone’s
minimum density is not eligible for modification under any circumstances, including a
modification under Chapter 17.66.
17.64 - 2
Revised by Ordinance 2005-02 effective 2/22/05
B. Minimum Site Area. A planned development may be established on any parcel of land, or on
more than one parcel of land if those parcels are abutting.
17.64.40 DENSITY CALCULATION
The maximum number of allowable dwelling units shall be the sum of densities allowed by the
underlying zone(s) unless an increase is authorized as otherwise allowed in this chapter.
A. Residential Zones. The calculation is based on a determination of gross site area and the
acreage of any restricted development areas (as defined by Chapter 17.60). A specific
determination of density shall be made pursuant to Chapter 17.30. When a PD is located in
more than one “R” zone, the total allowed number of units is the sum of the number of units
allowed by each zone. The dwelling units may be placed without regard to zone boundaries.
B. Commercial and Industrial Zones. The allowed density is only restricted by the provisions of
the base zone with respect to parking, setbacks, landscaping, etc., or as modified during
Detailed Development Plan review.
C. Increase in Density. An increase in density of up to 25% of the number of dwelling units may
be permitted upon a finding that the Planned Development is outstanding in planned land use
and design, and provides exceptional advantages in living conditions and amenities not found
in similar developments constructed under regular zoning.
D. Density Transfer. A transfer of density may be allowed by the Planning Commission when
consistent with the review criteria of Chapter 17.64.100 C. Density may be transferred across
zone district boundaries.
E. Reconfiguration of Village Zones. Reconfiguration of the base zones within a Village may be
modified through the Conceptual Development review process, provided that no more than a
20% change in acreage results between existing and proposed residential and non-residential
zones. The intent of this provision is to allow flexibility and potential for improved Village
design through the planned development process.
17.64.50 OPEN SPACE AND PARKLAND
All Planned Developments shall provide a minimum percentage of the total area in open space as
specified below. In addition to required open space, all Planned Developments that include
residential housing shall also provide a required parkland dedication as specified in Chapter
17.86.
A. Residential Zones. A minimum of 25% of the total site area.
B. Commercial or Industrial Zones. A minimum of 15% of the total tract area.
C. Payment in Lieu of Dedication. At the city’s discretion only, the city may accept payment of
a fee in lieu of land dedication. The amount of the fee in lieu of land dedication (in dollars
per acre) shall set by City Council Resolution or determined by a current land appraisal. The
City may also allow open space land donation requirements to be fulfilled on another parcel.
D. The following factors shall be used in the choice of whether to accept land or cash in lieu:
a. The topography, geology, access to, parcel size, and location of land to be dedicated;
b. Potential adverse/beneficial effects on environmentally sensitive areas;
17.64 - 3
Revised by Ordinance 2005-02 effective 2/22/05
c. Compatibility with the Parks Master Plan, Public Facilities element of the
Comprehensive Plan, and the City of Sandy Capital Improvements Program in effect at
the time of dedication;
d. Availability of previously acquired property; and
e. The feasibility of dedication.
E. The types of open space that may be provided are as follows:
a. Natural Areas: areas of undisturbed vegetation, steep slopes, stream corridors, wetlands,
wildlife habitat areas or areas replanted with native vegetation after construction.
b. Greenways: linear green belts linking residential areas with other open space areas.
These greenways may contain bicycle paths or footpaths. Connecting greenways
between residences and recreational areas are encouraged.
F. Dedication Procedures. Open space as part of Planned Development application shall be
dedicated according to the requirements of Section 17.86.50.
17.64.60 ALLOWED USES
A. Residential Districts:
1. Uses permitted in the underlying district
2. Housing types may include, but are not limited to, single family dwellings, duplexes, row
houses, clustered dwelling units, multiple family dwellings, or manufactured dwellings.
3. Related commercial uses as part of the development
4. Related community service uses as part of the development
5. Accessory buildings and uses
B. Commercial Districts:
1. Uses permitted in the underlying district
2. Community service uses
3. Other uses approved as part of the Detailed Development Plan
4. Accessory buildings and uses
17.64.70 OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
When a Planned Development project has been approved, the official Zoning Map shall be
amended by ordinance to denote the new “PD” Planned Development overlay designation. Such
an amendment is a ministerial act, and Chapter 17.26, Zoning District Amendments, shall not
apply when the map is amended to denote a PD overlay.
17.64.80 CONCEPTUAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN PROCEDURE
A. The Planning Commission shall review the Conceptual Development Plan at a public hearing
and forward a recommendation for approval, approval with modifications, or denial of the
application to the City Council for consideration.
B. The City Council shall review the recommendation at a public hearing and take action based
on the Planning Commission recommendation. The City Council may approve, approve with
modifications, or deny the application. Approval of the Conceptual Development Plan shall
be limited to the tentative acceptability of the land uses proposed and their interrelationships
and shall not be construed to endorse precise locations of uses nor engineering feasibility.
17.64 - 4
Revised by Ordinance 2005-02 effective 2/22/05
C. If an affirmative decision is made, the City Council shall adopt findings that specify how the
application has or has not complied with this chapter’s standards, as well as any other
relevant standards, and approve the request by an ordinance that amends the Zoning Map.
D. Within 12 months of approval of the Conceptual Development Plan, the applicant shall file a
Detailed Development Plan. The Detailed Development Plan shall incorporate any
modification or condition required by approval of the Conceptual Development Plan.
17.64.90 CONCEPTUAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN APPLICATION
A Conceptual Development Plan is intended as a general guide to land use, transportation and
utility placement within a planned development. A Conceptual Development Plan application
requires significantly less detail than a Detailed Development Plan.
A. Application Requirements. An application for Conceptual Development Plan review shall be
made on forms provided by the Director. The person filing the application must be the owner
or a person having an interest in the land to be included in the Planned Development. If the
Planned Development is to include land in more than one ownership, the application must be
submitted jointly by all of the owners or persons having an interest in each of the separately
owned properties to be included.
The application shall be accompanied by the following:
• 20 copies of the required narrative.
• 20 sets of full-scaled black line drawings of the conceptual development plan graphic(s)
drawn at a typical engineering scale.
• One set of plans reduced to 8 ½” by 11” sheets of paper. Graphics and related
names/numbers must be legible on this sheet size.
• List and mailing labels of all affected property owners within 300 feet.
• List of all proposed deviations from City development standards.
B. Additional Submittals. A Conceptual Development Plan shall include the following
information where applicable:
1. Existing land use map (typically a topographic map that extends at least 300 feet beyond
the site). The map shall include building footprints and make a distinction between
single-family, multi-family, commercial and industrial uses, as well as other significant
features such as roads, drainage ways, parks and schools.
2. Site plan(s) and other graphics drawn to scale. The site plan(s) shall contain the
following:
a) Title sheet, date, north arrow, and legend
b) Existing site conditions including contours at 10-foot intervals, watercourses, flood
plains and natural features.
c) Boundary of the proposed Planned Development and any interior boundaries related
to proposed development phases or land divisions.
d) General location of existing and proposed land uses, including residential densities
and non-residential building types. An indication of approximate building envelopes
may be required where necessary to evaluate building relationships.
e) General location and size of areas to be conveyed, dedicated, or reserved as common
open spaces, public parks, recreational areas, school sites, and similar public and
semi-public uses.
17.64 - 5
Revised by Ordinance 2005-02 effective 2/22/05
f) Existing and proposed general circulation system including collector and arterial
streets and major points of access to public rights-of-way and adjacent property.
Notations of proposed ownership (public or private) should be included where
appropriate.
g) General pedestrian and bicycle circulation system, including its interrelationship with
the motor vehicular system and indicating proposed treatments at existing or potential
points of conflict.
h) Existing and proposed utility systems including sanitary sewer, water, storm sewer,
and drainage ways.
i) Sufficient information on land areas within at least 300 ft. of the subject property to
indicate their relationships with the proposed development including land uses, lot
lines, circulation systems (including potential for connectivity of streets and
pedestrian ways), public facilities, and unique natural features of the landscape.
The Director may waive any of the above requirements or require additional information
when deemed necessary to properly evaluate the proposed Planned Development.
C. Narrative Requirements for a Conceptual Development Plan. A written statement shall be
provided, including the following information:
1. Statement of objectives to be achieved by the Planned Development. This statement
should indicate:
• A description of the character of the proposed development.
• The rationale behind the design assumptions and choices made.
• The rationale behind any design change to an existing Village and reasons why the
proposal is superior.
• A discussion indicating how the application meets the review criteria in 17.64.100
below.
2. Statement of intentions with regard to future sale or lease of all or portions of the Planned
Development.
3. Quantitative data for the following, where appropriate:
• Total number and type of dwelling units
• Parcel size(s)
• Proposed lot coverage of buildings and structures where known
• Gross densities per acre
• Total amount of open space (lands not designated for buildings or vehicle parking and
maneuvering areas)
• Total amount of nonresidential construction
4. General statement of intentions concerning timing, responsibilities, and assurances for all
public and non-public improvements, such as parks, open space improvements,
pedestrian connections, irrigation, private roads and drives, landscape, and maintenance.
5. Description of how the Planned Development contributes to the completion and
connectivity of the pedestrian and vehicular circulation system.
17.64.100 CONCEPTUAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW PROCESS
A. Acceptance of Application. The Director shall review the application in accordance with
Chapter 17.18 – Processing Applications.
17.64 - 6
Revised by Ordinance 2005-02 effective 2/22/05
B. Staff Evaluation. The Director shall prepare a report that evaluates whether the Conceptual
Development Plan complies with the review criteria below. The report shall also include a
recommendation for approval or denial and, if needed, a list of conditions for the Planning
Commission to consider if an approval is granted.
C. Review Criteria for Conceptual Development Plan. Requests for approval of a Conceptual
Development Plan shall be reviewed to:
1. Assure consistency with the Intent of this chapter;
2. Assure compliance with the General Provisions, Development Standards and Application
provisions of this chapter; and
3. When located in a Village, assure consistency with the appropriate Comprehensive Plan
policies for Village designations.
D. Major Modification(s) of a Conceptual Development Plan. A major modification to an
approved Conceptual Development Plan must be processed as a new CDP application. Major
Modifications include:
1. Changes in proposed land use
2. More than a 5 percent increase in dwelling unit density
3. Substantial change in building elevation or materials
4. Substantial changes in type and location of access ways and parking areas where off-site
traffic would be negatively affected
5. Increase in the floor area proposed for nonresidential use by more than 10 percent from
what was previously specified
6. Reduction of more than 10 percent of the area reserved for common open space and/or
usable open space from what was previously specified
7. Increase in the total ground area proposed to be covered by structures by more than 5
percent from what was previously specified
8. Reduction of specific setback requirements by more than 20 percent from what was
previously specified
9. Reduction of project amenities provided, such as recreational facilities, screening, and/or
landscaping provisions by more than 10 percent from what was previously specified
10. Any other modification to specific requirements established at the time of Conceptual
Development Plan approval
E. Minor Modification(s) of a Conceptual Development Plan. Minor Modifications may include
any of the changes listed in Section 17.64.100 D above, provided that the change is
quantified below the thresholds for a Major Modification. A Minor Modification shall be
processed as a Type II application, consistent with the standards of Chapter 17.12.
F. Application for Major Modification(s) of a Conceptual Development Plan
1. An applicant may petition for review of an approved PD for purposes of modification(s),
stating reasons for the change.
2. Where the Director determines that the proposed change is a Major Modification from
one or more of the review criteria listed above in 17.64.100 D, a hearing shall be
scheduled before the Planning Commission in accordance with Chapter 17.20-Public
Hearings.
3. In reviewing the proposed modification, the Planning Commission shall follow the
procedures herein required for Conceptual Development Plan submittal and review. The
17.64 - 7
Revised by Ordinance 2005-02 effective 2/22/05
Commission shall consider the review criteria in 17.64.100 C to determine whether to
authorize a Major Modification.
4. Upon finding that the petition is reasonable and valid, the Planning Commission may
consider the redesign in whole or in part of any Conceptual Development Plan and
forward a recommendation for approval, approval with modifications, or denial of the
application to the City Council for consideration.
5. The City Council shall consider the petition for modification at a public hearing and take
action based on the Planning Commission recommendation. The City Council may
approve, approve with modifications, or deny the application.
6. If an affirmative decision is made, the City Council shall approve the modification by an
ordinance.
7. Within 12 months of approval of a Major Modification, the applicant shall file a Detailed
Development Plan. The Detailed Development Plan shall incorporate any modification or
condition required by approval of the Conceptual Development Plan as modified.
17.64.110 DETAILED DEVELOPMENT PLAN PROCEDURE
A. If the Detailed Development Plan will involve the subdivision of land, the applicant shall
prepare and submit a tentative subdivision plat along with the Detailed Development Plan to
be considered at the same time.
B. The Planning Commission shall review the Detailed Development Plan at a public hearing
and may approve, approve with modifications or deny the application.
17.64.120 DETAILED DEVELOPMENT PLAN APPLICATION
A Detailed Development Plan is intended as a master plan for land use, transportation and utility
placement within a planned development. A Detailed Development Plan application follows an
approved Conceptual Development Plan or both applications may be submitted simultaneously.
Where land divisions are proposed, the Detailed Development Plan shall be combined with a
Tentative Subdivision Plat application according the requirements of Chapter 17.100. An
application for a Detailed Development Plan shall be reviewed in accordance with the following
procedures:
A. Application Requirements. An application filed for a Detailed Development Plan shall follow
the requirements specified for a Conceptual Development Plan as listed above and shall also
include the following:
1. Graphic Requirements
a) Topographic contours at two-foot intervals for slopes under 15 percent and at fivefoot
intervals for slopes at or greater than 15 percent. A grading plan is required to
show how runoff or surface water from the subject property will be managed,
including ultimate disposal of surface waters.
b) Location and floor area of existing and proposed structures and other improvements,
including maximum heights, building types, gross density per acre (for residential
developments).
c) Detailed utility plan indicating how sanitary sewer, water, storm sewer, and drainage
systems will function.
d) Location of existing utilities, including existing fire hydrants, overhead utility lines in
the abutting right of way, easements and walkways.
17.64 - 8
Revised by Ordinance 2005-02 effective 2/22/05
e) Typical elevations of buildings and structures (which may be submitted on additional
sheets) sufficient to indicate the architectural intent and character of the proposed
development.
f) Landscape plan drawn to scale showing location of existing trees and vegetation
proposed to be removed from or to be retained on the site, location and design of
proposed landscaped areas, quantities, varieties, quantities, and sizes of trees and
plant materials to be planted, other landscape features including walks and fences,
and irrigation systems required to maintain plant materials.
g) Circulation plan showing street, driveway, parking area, service area, loading area,
pedestrian way and bikeway improvements, their dimensions and connectivity to
surrounding parcels, existing and proposed streets.
h) Location and dimensions of all areas to be conveyed, dedicated, or reserved as
common open spaces, public parks, recreational areas, school sites, and similar public
and semipublic areas.
i) Exterior lighting plan indicating the location, size, height, typical design, material,
and method and direction of illumination.
j) Concurrent Design Review graphic elements
B. Narrative Requirements for a Detailed Development Plan. In addition to the narrative
requirements specified for a Conceptual Development Plan, the Detailed Development Plan
narrative shall also include:
1. Proposals for setbacks or building envelopes, lot areas where land division is anticipated,
and number of parking spaces to be provided (in ratio to gross floor area or number of
units).
2. Detailed statement outlining timing, responsibilities, and assurances for all public and
non-public improvements such as irrigation, private roads and drives, landscape, and
maintenance.
3. Statement addressing compatibility of proposed development to adjacent land uses
relating to such items as architectural character, building type, and height of proposed
structures.
4. Statement describing project phasing, if proposed. Phases shall be:
a) Substantially and functionally self-contained and self-sustaining with regard to
access, parking, utilities, open spaces, and similar physical features; capable of
substantial occupancy, operation, and maintenance upon completion of construction
and development.
b) Properly related to other services of the community as a whole and to those facilities
and services yet to be provided.
c) Provided with such temporary or permanent transitional features, buffers, or
protective areas as may be required to prevent damage or detriment to any completed
phases and to adjoining properties not in the Planned Development.
5. Statement of “substantial compliance” with the Conceptual Development Plan.
C. Minor Modification(s) of a Detailed Development Plan. Minor Modifications to a Detailed
Development Plan may include any of the changes listed in Section 17.64.100(D), provided
the change is quantified below the thresholds for a Major Modification. A Minor
Modification shall be processed as a Type II application, consistent with the standards of
Chapter 17.12.
17.64 - 9
Revised by Ordinance 2005-02 effective 2/22/05
D. Major Modification(s) of a Detailed Development Plan. Major Modifications to a Detailed
Development Plan shall not be permitted. A new application must be submitted in order to
make Major Modifications to a Detailed Development Plan.
17.64.130 APPEALS
A. The decision of the Director or Planning Commission may be appealed in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter 17.28-Appeals.
B. Where an appeal has been filed for a Detailed Development Plan subsequent to Conceptual
Development Plan approval, an appeal shall only be heard by the City Council for those
items specifically addressed by the Planning Commission for the Detailed Development Plan.
17.64.140 EFFECTIVE PERIOD OF APPROVAL
A. Conceptual Development Plan. Approval of a Conceptual Development Plan shall be valid
for a 12-month period from the date of approval, with possible six-month extension(s) when
requested in writing and granted by the Director for good cause.
B. Detailed Development Plan.
1. Approval of a Detailed Development Plan shall be valid for a 24-month period from the
date of approval, with possible six-month extension(s) when requested in writing and
granted by the Director for good cause.
2. When a Detailed Development Plan is submitted and approved for a single phase, 24-
month periods are allowed for submission of each subsequent phase. If the applicant has
not begun construction within this time frame, all approvals shall expire.
3. When shown that conditions have not changed, the Commission may extend the approval
for two additional years at its discretion and without a public hearing.
4. Total elapsed time for submission of Detailed Plans for all phases of a Planned
Development shall not exceed ten years from the date of Conceptual Development Plan
approval (or the initial Detailed Development Plan approval in the case of a concurrent
application), including extensions.
17.64.150 NONCOMPLIANCE WITH THE APPROVED DETAILED DEVELOPMENT
PLAN
If the Director determines that the development substantially differs from the approved plans, the
Director shall notify the developer in writing. Thereafter, the city may issue orders to the
developer within the range of discretion available, and upon continued noncompliance may
withhold building permits for further construction or revoke those permits previously issued until
compliance is achieved, or pursue any other remedies available to the City.
17.64.160 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT NULLIFICATION
If no development has occurred for an approved Planned development, and development plan
approval has expired under 17.64.140, an applicant may seek to have the PD zoning overlay
designation removed from the subject property.
17.64 - 10
Revised by Ordinance 2005-02 effective 2/22/05
A. Property owner(s) or their authorized agents may apply to nullify an established Planned
Development designation by filing an application on a form provided by the Director.
1. The City Council shall conduct a public hearing and provide notice of the hearing and the
decision in accordance with Chapter 17.20-Public Hearings.
B. The burden of proof is placed on the applicant to justify nullification of the Planned
Development designation, giving substantial evidence that:
1. Developing the property under conventional district standards and regulations will not
create nonconforming development.
2. Special circumstances such as building relationships, drainage ways, public
improvements, topography, and so forth that were to be responded to specifically through
the Planned Development process can be dealt with as effectively with conventional
standards.
3. Conditions attached to the approved Planned Development by the hearing authority can
be met or are no longer necessary.
4. No prior commitments involving the property were made that would adversely affect the
subject property, other related properties, or the city, as in the case of density transfer,
public improvements and activities, building relationships, recreational facilities, open
space, or phasing of development.
C. If the Planned Development is nullified, the PD overlay designation shall be removed from
the Official Zoning District Map after the appeal period has expired. The removal of the
designation from the map shall be a ministerial act and shall not implicate Chapter 17.26,
Zoning District Amendments.
17.66 - 1
CHAPTER 17.66 - ADJUSTMENTS & VARIANCES
17.66.00 INTENT
Adjustments and variances are procedures to vary development standards normally applied to a
particular district.
17.66.10 ADJUSTMENTS
Adjustments are a Type I or Type II procedure that provide a means to vary the development
standards normally applied in a particular district. This option exists for those circumstances
where uniform; unvarying rules would prevent a more efficient use of a lot. A typical example is
permitting a structure to be located closer to a property boundary than normally allowed by the
zoning district regulations.
Adjustments apply only to individual lots and therefore cannot be used by applicants seeking to
vary development standards for lots to be created through a subdivision process. Modifications
to land divisions standards should be sought through the Type II or Type III Variance process or
where appropriate, the Planned Development process.
An adjustment is intended to:
A. Allow more efficient use of land.
B. Provide flexibility and innovation in site planning and architectural design on individual lots.
C. Permit building location and/or construction techniques that conserve energy.
D. Minimize procedural delays and ensure due process in the review of unique development
situations.
E. Provide relief from the strict adherence of land division development standards where sitespecific
physical or functional land development conditions warrant a variance.
17.66.20 TYPE I ADJUSTMENTS
In issuing a permit the Director may grant or deny an adjustment under the Type I procedure if
the request involves only the expansion or reduction by not more than 10% of one or more
quantifiable provisions of this code.
17.66.30 TYPE II ADJUSTMENTS
Except in the case of a nonconforming development or use, the Director may grant or deny an
adjustment under the Type II procedure if the request involves only the expansion or reduction
by not more than 20% of one or more quantifiable provisions of this code.
17.66.40 TYPE I AND II ADJUSTMENT CRITERIA
A. The proposed development will not be contrary to the purposes of this chapter, policies of the
Comprehensive Plan, and any other applicable policies and standards adopted by the City;
17.66 - 2
B. The proposed development will not substantially reduce the amount of privacy enjoyed by
users of nearby structures when compared to the same development located as specified by
this Code;
C. The proposed development will not adversely affect existing physical systems and natural
systems, such as traffic, drainage, dramatic land forms, or parks; and
D. Architectural features of the proposed development will be compatible to the design
character of existing structures on adjoining properties and on the proposed development site.
17.66.50 ADJUSTMENT LIMITATIONS
Adjustments may not be utilized to:
A. Reduce width of accessways required for flag lots created through the land partition or minor
replat process
B. Reduce the area reserved for private outdoor space and/or usable open space by more than
10%
C. Reduce project site amenities such as screening and/or landscaping provisions by more than
10%
D. Increase fence height inside clear-vision areas
17.66.60 VARIANCES
Variances are a means of requesting a complete waiver or major adjustment to certain
development standards. They may be requested for a specific lot or as part of a land division
application. The Type II variance process is generally reserved for major adjustments on
individual lots, while variances to development standards proposed as part of a land division are
processed as a Type III application (requiring a public hearing).
17.66.70 TYPE II AND TYPE III VARIANCE CRITERIA
The authority to grant a variance does not include authority to approve a development that is
designed, arranged or intended for a use not otherwise approvable in the location. The criteria are
as follows:
A. The circumstances necessitating the variance are not of the applicant’s making.
B. The hardship does not arise from a violation of this Code, and approval will not allow
otherwise prohibited uses in the district in which the property is located.
C. Granting of the variance will not adversely affect implementation of the Comprehensive
Plan.
D. The variance authorized will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or materially
injurious to other property in the vicinity.
17.66 - 3
E. The development will be the same as development permitted under this code and City
standards to the greatest extent that is reasonably possible while permitting some economic
use of the land.
F. Special circumstances or conditions apply to the property which do not apply generally to
other properties in the same zone or vicinity, and result from lot size or shape (legally
existing prior to the effective date of this Code), topography, or other circumstances over
which the applicant has no control.
17.66.80 TYPE III SPECIAL VARIANCES
The Planning Commission may grant a special variance waiving a specified provision for under
the Type III procedure if it finds that the provision is unreasonable and unwarranted due to the
specific nature of the proposed development. In submitting an application for a Type III Special
Variance, the proposed development explanation shall provide facts and evidence sufficient to
enable the Planning Commission to make findings in compliance with the criteria set forth in this
section while avoiding conflict with the Comprehensive Plan.
One of the following sets of criteria shall be applied as appropriate.
A. The unique nature of the proposed development is such that:
1. The intent and purpose of the regulations and of the provisions to be waived will not be
violated; and
2. Authorization of the special variance will not be materially detrimental to the public
welfare and will not be injurious to other property in the area when compared with the
effects of development otherwise permitted.
B. The variance approved is the minimum variance needed to permit practical compliance with
a requirement of another law or regulation.
C. When restoration or replacement of a nonconforming development is necessary due to
damage by fire, flood, or other casual or natural disaster, the restoration or replacement will
decrease the degree of the previous noncompliance to the greatest extent possible.
17.66.90 APPLICATION
An application for an adjustment or variance shall be made on forms provided by the Director
and include the following, where applicable:
A. Description of the land (address, lot, block, tract, or similar description) on which the
proposed development is to take place.
B. Narrative addressing how the application meets the specified review criteria.
C. Site plan no larger than 11 in. by 17 in. (include a reduced copy if drawn larger) suitable for
photocopy reproduction. The site plan shall be drawn to scale and show:
1. Relationship of the site to adjoining properties, streets, alleys, structures, public utilities,
and drainageways;
2. Lot line dimensions;
17.66 - 4
3. Existing and proposed structures;
4. Structures on adjacent property(ies) affected by the request;
5. Vehicle and pedestrian access points and accessways;
6. Drainageways and any other prominent features;
7. Location of trees and shrubs over 3 ft. in height;
8. Fences and walls;
9. Off-street parking facilities;
10. Any other information relevant to the proposal.
The Director may modify the submission requirements as necessary.
17.66.100 ELEVATION OF APPLICATION TYPE
Prior to the decision date, the review of a Type I or II adjustment or variance, and any comments
received, may cause the Director to elevate the request to a Type III Variance. In this case the
Director shall notify the Applicant and any parties in writing, giving the reason(s) that the
application is found to qualify as a Type III Variance, requesting any additional information
required by this Chapter, and requesting any additional fees applicable under the redefined
application type. Upon receipt of new application materials and payment of the revised
application fee, the Director shall schedule a public hearing and serve public notice as required in
this Chapter.
17.66.190 EFFECTIVE PERIOD OF APPROVAL
Approval of an adjustment or variance shall be effective for a 2-year period from the date of
approval, unless substantial construction has taken place. The Director (Type I and Type II) or
Planning Commission (Type III) may grant a 1-year extension if the applicant requests such an
extension prior to expiration of the initial time limit.
17.68 - 1
Revised by Ordinance 2013-11 effective 12/18/13
CHAPTER 17.68 - CONDITIONAL USES
17.68.00 INTENT
Certain uses listed in each zoning district require special review to determine what their effects
may be to the surrounding properties, neighborhood, and community as a whole. The Minor
Conditional Use Permit (Type II) and Conditional Use Permit (Type III) processes provide an
opportunity to allow a use when potential adverse effects can be mitigated or deny a use if
concerns cannot be resolved.
It is the intent of this chapter to permit minor conditional uses or conditional uses that are
consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, subject to procedures and criteria intended to mitigate
potentially negative impacts.
Procedures and review criteria for conditional development are established for the following
purpose:
A. Permit certain types of public and private development that provides a community service in
locations related to their service areas.
B. Permit commercial development in locations related to its service area.
C. Ensure that a conditional use is compatible with its immediate area and the affected part of
the community
17.68.10 PROCEDURES
An application filed for a Minor Conditional Use Permit and/or a Conditional Use Permit shall
be on forms provided by the Director and include application materials listed in 17.18.30 and the
following, unless waived by the Director pursuant to subsection (M):
A. Site plan drawn to scale and showing existing and proposed:
1. Relationship of the site to adjoining properties, streets, alleys, structures, public utilities,
and drainage way with sufficient information on land areas within at least 300 ft. of the
subject property specifically addressing land uses, lot lines, circulation systems
(including potential for connectivity of streets and pedestrian ways), public facilities, and
unique natural features of the landscape.
2. Boundary of the proposed conditional use and any interior boundaries related to proposed
development phases.
2. Lot line dimensions
3. Location of structures
4. Vehicle and pedestrian access points and accessways
5. General location of vegetated areas
6. Fences and walls
7. Parking, maneuvering and loading areas
8. Trash and recycling areas
9. Direction of traffic flow on the property
10. Existing site conditions including contours at 10-foot intervals, watercourses, flood plains
and natural features.
17.68 - 2
Revised by Ordinance 2013-11 effective 12/18/13
11. Proposed modifications to existing grades
B. Exterior lighting plan indicating location, size, height, typical design, material, color, and
method of illumination.
C. Architectural elevations of all buildings and structures including heights, entrances and exits,
and floor plans, in sufficient detail to permit computation of other requirements.
D. Landscape plan drawn to scale showing:
1. Location of existing trees and vegetation proposed to be removed or retained on the site.
2. Location and design of landscape areas
3. Proposed varieties, quantities, and sizes of trees and plant materials
4. Other pertinent landscape features and details of irrigation system required to maintain
plant materials.
E. Narrative relating to applicable Comprehensive Land Use Plan policies
F. Narrative relating to applicable Sandy Development Code standards
G. Flood, Slope and Hazard Analysis, if portions of the site have slopes in excess of 15%,
floodplains, floodways, wetlands, etc.
H. Sign Details
I. Traffic impact report
J. Utility Plan
K. Additional data sheet indicating:
1. Square footage of site and structure
2. Building coverage
3. Amount of site to be landscaped
4. Number of parking spaces to be provided
5. Building materials to be used
6. Specifications as to type, color, and texture of exterior surfaces of proposed structures.
L. Any additional information that may be required by the Director to properly evaluate the
proposed site plan. Such additional information shall only be required where its need can be
justified on the basis of special and/or unforeseen circumstances.
M. The Director may waive any of the requirements above where determined that the
information required is unnecessary to properly evaluate the proposal.
17.68.20 REVIEW CRITERIA
The Planning Director (Minor Conditional Use Permit) through a Type II process or the Planning
Commission (Conditional Use Permit) through a Type III process may approve an application,
approve with modifications, approve with conditions, or deny an application for a conditional
use permit after a public hearing. The applicant must submit evidence substantiating that all
17.68 - 3
Revised by Ordinance 2013-11 effective 12/18/13
requirements of this code relative to the proposed use are satisfied and consistent with the
purposes of this chapter, policies of the Comprehensive Plan, and any other applicable policies
and standards adopted by the City Council.
The following criteria and compatibility factors shall be considered:
A. The use is listed as either a minor conditional use or conditional use in the underlying zoning
district or has been interpreted to be similar in use to other listed conditional uses.
B. The characteristics of the site are suitable for the proposed use considering the size, shape,
location, topography, and natural features.
C. The proposed use is timely considering the adequacy of the transportation systems, public
facilities and services existing or planned for the area affected by the use
D. The proposed use will not alter the character of the surrounding area in a manner which
substantially limits, precludes, or impairs the use of surrounding properties for the primary
uses listed in the underlying zoning district.
E. The proposed use will not result in the use of land for any purpose which may create or cause
to be created any public nuisance including, but not limited to, air, land, or water
degradation, noise, glare, heat, vibration, or other considerations which may be injurious to
the public health, safety, and welfare.
F. The proposed use will be reasonably compatible with existing or planned neighboring uses
based on review of the following:
1. Basic site design (organization of uses on the site)
2. Visual elements (scale, structural design and form, materials, and so forth)
3. Noise
4. Noxious odors
5. Lighting
6. Signage
7. Landscaping for buffering and screening
8. Traffic
9. Effects on off-street parking
10. Effects on air quality and water quality
17.68.30 MODIFICATION TO AN APPROVED CONDITIONAL USE
A. Major Modification. A major modification to an approved Minor Conditional Use Permit or
Conditional Use Permit must be processed as a new application. Major Modifications
include:
1. Changes in proposed land use
2. Substantial change in building elevation, color or materials
3. Changes in type and location of access ways and parking areas where off-site traffic
would be affected
4. Increase in the floor area proposed for nonresidential use by more than 10 percent from
what was previously specified
17.68 - 4
Revised by Ordinance 2013-11 effective 12/18/13
5. Increase in the total ground area proposed to be covered by structures by more than 10
percent from what was previously specified
6. Reduction of project amenities provided, such as recreational facilities, screening, and/or
landscaping provisions by more than 10 percent from what was previously specified
7. Any other modification to specific requirements established at the time of conditional use
permit approval
B. Minor Modification. Minor Modifications may include any of the changes listed above
provided that the change is quantified below the thresholds for a Major Modification.
Uses customarily subordinate to a principal use permitted outright may be approved by the
Director, as determined through Chapter 17.14 Request for Interpretation, as minor
modifications. Minor modifications are processed as a Type II decision.
17.68.40 REASONABLE CONDITIONS
Reasonable conditions, restrictions, or safeguards that would uphold the purpose and intent of
this section and mitigate any adverse impact upon adjoining properties which may result by
reason of the approved conditional use may be attached. A list of conditions may include, but is
not limited to, the following:
A. Controlling the location and number of vehicular ingress and egress points.
B. Improving public facilities such as:
1. Sanitary sewer
2. Sidewalks, curbs, and other street improvements
3. Storm drainage
4. Water supply
C. Increasing street width
D. Increasing the number of off-street parking or loading spaces or areas.
E. Increasing the required lot size or yard dimensions
F. Limiting lot coverage or height of buildings because of obstruction of view and reduction of
light and air to adjacent property
G. Limiting the number, size and location of signs
H. Requiring additional landscaping, berming, screening or fencing where necessary to reduce
noise and glare and maintain the property in a character in keeping with the surrounding area
I. Requiring additional public safety and crime prevention measures
J. Requiring land dedication or money in lieu of dedication for public purposes
K. Submission of bonds or other suitable security to ensure that requirements are met
17.68 - 5
Revised by Ordinance 2013-11 effective 12/18/13
L. Submittal of final detailed plan indicating conformance with conditions
M. Undergrounding of utilities
17.68.50 EXPIRATION OF PERMIT
Approval of a Minor Conditional Use Permit or Conditional Use Permit shall be void after 2
years, or such lesser time as specified in the approval, unless substantial construction has taken
place or building occupancy obtained. The Planning Director may grant a 1-year extension if the
applicant requests such an extension prior to expiration of the initial time limit.
17.68.60 BUILDING PERMIT ISSUANCE
A building permit for all or any portion of a Minor Conditional Use Permit or Conditional Use
Permit shall be issued only on the basis of the plan as approved. Any major modification shall be
submitted as a new application.
17.68.70 REVOCATION
A. A Minor Conditional Use Permit or Conditional Use Permit shall be subject to revocation if
the application is found to include false information or if the conditions of approval have not
been complied with or are not being maintained.
B. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing to allow the applicant an opportunity
to show cause why the permit should not be revoked.
C. If the Planning Commission finds that the conditions of approval have not been complied
with or are not being maintained, a reasonable time shall be given for making corrections. If
corrections are not made within the time specified, revocation of the conditional use permit
shall be effective 10 days after the time specified.
D. Reapplication for a conditional use, which has been denied or revoked, cannot be made
within 1 year after the date of the Planning Commission’s action, except that the Director
may schedule a new hearing if there is new evidence or a change in circumstances.
17.70 - 1
CHAPTER 17.70 - HARDSHIP PERMIT
MANUFACTURED HOME AND TRAILER OCCUPANCY PERMITS
17.70.00 INTENT
These regulations are intended to allow issuance of special permits to alleviate a significant
hardship or emergency arising out of a need or desire to provide health care or maintenance to a
handicapped or elderly person.
17.70.10 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
An application shall be made on forms provided by the Director. The application shall be
accompanied by the following:
A. Written letter from physician verifying that the health care or maintenance is required
B. One copy of the application
C. If on a septic system, a copy of letter of approval from Clackamas County indicating capacity
of septic system and any required improvements
D. A site plan, 8 ½” x 11”, showing:
1. Property boundaries
2. Required setbacks of underlying zoning district
3. Location of existing dwelling
4. Location of proposed manufactured dwelling
5. Location of septic system
6. Existing Driveway
E. List of affected property owners
17.70.20 NOTICE REQUIREMENTS
Notice of the public hearing shall be mailed not less than 20 days prior to the date of the hearing
to owners of property within one hundred feet of the exterior boundaries of the property
involved, not including public right-of-way.
17.70.30 CRITERIA FOR APPROVAL
A. Must be necessary for health care or maintenance of the person.
B. Must be connected to an approved water and sewer system; or
C. Be completely self-contained for water and sewage;
17.70.40 ACTION BY PLANNING COMMISSION
Upon receipt of a completed application for such a special permit, the Director shall schedule a
public hearing. The public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with Chapter 17.20-Public
17.70 - 2
Hearings. The Planning Commission shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the
application.
17.70.50 NOTICE OF DECISION
The Director shall provide the applicant with a notice of decision, that includes a written
statement of the decision, a reference to findings leading to it, any conditions of approval, and
appeal period deadline.
17.70.60 APPROVAL PERIOD
A hardship permit is valid for a period of not more than 24 months or until the termination of the
condition of hardship or emergency for which the permit was issued whichever occurs first.
17.70.70 RENEWAL
An application for renewal, with a renewal fee, shall be filed at least 90 days prior to expiration
of the hardship permit. The renewal shall be a Type II procedure. A renewal application must be
accompanied by an updated written statement from a physician that the need for health care or
maintenance still exists.
17.70.80 TERMINATION OF PERMIT
A. The hardship permit becomes null and void upon the vacation or demise of the person
requiring health care or maintenance.
B. The dwelling unit must be removed within 90 days of termination of the permit.
C. If the dwelling unit is not removed within 90 days, the City Council may order removal of
the dwelling and place a lien on the property to recover the costs of removal.
17.72 - 1
CHAPTER 17.72 - CONGREGATE HOUSING
17.72.00 PURPOSE
The purpose of a CH district is to provide housing alternatives for elderly or handicapped
persons. The standards set forth in this section are intended to insure that congregate housing
developments provide a minimum of services and facilities to accommodate the needs of the
residents and to relieve any possible detrimental effects of the development on surrounding
properties.
17.72.10 JUSTIFICATION
This chapter recognizes that housing for senior citizens and handicapped persons customarily has
less impact on surrounding properties than typical multi-family developments providing the
same number, or fewer units, and therefore, deserves special consideration.
17.72.20 ESTABLISHMENT OF CONGREGATE HOUSING
Congregate housing facilities may be permitted as conditional uses in the R-2, R-3 and C-1
zoning districts.
17.72.30 DENSITY STANDARDS
The Planning Commission may increase the underlying density of the zoning district through the
conditional use permit process if warranted based on the size of the dwelling units, number of
proposed occupants, lesser impact on surrounding properties, and other relevant factors. Density
is limited to the increase in the following chart:
Zone Percentage of Increase
R-2 25%
R-3 50%
C-1 50%
17.72.40 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
The setbacks and height limitations shall be in compliance with the standards of the underlying
zoning district.
Type Standard
Minimum Lot Width, Depth, Frontage, Setbacks,
Projections, & Accessory Structures, and Height
Same as underlying district
Landscaping 20%
Off-Street Parking See Chapter 17.98
17.72.50 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS
A. Age Restriction. Congregate housing is intended for persons fifty-five (55) years of age and
older or handicapped persons.
17.72 - 2
B. Any principal or accessory use allowed in the zoning district may be provided. These uses
shall be primarily for residents and guests.
C. Community Space. All complexes shall have a minimum of 15 square feet of community
space for social and recreational opportunities per occupant, based on one person per
bedroom. Community space may include, but is not limited to:
1. Game room, meeting rooms, music or craft rooms.
2. Congregate Dining Facilities. Complexes with or without kitchen facilities in each unit
may include congregate dining facilities providing regular daily meals for residents.
Areas used as congregate dining areas may be applied to the minimum community space
requirements.
D. Laundry and Storage. A minimum of 10 square feet of general storage area (80 cu. Ft.) other
than regular kitchen, bedroom and linen storage shall be provided within each unit.
Complexes, which do not include laundry facilities in the units, shall have adequate laundry
facilities accessible to all tenants.
E. Design Standards. The design of the building and the site and landscaping plans shall be
subject to review. Special considerations for this use may include, but are not limited to:
1. Compatibility in style, colors, materials, and scale with the general character of the
neighborhood.
2. Defining semi-public, semi-private and private spaces.
3. Minimizing barriers to handicapped or elderly persons.
4. Security and protection for residents.
17.74 - 1
Revised by Ordinance 2014-05 effective 06/02/14
CHAPTER 17.74 - ACCESSORY DEVELOPMENT
ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS AND PROCEDURES
17.74.00 INTENT
These provisions are intended to establish the relationship between principal and accessory
development and specify criteria for regulating accessory developments.
In addition to uses expressly included in each zoning district as primary or conditional uses each
district shall provide for accessory developments identified in this chapter. When a proposed
accessory use is not specified, the Director shall determine the appropriateness of the use and
whether it is customarily associated with, and subordinate to, the principal development. The
Director shall base the decision on the similarity of the proposed accessory development to those
developments specifically identified as accessory to the principal developments and the
relationship between the proposed accessory development and principal development. The
Director’s determination shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in Chapter 17.14
- Request for Interpretation.
17.74.10 RESIDENTIAL ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
Accessory structures (sheds) may be constructed or installed when in conformance with the
standards of this section. A detached accessory structure shall be separated from the primary
structure by at least six (6) feet. An accessory structure located closer than six (6) feet from the
primary structure shall be considered attached and is required to comply with the same setbacks
as the primary structure.
A. Detached Accessory Structure Setbacks.
Table 17.74.10 below and Figures 17.74.10-A and B specify setbacks for detached accessory
structures. If not specified below, these structures are subject to the standards identified in
the respective zoning district where the structure is to be located. For purposes of these
regulations, solariums, greenhouses, garages or other enclosed areas which are attached to
the residential structure shall not be considered accessory but shall be considered part of the
main dwelling. Rigid frame fabric structures are considered accessory structures subject to
these standards.
Table 17.74.10: Setbacks for Detached Accessory Structures (Sheds)
Accessory Structure Size
Interior Side Yard
Setback
Rear Yard Setback
Up to 120 sq. ft.,
Up to 10 ft. tall
1 foot 1 foot
Up to 120 sq. ft.,
Up to 12 ft. tall
3 feet 3 feet
Larger than 120 sq. ft. up to 200
sq. ft. and up to 12 ft. in height
3 feet
3 feet
Larger than 200 sq. ft. or taller
than 12 ft. in height
5 feet minimum or
same as primary
structure whichever is
greater
15 feet minimum or
same as primary
structure whichever is
greater
17.74 - 2
Revised by Ordinance 2014-05 effective 06/02/14
Figure 17.74.10–A: Interior Lot
Figure 17.74.10-B: Corner Lot
17.74 - 3
Revised by Ordinance 2014-05 effective 06/02/14
B. General Standards.
1. No accessory structure shall be located in front of the principal building. If located to
the side of the principal building on an interior lot, the structure shall not be placed closer
to the front lot line than the farthest back front wall of the principal building.
2. An accessory structure located on the street side of a corner lot shall follow the same
setbacks as the principal building (10 feet).
3. The roof of the structure shall be constructed so that water runoff from the structure does
not flow onto an abutting parcel.
4. Accessory structures for private vehicle storage which have an entrance from the street
side yard (except alleys) shall have a minimum street side yard setback of 20 ft.
5. The total accumulative square footage of all accessory structures on an individual lot
shall not exceed 1,200 square feet.
6. No accessory structure shall exceed a maximum height of 16 feet.
7. An accessory structure may be located on an adjacent lot that does not contain a primary
structure provided:
a. Both lots are under the exact same ownership; and
b. A deed restriction is recorded requiring the accessory structure to be removed within
30 days of transfer of ownership of either lot into separate ownership; and
c. The accessory structure complies with setback requirements as applied to the lots
under same ownership.
8. Exception for Temporary Use of Rigid Frame Fabric Membrane Structures. Exceptions
to these standards may be made by the Planning Director for temporary storage of
materials for not more than three days within any 30 day period.
17.74.20 PROJECTING BUILDING FEATURES
A. Setback Projections.
The following building features may project into portions of a required yard setback by no
more than the amount specified below:
Table 17.74.20: Setbacks for Projecting Building Features
Feature Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard
Architectural Appendages 1 5 ft. 2 ½ ft. 5 ft.
Awnings 5 ft. 2 ½ ft. 5 ft.
Chimneys 5 ft. 2 ½ ft. 5 ft.
Decks (unroofed) - ground level 30” in height or less 5 ft. 2 ½ ft. Footnote 2
Decks (unroofed) - ground level more than 30” in
height or second story (building permit required)
5 ft. 2 ½ ft. Footnote 3
Eaves 5 ft. 2 ½ ft. 5 ft.
Fire Escapes, Landings (unroofed) and Stairs 5 ft. 2 ½ ft. 5 ft.
Planters 5 ft. 2 ½ ft. 5 ft.
Porches (roofed) 5 ft. 2 ½ ft. Footnote 3
Windows (bow or bay) 5 ft. 2 ½ ft. 5 ft.
1 Architectural features shall not include any portion of a structure built for the support, conveyance, occupancy,
shelter, or enclosure of persons, chattels, or property of any kind.
2 Must maintain a minimum rear yard setback from rear property line of 5 ft.
3 Must maintain a minimum rear yard setback from rear property line of 10 ft.
17.74 - 4
Revised by Ordinance 2014-05 effective 06/02/14
B. Vertical Projections. Height limitations shall not apply to the following:
1. Fire and parapet walls.
2. Penthouses or roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating
fans or similar equipment required to operate and maintain a structure. No penthouse or
roof structure or any space above the height limitation shall be allowed for the purpose
of providing additional floor space.
3. Smokestacks.
4. Steeples.
5. Windmills.
6. Other similar structures.
17.74.30 VISION CLEARANCE AREA
A. A vision clearance area shall be maintained on each corner of property at the intersection of
two streets. No visual obstruction (e.g., sign, structure, solid fence, or vegetation) shall be
placed or located in the “vision clearance area” between the height of 36 inches (3 feet) and
eight and one-half feet (8 1/2) measured from the street grade at the curb line, or where curbs
are absent from the edge of asphalt as specified in the table below.
B. A vision clearance area shall consist of a triangular area formed by the intersection of the
curb lines, measured from the street grade at the curb line, or where curbs are absent from the
edge of asphalt as specified below.
Table 17.74.30 - Vision Clearance Distances
Functional Street Classification
Measurement along curb line
Intersection of a street and an alley 20 feet
Intersection of a street and another
street
30 feet
Figure 17.74.20 – Vision Clearance Measurement
C. The foregoing provisions shall not apply to the following:
1. A public utility pole, signal pole, light pole, or other utility appurtenance.
2. A tree trimmed (to the trunk) to a line at least 8 ½ ft. above the level of the intersection.
17.74 - 5
Revised by Ordinance 2014-05 effective 06/02/14
3. Vegetation that is not planted in the form of a hedge and which is so planted and trimmed
to leave at all seasons a clear and unobstructed cross view.
4. A supporting member or appurtenance to a permanent building lawfully existing on the
date this code is adopted.
5. An official warning sign or signal.
6. A place where the natural contour of the ground is such that there can be no crossvisibility
at the intersection.
7. A sign mounted 10 ft. or more above the ground with supports that do not encroach into
the clear vision area.
8. A signalized intersection.
17.74.40 FENCES AND WINDSCREENS
A. Fences - Residential
1. Fences on corner lots. Any fence or retaining wall, constructed upon or adjacent to any
property line that abuts two or more intersecting streets, shall not exceed 3 ft. in height
within the vision clearance area as specified in Section 17.74.30.
2. Fences in a front yard. The height of a fence or retaining wall in a front yard shall not
exceed 4 ft.
3. Fences - side and rear yards abutting streets. The height of a fence or retaining wall in a
side or rear yard abutting a public right-of-way shall not exceed 6 ft.
4. Fences - side and rear yards abutting other lots. The height of a fence or retaining wall in
a side or rear yard abutting other lots shall not exceed 8 ft.
5. Sight Obscuring Hedges. Trees or shrubs that form a sight-obscuring hedge shall comply
with the same height requirement as a fence within the clear vision area. Deciduous trees
separated by at least 15 ft. may grow to any height.
6. Front Yard Fences for Existing Dwellings on Major Arterials. The height of a fence in a
front yard for an existing dwelling (constructed prior to July 1, 1996) facing a major
arterial shall not exceed a height of 6 ft. outside the clear vision area.
7. Fences on Through Lots. Gates are required in rear-yard fences on through-lots since it
remains the property owners’ responsibility to maintain the area from the curb or edge of
pavement to a proposed fence.
B. Fences - Commercial/Industrial
1. Fences on corner lots. Any fence or retaining wall, constructed upon or adjacent to any
property line that abuts two or more intersecting streets, shall not exceed 3 ft. in height
within the clear vision area.
2. Fences in a front yard (Commercial). The height of a fence or retaining wall in a front
yard shall not exceed 4 ft.
3. Fences in a front yard (Industrial). The height of a fence or retaining wall in a front yard
shall not exceed 6 ft.
4. Fences - Side and Rear Yards. The height of a fence or retaining wall adjacent to a side or
rear yard or a side or rear property line shall not exceed 8 ft.
5. Sight Obscuring Hedges. Trees or shrubs that form a sight-obscuring hedge shall comply
with the same height requirement as a fence within the clear vision area. Deciduous trees
separated by at least 15 ft. may grow to any height.
17.74 - 6
Revised by Ordinance 2014-05 effective 06/02/14
C. Fence Regulations for Recreation Areas. Any recreational court may be enclosed by a wire
fence not exceeding 12 ft. in height provided that no part of the court fence is within 20 ft. of
any street.
D. Fence Regulations for Swimming Pool/Hot Tub Areas. A swimming pool, hot tub or other
man-made outside body of water, which has a depth greater than 18 inches shall be enclosed
with a fence not less than 4 ft. and not more than 8 ft. in height. If located on or surrounded
by a deck, the deck shall be enclosed with a railing with a height of not less than 4 feet and
not more than 8 feet. The fence or railing shall not have any openings, holes or gaps larger
than four inches square, except for doors or gates. Any gate shall be equipped with a selfclosing,
self-latching device. A dwelling unit and/or accessory building may form part of the
enclosure.
Exception: This regulation does not apply to wetland areas and storm water detention
facilities. However, fencing requirements may be imposed through the design review
process.
E. Wire Fences
1. Barbed wire fencing may be permitted for agricultural, community service, commercial
or industrial uses when the wire is employed on the top of any other type of fencing, and
when the barbed wire is a minimum of 6 ft. above the finished ground surface, and does
not extend over a public way. The maximum height shall not exceed 8 ft.
2. No electrically charged or sharp pointed fencing such as razor wire (other than barbed
wire fencing) shall be constructed or maintained within the city limits.
F. Fences in excess of 6 ft. in height require a building permit.
17.74.50 DECKS
A. Decks may encroach into required yard areas as specified in 17.74.20 above.
B. Decks greater than 30 inches in height require a building permit for structural and zoning
review.
17.74.60 TEMPORARY USES OR STRUCTURES
A. Temporary Uses. Temporary uses, as defined in Chapter 17.10 - Definitions, not located
within a structure, may be permitted for a period not to exceed 90 days, provided a temporary
permit is first obtained under the Type I procedure. Renewal of a temporary permit shall be
processed under the Type II procedure and may require a public hearing.
B. Temporary Structures. Temporary structures in connection with the building or sale of
dwellings and land, and construction of industrial or commercial facilities may be permitted,
for a period not to exceed 1 year, provided a temporary permit is first obtained under the
Type I procedure. Renewal of a temporary permit shall be processed under the Type II
procedure and may require a public hearing.
17.74 - 7
Revised by Ordinance 2014-05 effective 06/02/14
C. Portable Outdoor Storage Unit. Portable outdoor storage units may be placed on a lot,
including within the setback areas, for not more than 60 days (any portion of a day, between
12:00 a.m. and ending at 11:59 p.m., shall be counted as a day) within any 12 month period.
17.74.70 ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS
Accessory dwelling unit (ADU) regulations are intended to:
• Provide a cost-effective means of serving development through the use of existing
infrastructure, rather than requiring new infrastructure to serve development.
• Increase the supply of affordable housing without government subsidies.
• Benefit older homeowners, single parents, young homebuyers and the disabled.
• Integrate affordable housing more uniformly in the community.
• Provide a means for adult children to give care and support to a parent in a semiindependent
living arrangement.
• Foster better housing maintenance and neighborhood stability.
• Provide the opportunity for increased security and companionship for elderly and other
homeowners who fear crime and personal accidents.
• Help maintain the Urban Growth Boundary by creating more housing opportunities
within existing urban areas.
A. Permitted Zoning Districts. Accessory dwelling units (ADU) are allowed in any zone that
allows single family or multi-family housing and within the Central Business District (C-1)
and Village Commercial District (C-3).
B. Dimensional Standards.
Type Standard
Minimum Average Lot Width, Frontage, Depth Same as underlying zoning district
Maximum square footage 600 sq. ft.
Maximum number of occupants 3
Setbacks Same as underlying zoning district
Structure Height Same as underlying zoning district
Building Site Coverage No maximum
Off-Street Parking See Chapter 17.98
Landscaping Same as underlying zoning district
C. Occupancy Limitations.
1. The owner of the lot must occupy either the principal residence or the accessory unit
except for bona fide temporary absences.
2. Occupancy may be granted without a specific time limitation, but if a written complaint
is filed, a public hearing will be scheduled before the Planning Commission, to consider
the nature of the violation or complaint and revocation of the permit
D. Design Standards.
1. The accessory dwelling unit shall remain subordinate to the principal residence.
2. There shall be adequate provisions for ingress and egress but separation is not required.
3. Traffic generated by the accessory dwelling unit shall not interfere with the proper
functioning of the principal residence.
17.74 - 8
Revised by Ordinance 2014-05 effective 06/02/14
4. An ADU may be either stick-built or a modular dwelling unit, but may not be a single
wide manufactured dwelling unit.
5. Detached ADUs shall be architecturally consistent with the principal dwelling unit.
6. Attached ADUs shall have the appearance of a single-family dwelling.
7. Primary entrances shall not be in front of the principal unit.
E. Permit Issuance.
1. A permit to construct or alter a dwelling to accommodate an ADU may be issued under a
Type I procedure if the application is in compliance with the ADU standards.
2. Required permit information shall be limited to that for single-family dwellings.
3. Construction permit fees shall be based on the same fee schedule as a single-family
dwelling.
4. ADUs may be added to an existing residential dwelling or built concurrently with a new
residence.
F. Additional Requirements.
1. Adequate provision shall be made for drainage, water and sewage waste.
2. The accessory dwelling unit shall meet applicable building code requirements for twofamily
dwelling units.
3. ADUs may not be developed for sale and may only be rented.
4. Illegal ADUs may be legalized if they conform, or are brought into conformance with
basic zoning, building, plumbing, mechanical and electrical codes.
5. ADU requirements shall be recorded as a deed restriction against the property.
6. Periodic review of ADUs shall be conducted by the city to evaluate and reconsider
existing densities.
17.74.80 HOME BUSINESSES
The provision for a home business is in recognition of the needs of many people who are
engaged in small-scale business ventures, which cannot be expanded to a full-scale enterprise. It
is the intent of this section that full-scale commercial or professional operations, which would
ordinarily be conducted in a commercial or industrial district, continue to be conducted in the
appropriate zoning district and not a dwelling. These regulations apply to family day care
businesses.
A. Home Business Regulations
1. No sign is used other than a nameplate indicating the name of the resident (not the
business name) not over two sq. ft. in area.
2. There is no display that will indicate from the exterior that the building is being used in
whole or in part for any purpose other than a dwelling.
3. There is no outside storage of materials other than plant materials.
4. The home occupation is licensed by the city.
5. There is no more than one non-resident employee working on the site.
6. The building retains the characteristics of a residence.
7. The use does not destroy the residential character of the neighborhood.
B. Complaint Procedures.
1. Complaints on Items 1 through 5 will be handled routinely by the Director.
2. Complaints on Items 6 and 7 will be dealt with as follows:
17.74 - 9
Revised by Ordinance 2014-05 effective 06/02/14
a) Upon receipt of three written complaints specifically stating the nature of the
objection from three separate households located within three hundred ft. of the
boundary of the affected property, the Director shall:
1) Investigate the complaints;
2) Prepare a report to the Planning Commission; and,
3) Schedule a public hearing before the Planning Commission to make a decision on
the validity of the complaint.
3. Standards evaluating complaints shall include:
a) Generation of excessive traffic;
b) Monopoly of on-street parking spaces;
c) Frequent deliveries and pickups by motor freight;
d) Noise in excess of that created by normal residential use (either in terms of volume or
hours of occurrence);
e) Smoke, fumes, or odors in excess of those created by normal residential use;
f) Other offensive activities not in harmony with a residential neighborhood.
4. Planning Commission Action. The Planning Commission, upon hearing the evidence
may:
a) Approve the use as it exists;
b) Require the use to be terminated;
c) Impose appropriate restriction, such as limiting hours of operation, establishing a
phase-out period or other measures insuring compatibility with the neighborhood.
17.74.90 FOOD AND BEVERAGE CARTS
A. Intent
The purpose of these regulations is to permit food and beverage carts on a year-round basis
where eating and drinking establishments are permitted outright.
B. Applicability
The provisions of this section apply to food and beverage carts used in the preparation and/or
sales of food and beverage items to the general public. Drive-through uses are not permitted as
food carts under this section. Carts must be mobile units but are not permitted to operate from a
motorized vehicle. An example of a mobile unit that meets this standard includes a trailer
modified for the purpose of selling food (but not a food truck or RV).
C. Permit Required
1. Food and Beverage Carts are required to obtain a Food Cart Permit and a City of Sandy
Business License prior to operating.
2. The initial permit review for a Food Cart Permit shall follow a Type II review procedure
per the requirements of Chapter 17.18.
3. Food Cart permits are valid for the calendar year in which they are issued and will be
renewed through a Type I procedure, except if the use was the subject of a City Code
Enforcement action. If an enforcement action has occurred, the use shall be reviewed at
the time of renewal following the Type II review procedure.
17.74 - 10
Revised by Ordinance 2014-05 effective 06/02/14
D. Submission Requirements
An application for a permit to allow operation of one or more food carts on private property shall
be on forms provided by the Director and include materials listed as follows:
1. A completed General Land Use Application and application fee.
2. List and mailing labels for property owners within 200 feet of the subject property.
3. Site plan drawn to scale including:
a. Site dimensions.
b. Relationship of the site to adjoining properties, streets, alleys, structures, public
utilities, and drainage ways.
c. Number and location of food carts on the site.
d. Individual square footage of all food carts.
e. Accessible pedestrian route clearances.
f. Size, location, and clearances of customer seating areas.
g. Vehicular circulation and access points.
h. Parking, maneuvering and loading areas.
i. Location and design elevation of all structures.
j. Location and specification of landscaped areas.
k. Location and specifications of food cart pads.
l. Location and design of fences and walls.
m. Number and location of trash and recycling areas.
n. Location and type of auxiliary storage.
4. Pictures or architectural elevations of proposed food cart(s).
5. Proximity to bathroom and written permission, if applicable.
6. Disposal plan for wastewater and gray water.
7. Exterior lighting plan indicating location, size, height, typical design, material, color, and
method of illumination.
8. Written verification that the food cart has been inspected and meets applicable County
Health regulations.
9. Any additional information that may be required by the Director to properly evaluate the
proposed site plan.
10. The Director may waive any of the requirements above where determined that the
information required is unnecessary to properly evaluate the proposal.
E. Standards for Food and Beverage Carts
An application for a food and beverage cart shall be reviewed for compliance with the following
standards:
Location and Design
1. Drive-through uses are not permitted in food carts.
2. Carts shall not exceed 20 feet in length, not including the trailer hitch, or be greater than
200 square feet.
3. All carts shall be placed on a paved surface such as but not limited to concrete, asphalt or
pavers, or other approved material excluding gravel. If new paved surface is added to a
site to accommodate a cart, the parking area shall comply with applicable parking design
standards contained in Chapter 17.98.
17.74 - 11
Revised by Ordinance 2014-05 effective 06/02/14
4. Carts shall be located at least three (3) feet from the public right-of-way or back of
sidewalk, whichever provides the greater distance from the public right-of-way.
5. Carts shall be located at least 5 feet away from other carts.
6. Carts shall not be located within 25 feet of an active driveway entrance as measured in all
directions from where the driveway enters the site at the edge of the street right-of-way.
7. Carts shall not occupy fire lanes or drive aisles necessary for vehicular circulation or
fire/emergency vehicle access.
8. Customer service windows shall be located at least five (5) feet from an active drive aisle
used by cars.
9. Carts shall not occupy pedestrian walkways or required landscape areas.
10. Carts shall not occupy parking needed to meet minimum vehicle and bicycle parking
requirements per Chapter 17.98. Blocking automobile access to parking spaces shall be
considered occupying the spaces.
11. Each food cart shall provide a minimum of one paved off-street parking space for
employee use or provide proof of written permission from an adjacent business or
property owner within 1/4 mile of the subject site allowing the food cart operator to share
parking facilities.
12. The exterior surfaces of all carts shall be clean and free from dents, rust, peeling paint,
and deterioration, and windows shall not be cracked or broken. Day-glo and highly
reflective colors are prohibited.
13. Each cart shall provide an awning for shelter to customers with a minimum clearance of
seven (7) feet between the ground and the awning.
14. Tents and canopies shall not have not tears, mold, or broken or non-functioning supports
and shall be securely anchored.
15. Carts shall limit the visual effect of accessory items not used by customers, including but
not limited to tanks, barrels, etc. by screening with a site-obscuring fence or landscaping,
or containing them within a small storage shed.
16. All seating areas shall be located on the subject property at least 10 feet from a food cart
and seating areas shall be separated from parking areas by an approved fence or barrier.
17. Signage shall comply with Chapter 15.32, Sign Code regulations. Each cart is permitted
one (1) A-Frame sign.
18. Auxiliary storage shall be provided on site when there are four (4) or more food carts.
The structure for auxiliary storage shall meet Chapter 17.90, Design Standards.
Fire Safety
19. Carts shall meet Fire Code requirements regarding distances from other structures or
combustible materials.
20. Any cooking device within a food cart that creates grease-laden vapors shall provide an
approved hood and extinguishing system, or be the type with a self-closing lid as
approved by the Fire Marshall.
21. Appropriate fire extinguishers are required.
22. Propane tanks shall be stored and handled properly and be located at least 10 feet from
combustible vegetation and trash receptacles and 20 feet from a potential ignition source.
Propane tanks shall remain outdoors and be secured from falling.
23. Carts shall not have any internal floor space available to customers.
Health and Sanitation
24. Trash and recycle receptacles shall be provided on site, and must be emptied and
maintained. Trash and recycle receptacles shall be provided at a rate of one (1) receptacle
17.74 - 12
Revised by Ordinance 2014-05 effective 06/02/14
for every food cart. Where the food cart operator proposes to provide a common seating
area a minimum of one (1) trash receptacle and one (1) recycle receptacle shall be
provided in the common seating area.
25. Restrooms with handwashing facilities shall be provided for employees and customers.
The restroom can be on-site or within one-quarter mile or a five-minute walk (such as at a
neighboring business) and must be available during the cart’s hours of operation. If the
restroom is not on-site, the food cart operator shall submit written permission from an
adjacent business or property owner where the facility is located.
26. Sites containing more than one food cart shall provide a restroom facility on-site.
27. Wastewater and gray water shall be disposed of properly without harm to the
environment or city infrastructure. An approved disposal plan shall detail storage and
removal methods.
28. Food carts that are fully contained; i.e., carts that provide their own water, power, and
waste disposal, are permitted with no additional utility considerations beyond the
permitting process and site plan approval described herein. Food carts that require a water
source, power source, or waste disposal location are permitted only where the Director
has approved site plans that show safe access and location of the aforementioned
provisions. Such provisions may be subject to all applicable building permits and System
Development Charge requirements.
F. Conditions of Permit
The permit issued shall be in a form deemed suitable by the Director. In addition to naming the
property owner as permittee and other information deemed appropriate, the permit shall contain
the following minimum conditions.
1. Permit requirements:
a. Each food cart permit issued shall terminate December 31st of the year in which it is
issued.
b. The permit issued shall be personal to the permittee only and is not transferable in
any manner. The permittee will be responsible for compliance with all conditions of
approval.
c. The permit is specifically limited to the area approved or as modified by the Director,
and will include a site plan indicating the area approved for the operation of one or
more food carts and the location of common seating areas, if provided.
2. Requirements for properties containing one or more food carts:
a. The property containing one or more food carts and all things placed thereon shall at
all times be maintained in a clean and orderly condition. Only those things authorized
by the permit and shown on the site plan may be stored on the subject property.
3. Additional licensing requirements: All mobile food carts shall be appropriately licensed
and approved for operation in Clackamas County as a Class I – IV mobile food cart.
Additionally, each food cart shall be inspected by the Sandy Fire Department once per
calendar year, as warranted by the Sandy Fire Department. All food carts are subject to
all applicable city, county, and state regulations. The property owner shall ensure that
each food cart located on the subject site complies with these regulations.
17.74 - 13
Revised by Ordinance 2014-05 effective 06/02/14
G. Denial, Revocation or Suspension of Permit
1. A food cart permit shall be subject to revocation by the Director if the application is
found to include false information or if the conditions of approval have not been
complied with or are not being maintained.
2. Food carts that have not been in use for over 30 days are determined defunct and shall be
removed from the private property which they are located.
3. Food carts that have not been in use for over 60 days are determined abandoned and shall
be removed in accordance with nuisance regulations as described in Title 8 of the Sandy
Municipal Code.
4. Reapplication for a food cart, which has been denied or revoked, cannot be made within
one (1) year from the date of the Director’s action, except that the Director may schedule
a hearing before the City Council if there is new evidence or a change in circumstances.
17.76 - 1
CHAPTER 17.76 - MAJOR UTILITY SITING STANDARDS
17.76.00 INTENT
These regulations are intended to provide specific siting criteria for major utility facilities to
reduce the potential negative impacts on surrounding development.
17.76.10 SITING STANDARDS
Major Utilities (as defined in Chapter 17.10-Definitions) require Conditional Use approval. In
addition to complying with the review criteria for conditional uses, major utilities shall meet the
following siting standards:
A. The setback from the base of a major utility structure to any lot in an adjoining residential
district shall be at least 20 percent of the structure height.
B. In any residential district, commercial communication transmission facilities shall have a
minimum 500-ft. separation from each other. Emergency and public communication facilities
are exempt from this requirement.
C. In any nonresidential district, the owner of a commercial communication facility shall agree
to permit other businesses to attach communication facilities that do not interfere with the
primary purpose of the facility, provided that an agreement is negotiated for reasonable
compensation and indemnification from any liability that may result from such attachment.
D. If scientifically validated evidence demonstrates the level of electric magnetic fields (EMFs)
produced by the major utility poses a health hazard based on nationally accepted standards,
the City Council may require removal of the major utility after conducting a public hearing in
accordance with Chapter 17.20-Public Hearings.
17.78 - 1
Revised by Ordinance No. 2020-13 (effective 08/05/20)
CHAPTER 17.78 - ANNEXATION
17.78.00 INTENT
The procedures and standards established in this chapter are required for review of proposed
annexations in order to:
A. Maximize citizen involvement in the annexation review process by holding a public hearing;
B. Ensure that public facilities are or will be available to serve land annexed to the City;
C. Establish a system for measuring the physical, environmental, fiscal and related social effects
of proposed annexations; and,
D. Where possible and practical, avoid the creation of irregular boundaries or annexations that
create “island,” “cherry stem” or “shoestring” annexations.
17.78.10 PROCEDURAL CONSIDERATIONS
A. The corporate limits of the City shall include all territory encompassed by its boundaries as
they now exist or are modified as provided herein unless mandated by State Law.
B. The City may annex an unincorporated area that is surrounded by the City boundary.
C. The City may annex land for public facilities. Public facilities include but are not limited to
schools, senior centers, roads, police and fire stations, parks or open space, and public water,
sewer and storm drainage facilities.
17.78.15 TYPES OF ANNEXATION
A. Type A: Annexation in conformance with conceptual zoning designation
B. Type B: Annexation + zone change, including Parks and Open Space (POS) and/or Flood
and Slope Hazard (FSH) Overlay District
C. Type C: Annexation + plan map change + zone change
17.78.20 CONDITIONS FOR ANNEXATION
The following conditions must be met prior to beginning an annexation request:
A. The requirement of Oregon Revised Statutes, Chapters 199 and 222 for initiation of the
annexation process are met;
B. The site must be within the City of Sandy Urban Growth Boundary (UGB);
17.78 - 2
Revised by Ordinance No. 2020-13 (effective 08/05/20)
C. The site must be contiguous to the city or separated from it only by a public right-of-way or a
stream, bay, lake or other body of water; and
D. The site has not violated Section 17.78.25.
17.78.25 TREE RETENTION
The intent of this section is to treat property with annexation potential (in the UGB) as if it had
been subject, prior to annexation, to the tree retention provisions of the City's Urban Forestry
Ordinance (Chapter 17.102) and Flood and Slope Hazard (FSH) Overlay District (Chapter
17.60), to discourage property owners from removing trees prior to annexation as a way of
avoiding Urban Forestry Ordinance provisions, and to prevent unnecessary tree removal for
future subdivision layout. In accordance with ORS 527.722, the State Forester shall provide the
City with a copy of the notice or written plan when a forest operation is proposed within the
UGB. The City shall review and comment on an individual forest operation and inform the
landowner or operator of all other regulations that apply but that do not pertain to activities
regulated under the Oregon Forest Practices Act.
A. Properties shall not be considered for annexation for a minimum of ten (10) years if any of
the following apply:
1. Where any trees six (6) inches or greater diameter at breast height (DBH) have been
removed within 25 feet of the high water level along a perennial stream in the ten (10)
years prior to the annexation application.
2. Where more than two (2) trees (six (6) inches or greater DBH) per 500 linear feet have
been removed in the area between 25 feet and 80 feet of the high water level of Tickle
Creek in the ten (10) years prior to the annexation application.
3. Where more than two (2) trees (six (6) inches or greater DBH) per 500 linear feet have
been removed in the area between 25 feet and 50 feet of the high water level along other
perennial streams in the ten (10) years prior to the annexation application.
4. Where any trees six (6) inches or greater DBH have been removed on 25 percent or
greater slopes in the ten (10) years prior to the annexation application.
5. Where more than ten (10) trees (11 inches or greater DBH) per gross acre have been
removed in the ten (10) years prior to the annexation application, except as provided
below:
a. Sites under one (1) acre in area shall not remove more than five (5) trees in the ten
(10) years prior to the annexation application.
b. Sites where removal of ten (10) or fewer trees will result in the site not meeting
the minimum tree retention requirements of Chapter 17.102, Urban Forestry.
c. For properties in or adjacent to the Bornstedt Village Overlay (BVO), tree
removal must not result in fewer than six (6) healthy 11 inch DBH or greater trees
17.78 - 3
Revised by Ordinance No. 2020-13 (effective 08/05/20)
per acre. For properties in or adjacent to the BVO and within 300 feet of the FSH
Overlay District, tree removal must not result in fewer than nine (9) healthy 11
inch DBH or greater trees per acre.
Rounding: Site area shall be rounded to the nearest half acre and allowed tree removal
shall be calculated accordingly. For example, a 1.5 acre site will not be allowed to
remove more than fifteen (15) trees in the ten (10) years prior to the annexation
application. A calculation of 1.2 acres is rounded down to one (1) acre and a calculation
of 1.8 is rounded up to two (2) acres.
Cumulative Calculation: Total gross acreage includes riparian areas and other sensitive
habitat. Trees removed under Sections 17.78.25(A) 2. and 3. shall count towards tree
removal under Section 17.78.25(A) 5.
B. Exceptions. The City Council may grant exceptions to this section where:
1. The property owner can demonstrate that Douglas Fir, Western Red Cedar, or other
appropriate native trees were planted at a ratio of at least two trees for every one tree
removed no less than ten (10) years prior to the submission of the annexation
application, and at least 50 percent of these trees have remained healthy; or
2. The Council finds that tree removal was necessary due to hazards, or right-of-way or
utility facilities or access; or
3. The trees were removed because they were dead, dying, or diseased and their
condition as such resulted from an accident or non-human cause, as determined by a
certified arborist or other qualified professional; or
4. The trees removed were nuisance trees; or
5. The trees were removed as part of a stream restoration and enhancement program
approved by the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife as improving riparian
function; or
6. The trees removed were orchard trees, Christmas trees, or commercial nursery trees
grown for commercial purposes; or
7. The application of this section will create an island of unincorporated area.
17.78.30 ZONING OF ANNEXED AREAS
A. All lands within the urban growth boundary of Sandy have been classified according to the
appropriate city land use designation as noted on the comprehensive plan map (as per the
city/county urban growth management area agreement). The zoning classification shall
reflect the city land use classification as illustrated in Table 17.26.20.
17.78 - 4
Revised by Ordinance No. 2020-13 (effective 08/05/20)
17.78.40 EXISTING USE, ACTIVITY OR STRUCTURE
A. As of the effective date of annexation, no use or activity shall be considered non-conforming
if the use or activity: (1) violates or conflicts with county zoning regulations and (2) is not
classified as non-conforming under county zoning regulations. Any such use or activity shall
constitute a violation of this ordinance.
B. Any use, activity or structure that is existing at the effective date of annexation, under a
Clackamas County use permit with a time limit imposed, shall not be a non-conforming use,
but may continue for the extent of the time limit. Such use permits may not be extended
without City approval.
C. Any lot or parcel of land duly recorded in the Clackamas County Recorder's Office prior to
the effective date of this Ordinance and having an area, width, depth, or street frontage less
than that required in the Zoning District regulations in which such lot or parcel is situated,
shall be deemed to be a lot and may be used as a building site, provided that all other
regulations for the Zoning District shall apply.
17.78.50 ANNEXATION CRITERIA
Requests for annexation shall not have an adverse impact on the citizens of Sandy, either
financially or in relation to the livability of the city or any neighborhoods within the annexation
area.
A. Except as provided in subsection B of this section, an application to annex property into the
city shall meet the following criteria:
1. The application demonstrates how the property will be served by adequate public
facilities and services, including sanitary sewer, domestic water, transportation, internet
and parks. Public facilities and services must be provided in a manner consistent with the
City’s adopted public facility plans, comprehensive plan, transportation system plan,
parks and trails master plan, and any applicable area plan or master plan. The application
must demonstrate how the public facilities and services will be provided to the property
in an orderly, efficient, and timely manner.
2. The application demonstrates how impacts to existing City public facilities and services
(sewer, water, stormwater, and transportation) from development of the property will be
mitigated, if necessary. Mitigation may include construction of on-site or off-site
improvements or improvements to existing infrastructure to City standards and
specifications. The application must demonstrate adequate funding for the mitigation. If
the financing requires City funds, the funding must be approved by the City Council prior
to annexation. The City may rely on the standards and criteria of SMC Chapter 17.84
(Improvements Required with Development) and other relevant standards and criteria in
the comprehensive plan or development code to analyze an applicant’s proposed
mitigation of impacts. In order to ensure adequate public facilities and services will exist
to serve property annexed to the City, an applicant may be required to enter into an
agreement with the City that governs the extent and timing of infrastructure
improvements.
17.78 - 5
Revised by Ordinance No. 2020-13 (effective 08/05/20)
3. The application demonstrates that the annexation and proposed zoning is consistent with
the Transportation Planning Rule (TPR) or explains that the TPR analysis is not required.
4. The annexation is in the best interest of the City. Generally, the annexation is in the best
interest of the city if it meets one or more of the following criteria:
a. A needed solution for existing problems, resulting from insufficient sanitation, water
service, or other urban service related problems; or
b. Land for development to meet urban needs and that meets a logical growth pattern of
the city and encourages orderly growth; or
c. Needed routes for utility and transportation networks.
B. The standards described in paragraphs A.1 and A.2 above do not apply to:
1. An application to annex property that is smaller than one acre.
2. An “island” annexation under ORS 222.750.
3. An annexation for which the City has executed an annexation agreement and the
agreement allows for A.1 and A.2 to be delayed until development is proposed.
17.78.60 APPLICATION SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
Requests for annexation shall be made on forms provided by the city for such purposes and shall
be accompanied by all of the following:
A. Written consent form to the annexation signed by the owners of all land to be annexed.
B. A legal description certified by a registered surveyor or engineer.
C. The application fee established by the city.
D. A list of property owners within one thousand (1,000) feet of the subject property and two
sets of mailing labels.
E. Vicinity map showing the area to be annexed including adjacent city territory.
F. Site Plan drawn to scale (not greater than one inch = fifty feet), indicating:
1. The location of existing structures (if any);
2. The location of streets, sewer, water, electric and other utilities, on or adjacent to the
property to be annexed;
3. Approximate or surveyed location of areas subject to regulation under Chapter 17.60,
Flood and Slope Hazard (FSH) Overlay District, including, but not limited to, wetland
boundaries, streams, top of bank, buffers, areas of 25 percent or greater slope, restricted
development areas, and the FSH analysis area. If the applicant wants to avoid an
17.78 - 6
Revised by Ordinance No. 2020-13 (effective 08/05/20)
additional zone map modification request at time of development, then these areas will
need to be surveyed at the time of annexation application submittal.
G. Narrative Statement explaining the proposal and addressing:
1. Availability, capacity and status of existing water, sewer, drainage, transportation, fire,
and park facilities;
2. Additional facilities, if any, required to meet the increased demand and any proposed
phasing of such facilities in accordance with projected demand;
3. Ability to adhere to adopted City plans including, but not limited to, the Transportation
System Plan, Parks and Trails Master Plan, Comprehensive Plan, and Specific Area
Plans; this analysis may be deferred if the applicant enters into an annexation agreement
as provided in Section 17.78.50(B); and,
4. Method and source of financing required to provide additional facilities, if any.
H. Transportation Planning Rule findings, if applicable.
17.78.70 REVIEW PROCEDURE
Type A, B & C
1. Pre-application conference;
2. Submission of completed application;
3. Review by Planning Commission with recommendation to City Council;
4. Review by City Council;
5. Approval or denial by City Council.
17.78.80 EXCEPTIONS
Exceptions may be granted for identified health hazards and for those matters which the City
Council determines that the public interest would not be served by undertaking the entire
annexation process. The City Council may authorize an exception to any of the requirements of
this chapter. An exception shall require a statement of findings that indicates the basis for the
exception.
17.78.90 ANNEXATION CONDITIONS
A. All properties annexed are subject to inclusion within applicable advance financing districts
and urban renewal districts.
B. These conditions apply to all annexed properties regardless of transfers of the ownership of
such properties.
17.80 - 1
Revised by Ordinance No. 2018-29 effective 12/05/18
CHAPTER 17.80 - ADDITIONAL SETBACKS ON COLLECTOR & ARTERIAL
STREETS
17.80.00 INTENT
The requirement of additional special setbacks for development on arterial or collector is
intended to provide better light, air and vision on more heavily traveled streets. The additional
setback, on substandard streets, will protect collector and arterial streets and permit the eventual
widening of streets.
17.80.10 APPLICABLITY
These regulations apply to all collector and arterial streets as identified in the latest adopted
Sandy Transportation System Plan (TSP). The Central Business District (C-1) is exempt from
Chapter 17.80 regulations.
17.80.20 SPECIFIC SETBACKS
Any structure located on streets listed above or identified in the Transportation System Plan as
arterials or collectors shall have a minimum setback of 20 feet measured from the property line.
This applies to applicable front, rear and side yards.
17.82 - 1
Revised by Ordinance No. 2018-29 effective 12/05/18
CHAPTER 17.82 - SPECIAL SETBACKS ON TRANSIT STREETS
17.82.00 INTENT
The intent is to provide for convenient, direct, and accessible pedestrian access to and from
public sidewalks and transit facilities; provide a safe, pleasant and enjoyable pedestrian
experience by connecting activities within a structure to the adjacent sidewalk and/or transit
street; and, promote the use of pedestrian, bicycle, and transit modes of transportation.
17.82.10 APPLICABILITY
This chapter applies to all residential development located adjacent to a transit street. A transit
street is defined as any street designated as a collector or arterial, unless otherwise designated in
the Transit System Plan.
17.82.20 BUILDING ORIENTATION
A. All residential dwellings shall have their primary entrances oriented toward a transit street
rather than a parking area, or if not adjacent to a transit street, toward a public right-of-way
or private walkway which leads to a transit street.
B. Dwellings shall have a primary entrance connecting directly between the street and building
interior. A clearly marked, convenient, safe and lighted pedestrian route shall be provided to
the entrance, from the transit street. The pedestrian route shall consist of materials such as
concrete, asphalt, stone, brick, permeable pavers, or other materials as approved by the
Director. The pedestrian path shall be permanently affixed to the ground with gravel
subsurface or a comparable subsurface as approved by the Director.
C. Primary dwelling entrances shall be architecturally emphasized and visible from the street
and shall include a covered porch at least 5 feet in depth.
D. If the site has frontage on more than one transit street, the dwelling shall provide one main
entrance oriented to a transit street or to a corner where two transit streets intersect.
17.84 - 1
CHAPTER 17.84 - IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED WITH DEVELOPMENT
17.84.00 INTENT
This chapter provides general information regarding improvements required with residential,
commercial, and industrial development. It is intended to clarify timing, extent, and standards for
improvements required in conjunction with development. In addition to the standards in this
chapter, additional standards for specific situations are contained in other chapters.
17.84.10 EXCEPTIONS
Single family residential development on existing lots are exempt from this chapter, with the
exception of 17.84.30 Pedestrian Requirements.
17.84.20 TIMING OF IMPROVEMENTS
A. All improvements required by the standards in this chapter shall be installed concurrently
with development, as follows:
1. Where a land division is proposed, each proposed lot shall have required public and
franchise utility improvements installed or financially guaranteed in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 17 prior to approval of the final plat.
2. Where a land division is not proposed, the site shall have required public and franchise
utility improvements installed or financially guaranteed in accordance with the provisions
of Chapter 17 prior to temporary or final occupancy of structures.
B. Where specific approval for a phasing plan has been granted for a planned development
and/or subdivision, improvements may similarly be phased in accordance with that plan.
17.84.30 PEDESTRIAN AND BICYCLIST REQUIREMENTS
A. Sidewalks shall be required along both sides of all arterial, collector, and local streets, as
follows:
1. Sidewalks shall be a minimum of 5 ft. wide on local streets. The sidewalks shall be
separated from curbs by a tree planting area that provides separation between sidewalk
and curb, unless modified in accordance with Subsection 3 below.
2. Sidewalks along arterial and collector streets shall be separated from curbs with a
planting area, except as necessary to continue an existing curb-tight sidewalk. The
planting area shall be landscaped with trees and plant materials approved by the City. The
sidewalks shall be a minimum of 6 ft. wide.
3. Sidewalk improvements shall be made according to city standards, unless the city
determines that the public benefit in the particular case does not warrant imposing a
severe adverse impact to a natural or other significant feature such as requiring removal
of a mature tree, requiring undue grading, or requiring modification to an existing
building. Any exceptions to the standards shall generally be in the following order.
a) Narrow landscape strips
b) Narrow sidewalk or portion of sidewalk to no less than 4 feet in width
c) Eliminate landscape strips
d) Narrow on-street improvements by eliminating on-street parking
e) Eliminate sidewalks
4. The timing of the installation of sidewalks shall be as follows:
17.84 - 2
a) Sidewalks and planted areas along arterial and collector streets shall be installed with
street improvements, or with development of the site if street improvements are
deferred.
b) Sidewalks along local streets shall be installed in conjunction with development of
the site, generally with building permits, except as noted in (c) below.
c) Where sidewalks on local streets abut common areas, drainageways, or other publicly
owned or semi-publicly owned areas, the sidewalks and planted areas shall be
installed with street improvements.
B. Safe and convenient pedestrian and bicyclist facilities that strive to minimize travel distance
to the extent practicable shall be provided in conjunction with new development within and
between new subdivisions, planned developments, commercial developments, industrial
areas, residential areas, public transit stops, school transit stops, and neighborhood activity
centers such as schools and parks, as follows:
1. For the purposes of this section, “safe and convenient” means pedestrian and bicyclist
facilities that: are reasonably free from hazards which would interfere with or discourage
travel for short trips; provide a direct route of travel between destinations; and meet the
travel needs of pedestrians and bicyclists considering destination and length of trip.
2. To meet the intent of “B” above, right-of-ways connecting cul-de-sacs or passing through
unusually long or oddly shaped blocks shall be a minimum of 15 ft. wide with 8 feet of
pavement.
3. 12 feet wide pathways shall be provided in areas with high bicycle volumes or multiple
use by bicyclists, pedestrians, and joggers.
4. Pathways and sidewalks shall be encouraged in new developments by clustering
buildings or constructing convenient pedestrian ways. Pedestrian walkways shall be
provided in accordance with the following standards:
a) The pedestrian circulation system shall be at least five feet in width and shall connect
the sidewalk on each abutting street to the main entrance of the primary structure on
the site to minimize out of direction pedestrian travel.
b) Walkways at least five feet in width shall be provided to connect the pedestrian
circulation system with existing or planned pedestrian facilities which abut the site
but are not adjacent to the streets abutting the site.
c) Walkways shall be as direct as possible and avoid unnecessary meandering.
d) Walkway/driveway crossings shall be minimized. Internal parking lot design shall
maintain ease of access for pedestrians from abutting streets, pedestrian facilities, and
transit stops.
e) With the exception of walkway/driveway crossings, walkways shall be separated
from vehicle parking or vehicle maneuvering areas by grade, different paving
material, painted crosshatching or landscaping. They shall be constructed in
accordance with the sidewalk standards adopted by the City. (This provision does not
require a separated walkway system to collect drivers and passengers from cars that
have parked on site unless an unusual parking lot hazard exists).
f) Pedestrians amenities such as covered walk-ways, awnings, visual corridors and
benches will be encouraged. For every two benches provided, the minimum parking
requirements will be reduced by one, up to a maximum of four benches per site.
Benches shall have direct access to the circulation system.
C. Where a development site is traversed by or adjacent to a future trail linkage identified within
the Transportation System Plan, improvement of the trail linkage shall occur concurrent with
17.84 - 3
development. Dedication of the trail to the City shall be provided in accordance with
17.84.80.
D. To provide for orderly development of an effective pedestrian network, pedestrian facilities
installed concurrent with development of a site shall be extended through the site to the edge
of adjacent property(ies).
E. To ensure improved access between a development site and an existing developed facility
such as a commercial center, school, park, or trail system, the Planning Commission or
Director may require off-site pedestrian facility improvements concurrent with development.
17.84.40 TRANSIT AND SCHOOL BUS TRANSIT REQUIREMENTS
A. Development sites located along existing or planned transit routes shall, where appropriate,
incorporate bus pull-outs and/or shelters into the site design. These improvements shall be
installed in accordance with the guidelines and standards of the transit agency. School bus
pull-outs and/or shelters may also be required, where appropriate, as a condition of approval
for a residential development of greater than 50 dwelling units where a school bus pick-up
point is anticipated to serve a large number of children.
B. New developments at or near existing or planned transit or school bus transit stops shall
design development sites to provide safe, convenient access to the transit system, as follows:
1. Commercial and civic use developments shall provide a prominent entrance oriented
towards arterial and collector streets, with front setbacks reduced as much as possible to
provide access for pedestrians, bicycles, and transit.
2. All developments shall provide safe, convenient pedestrian walkways between the
buildings and the transit stop, in accordance with the provisions of 17.84.30 B.
17.84.50 STREET REQUIREMENTS
A. Traffic evaluations may be required of all development proposals in accordance with the
following:
1. A proposal establishing the scope of the traffic evaluation shall be submitted for review
to the City Engineer. The evaluation requirements shall reflect the magnitude of the
project in accordance with accepted traffic engineering practices. Large projects should
assess all nearby key intersections. Once the scope of the traffic evaluation has been
approved, the applicant shall present the results with and an overall site development
proposal. If required by the City Engineer, such evaluations shall be signed by a Licensed
Professional Civil Engineer or Licensed Professional Traffic Engineer licensed in the
State of Oregon.
2. If the traffic evaluation identifies level-of-service conditions less than the minimum
standard established in the Transportation System Plan, improvements and funding
strategies mitigating the problem shall be considered concurrent with a development
proposal.
B. Location of new arterial streets shall conform to the Transportation System Plan in
accordance with the following:
1. Arterial streets should generally be spaced in one-mile intervals.
2. Traffic signals should generally not be spaced closer than 1500 ft. for reasonable traffic
progression.
17.84 - 4
C. Local streets shall be designed to discourage through traffic. NOTE: for the purposes of this
section, “through traffic” means the traffic traveling through an area that does not have a
local origination or destination. To discourage through traffic and excessive vehicle speeds
the following street design characteristics shall be considered, as well as other designs
intended to discourage traffic:
1. Straight segments of local streets should be kept to less than a quarter mile in length. As
practical, local streets should include traffic calming features, and design features such as
curves and “T” intersections while maintaining pedestrian connectivity.
2. Local streets should typically intersect in “T” configurations rather than 4-way
intersections to minimize conflicts and discourage through traffic. Adjacent “T”
intersections shall maintain a minimum of 150 ft. between the nearest edges of the 2
rights-of-way.
3. Cul-de-sacs should generally not exceed 400 ft. in length nor serve more than 20
dwelling units, except in cases where existing topography, wetlands, or drainage systems
or other existing features necessitate a longer cul-de-sac in order to provide adequate
access to an area. Cul-de-sacs longer than 400 feet or developments with only one access
point may be required to provide an alternative access for emergency vehicle use only,
install fire prevention sprinklers, or provide other mitigating measures, determined by the
City.
D. Development sites shall be provided with access from a public street improved to City
standards in accordance with the following:
1. Where a development site abuts an existing public street not improved to City standards,
the abutting street shall be improved to City standards along the full frontage of the
property concurrent with development.
2. Half-street improvements are considered the minimum required improvement. Threequarter-
street or full-street improvements shall be required where traffic volumes
generated by the development are such that a half-street improvement would cause safety
and/or capacity problems. Such a determination shall be made by the City Engineer.
3. To ensure improved access to a development site consistent with policies on orderly
urbanization and extension of public facilities the Planning Commission or Director may
require off-site improvements concurrent with development. Off-site improvement
requirements upon the site developer shall be reasonably related to the anticipated
impacts of the development.
4. Reimbursement agreements for ¾ street improvements (i.e., curb face to curb face) may
be requested by the developer per Chapter 12 of the SMC.
5. A ½ street improvement includes curb and pavement 2 feet beyond the center line of the
right-of-way. A ¾ street improvement includes curbs on both sides of the side and full
pavement between curb faces.
17.84 - 5
E. As necessary to provide for orderly development of adjacent properties, public streets
installed concurrent with development of a site shall be extended through the site to the edge
of the adjacent property(ies) in accordance with the following:
1. Temporary dead-ends created by this requirement to extend street improvements to the
edge of adjacent properties may be installed without turn-arounds, subject to the approval
of the Fire Marshal.
2. In order to assure the eventual continuation or completion of the street, reserve strips may
be required.
F. Where required by the Planning Commission or Director, public street improvements may be
required through a development site to provide for the logical extension of an existing street
network or to connect a site with a nearby neighborhood activity center, such as a school or
park. Where this creates a land division incidental to the development, a land partition shall
be completed concurrent with the development.
G. Except for extensions of existing streets, no street names shall be used that will duplicate or
be confused with names of existing streets. Street names and numbers shall conform to the
established pattern in the surrounding area and be subject to approval of the Director.
H. Location, grades, alignment, and widths for all public streets shall be considered in relation
to existing and planned streets, topographical conditions, public convenience and safety, and
proposed land use. Where topographical conditions present special circumstances, exceptions
to these standards may be granted by the City Engineer provided the safety and capacity of
the street network is not adversely affected. The following standards shall apply:
1. Location of streets in a development shall not preclude development of adjacent
properties. Streets shall conform to planned street extensions identified in the
Transportation Plan and/or provide for continuation of the existing street network in the
surrounding area.
2. Grades shall not exceed 6 percent on arterial streets, 10 percent on collector streets, and
15 percent on local streets.
3. As far as practical, arterial streets and collector streets shall be extended in alignment
with existing streets by continuation of the street centerline. When staggered street
alignments resulting in “T” intersections are unavoidable, they shall leave a minimum of
150 ft. between the nearest edges of the two rights-of-way.
4. Centerline radii of curves shall not be less than 500 ft. on arterial streets, 300 ft. on
collector streets, and 100 ft. on local streets.
5. Streets shall be designed to intersect at angles as near as practicable to right angles and
shall comply with the following:
a) The intersection of an arterial or collector street with another arterial or collector
street shall have a minimum of 100 ft. of straight (tangent) alignment perpendicular to
the intersection.
b) The intersection of a local street with another street shall have a minimum of 50 ft. of
straight (tangent) alignment perpendicular to the intersection.
c) Where right angle intersections are not possible, exceptions can be granted by the
City Engineer provided that intersections not at right angles have a minimum corner
radius of 20 ft. along the right-of-way lines of the acute angle.
d) Intersections with arterial streets shall have a minimum curb corner radius of 20 ft.
All other intersections shall have a minimum curb corner radius of 10 ft.
17.84 - 6
6. Right-of-way and improvement widths shall be as specified by the Transportation System
Plan. Exceptions to those specifications may be approved by the City Engineer to deal
with specific unique physical constraints of the site.
J. Private streets may be considered within a development site provided all the following
conditions are met:
1. Extension of a public street through the development site is not needed for continuation
of the existing street network or for future service to adjacent properties;
2. The development site remains in one ownership, or adequate mechanisms are established
(such as a homeowner’s association invested with the authority to enforce payment) to
ensure that a private street installed with a land division will be adequately maintained;
and
3. Where a private street is installed in connection with a land division, paving standards
consistent with City standards for public streets shall be utilized to protect the interests of
future homeowners.
17.84.60 PUBLIC FACILITY EXTENSIONS
A. All development sites shall be provided with public water, sanitary sewer, broadband (fiber),
and storm drainage.
B. Where necessary to serve property as specified in “A” above, required public facility
installations shall be constructed concurrent with development.
C. Off-site public facility extensions necessary to fully serve a development site and adjacent
properties shall be constructed concurrent with development.
D. As necessary to provide for orderly development of adjacent properties, public facilities
installed concurrent with development of a site shall be extended through the site to the edge
of adjacent property(ies).
E. All public facility installations required with development shall conform to the City’s
facilities master plans.
F. Private on-site sanitary sewer and storm drainage facilities may be considered provided all
the following conditions exist:
1. Extension of a public facility through the site is not necessary for the future orderly
development of adjacent properties;
2. The development site remains in one ownership and land division does not occur (with
the exception of land divisions that may occur under the provisions of 17.84.50 F above);
3. The facilities are designed and constructed in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing
Code and other applicable codes, and permits and/or authorization to proceed with
construction is issued prior to commencement of work.
17.84.70 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT PROCEDURES
It is in the best interests of the community to ensure public improvements installed in
conjunction with development are constructed in accordance with all applicable City policies,
standards, procedures, and ordinances. Therefore, prior to commencement of installation of
public water, sanitary sewer, storm drainage, broadband (fiber), street, bicycle, or pedestrian
17.84 - 7
improvements for any development site, developers shall contact the City Engineer to receive
information regarding adopted procedures governing plan submittal, plan review and approval,
permit requirements, inspection and testing requirements, progress of the work, and provision of
easements, dedications, and as-built drawings for installation of public improvements. All work
shall proceed in accordance with those adopted procedures, and all applicable City policies,
standards, and ordinances.
Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this Code, the Director may order
the work stopped by notice in writing served on the persons engaged in performing the work or
causing the work to be performed. The work shall stop until authorized by the Director to
proceed with the work or with corrective action to remedy substandard work already completed.
17.84.80 FRANCHISE UTILITY INSTALLATIONS
These standards are intended to supplement, not replace or supersede, requirements contained
within individual franchise agreements the City has with providers of electrical power,
telephone, cable television, and natural gas services (hereinafter referred to as “franchise
utilities”).
A. Where a land division is proposed, the developer shall provide franchise utilities to the
development site. Each lot created within a subdivision shall have an individual service
available or financially guaranteed prior to approval of the final plat.
B. Where necessary, in the judgment of the Director, to provide for orderly development of
adjacent properties, franchise utilities shall be extended through the site to the edge of
adjacent property(ies), whether or not the development involves a land division.
C. The developer shall have the option of choosing whether or not to provide natural gas or
cable television service to the development site, providing all of the following conditions
exist:
1. Extension of franchise utilities through the site is not necessary for the future orderly
development of adjacent property(ies);
2. The development site remains in one ownership and land division does not occur (with
the exception of land divisions that may occur under the provisions of 17.84.50 F above);
and
3. The development is non-residential.
D. Where a land division is not proposed, the site shall have franchise utilities required by this
section provided in accordance with the provisions of 17.84.70 prior to occupancy of
structures.
E. All franchise utility distribution facilities installed to serve new development shall be placed
underground except as provided below. The following facilities may be installed aboveground:
1. Poles for street lights and traffic signals, pedestals for police and fire system
communications and alarms, pad mounted transformers, pedestals, pedestal mounted
terminal boxes and meter cabinets, concealed ducts, substations, or facilities used to carry
voltage higher than 35,000 volts;
2. Overhead utility distribution lines may be permitted upon approval of the City Engineer
when unusual terrain, soil, or other conditions make underground installation
17.84 - 8
impracticable. Location of such overhead utilities shall follow rear or side lot lines
wherever feasible.
F. The developer shall be responsible for making necessary arrangements with franchise utility
providers for provision of plans, timing of installation, and payment for services installed.
Plans for franchise utility installations shall be submitted concurrent with plan submittal for
public improvements to facilitate review by the City Engineer.
G. The developer shall be responsible for installation of underground conduit for street lighting
along all public streets improved in conjunction with the development in accordance with the
following:
1. The developer shall coordinate with the City Engineer to determine the location of future
street light poles. The street light plan shall be designed to provide illumination meeting
standards set by the City Engineer.
2. The developer shall make arrangements with the serving electric utility for trenching
prior to installation of underground conduit for street lighting.
17.84.90 LAND FOR PUBLIC PURPOSES
A. Easements for public sanitary sewer, water, storm drain, pedestrian and bicycle facilities
shall be provided whenever these facilities are located outside a public right-of-way in
accordance with the following:
1. When located between adjacent lots, easements shall be provided on one side of a lot
line.
2. The minimum easement width for a single utility is 15 ft. The minimum easement width
for two adjacent utilities is 20 ft. The easement width shall be centered on the utility to
the greatest extent practicable. Wider easements may be required for unusually deep
facilities.
B. Public utility easements with a minimum width of 5 feet shall be provided adjacent to all
street rights-of-way for franchise utility installations.
C. Where a development site is traversed by a drainageway or water course, a drainage way
dedication shall be provided to the City.
D. Where a development is traversed by, or adjacent to, a future trail linkage identified within
the Transportation System Plan, dedications of suitable width to accommodate the trail
linkage shall be provided. This width shall be determined by the City Engineer, considering
the type of trail facility involved.
E. Where existing rights-of-way and/or easements within or adjacent to development sites are
nonexistent or of insufficient width, dedications may be required. The need for and widths of
those dedications shall be determined by the City Engineer.
F. Where easement or dedications are required in conjunction with land divisions, they shall be
recorded on the plat. Where a development does not include a land division, easements
and/or dedications shall be recorded on standard document forms provided by the City
Engineer.
17.84 - 9
G. If the City has an interest in acquiring any portion of a proposed subdivision or planned
development site for a public purpose, other than for those purposes listed above, or if the
City has been advised of such interest by a school district or other public agency, and there is
a reasonable assurance that steps will be taken to acquire the land, the Planning Commission
may require those portions of the land be reserved for public acquisition for a period not to
exceed 1 year.
H. Environmental assessments for all lands to be dedicated to the public or City may be required
to be provided by the developer. An environmental assessment shall include information
necessary for the City to evaluate potential liability for environmental hazards,
contamination, or required waste cleanups related to the dedicated land. An environmental
assessment shall be completed prior to the acceptance of dedicated lands in accordance with
the following:
1. The initial environmental assessment shall detail the history of ownership and general use
of the land by past owners. Upon review of the information provided by the grantor, as
well as any site investigation by the City, the Director will determine if the risks of
potential contamination warrant further investigation. When further site investigation is
warranted, a Level I Environmental Assessment shall be provided by the grantor.
17.84.100 MAIL DELIVERY FACILITIES
A. In establishing placement of mail delivery facilities, locations of sidewalks, bikeways,
intersections, existing or future driveways, existing or future utilities, right-of-way and street
width, and vehicle, bicycle and pedestrian movements shall be considered. The final location
of these facilities shall meet the approval of the City Engineer and the Post Office. Where
mail delivery facilities are being installed in conjunction with a land division, placement shall
be indicated on the plat and meet the approval of the City Engineer and the Post Office prior
to final plat approval.
B. Where mail delivery facilities are proposed to be installed in areas with an existing or future
curb-tight sidewalk, a sidewalk transition shall be provided that maintains the required design
width of the sidewalk around the mail delivery facility. If the right-of-way width will not
accommodate the sidewalk transition, a sidewalk easement shall be provided adjacent to the
right-of-way.
C. Mail delivery facilities and the associated sidewalk transition (if necessary) around these
facilities shall conform with the City’s standard construction specifications. Actual mailbox
units shall conform with the Post Office standards for mail delivery facilities.
D. Installation of mail delivery facilities is the obligation of the developer. These facilities shall
be installed concurrently with the public improvements. Where development of a site does
not require public improvements, mail delivery facilities shall be installed concurrently with
private site improvements.
17.86 - 1
Revised by Ordinance No. 2013-03 (effective 07/03/13)
CHAPTER 17.86 - PARKLAND & OPEN SPACE
17.86.00 INTENT
The availability of parkland and open space is a critical element in maintaining and improving
the quality of life in Sandy. Land that features trees, grass and vegetation provides not only an
aesthetically pleasing landscape but also buffers incompatible uses, and preserves sensitive
environmental features and important resources. Parks and open space, together with support
facilities, also help to meet the active and passive recreational needs of the population of Sandy.
This chapter implements policies of Goal 8 of the Comprehensive Plan and the Parks Master
Plan by outlining provisions for parks and open space in the City of Sandy.
17.86.10 MINIMUM PARKLAND DEDICATION REQUIREMENTS
Parkland Dedication: New residential subdivisions, planned developments, multi-family or
manufactured home park developments shall be required to provide parkland to serve existing
and future residents of those developments. Multi-family developments which provide some
"congregate" services and/or facilities, such as group transportation, dining halls, emergency
monitoring systems, etc., but which have individual dwelling units rather than sleeping quarters
only, are considered to be multi-family developments for the purpose of parkland dedication.
Licensed adult congregate living facilities, nursing homes, and all other similar facilities which
provide their clients with individual beds and sleeping quarters, but in which all other care and
services are communal and provided by facility employees, are specifically exempt from
parkland dedication and system development fee requirements.
1. The required parkland shall be dedicated as a condition of approval for the following:
a. Tentative plat for a subdivision or partition;
b. Planned Development conceptual or detailed development plan;
c. Design review for a multi-family development or manufactured home park; and
d. Replat or amendment of any site plan for multi-family development or manufactured
home park where dedication has not previously been made or where the density of the
development involved will be increased.
2. Calculation of Required Dedication: The required parkland acreage to be dedicated is based
on a calculation of the following formula rounded to the nearest 1/100 (0.00) of an acre:
Required parkland dedication (acres) = (proposed units) x (persons/unit) x 0.0043 (per
person park land dedication factor)
a. Population Formula: The following table shall be used to determine the number of
persons per unit to be used in calculating required parkland dedication:
17.86 - 2
Revised by Ordinance No. 2013-03 (effective 07/03/13)
Type of Unit Total Persons Per Unit
Single family residential 3.0
Standard multi-family unit 2.0
Manufactured dwelling park 2.0
Congregate multi-family unit 1.5
Persons per unit, age distribution, and local conditions change with time. The specific
formula for the dedication of land will, therefore, be subject to periodic review and
amendment.
b. Per Person Parkland Dedication Factor: The total parkland dedication requirement shall
be 0.0043 of an acre per person based on the adopted standard of 4.3 acres of land per
one thousand of ultimate population per the Parks Master Plan1. This standard represents
the citywide land-to-population ratio for city parks, and may be adjusted periodically
through amendments to the Parks Master Plan.
17.86.20 MINIMUM PARKLAND STANDARDS
Land required or proposed for parkland dedication shall be contained within a continuous unit
and must be suitable for active use as a neighborhood or mini-park, based on the following
criteria:
1. Homes must front on the parkland as shown in the example below:
PARK
2. The required dedication shall be contained as a contiguous unit and not separated into
pieces or divided by roadways.
3. The parkland must be able to accommodate play structures, play fields, picnic areas, or
other active park use facilities. The average slope of the active use parkland shall not
exceed 15%.
1 Parks Master Plan, Implementation Plan section, Pages 4 and 5 indicate a required park acreage total of 64.5 acres.
This number, divided by population (2015) of 15,000 equates to 4.3 acres per 1000 population or 0.0043 per person.
17.86 - 3
Revised by Ordinance No. 2013-03 (effective 07/03/13)
4. Any retaining wall constructed at the perimeter of the park adjacent to a public right-ofway
or private street shall not exceed 4 feet in height.
5. Once dedicated, the City will assume maintenance responsibility for the neighborhood or
mini parkland.
17.86.30 DEDICATION PROCEDURES
Prior to approval of the final plat, the developer shall dedicate the land as previously determined
by the City in conjunction with approval of the tentative plat. Dedication of land in conjunction
with multi-family development shall be required prior to issuance of permits and commencement
of construction.
A. Prior to acceptance of required parkland dedications, the applicant/developer shall complete
the following items for all proposed dedication areas:
1. The developer shall clear, fill, and/or grade all land to the satisfaction of the City, install
sidewalks on the park land adjacent to any street, and seed the park land; and,
2. The developer shall submit a Phase I Environmental Site Assessment completed by a
qualified professional according to American Society of Testing and Materials (ASTM)
standards (ASTM E 1527). The results of this study shall indicate a clean environmental
record.
B. Additional Requirements
1. In addition to a formal dedication on the plat to be recorded, the subdivider shall convey
the required lands to the city by general warranty deed. The developer of a multi-family
development or manufactured home park shall deed the lands required to be dedicated by
a general warranty deed. In any of the above situations, the land so dedicated and deeded
shall not be subject to any reservations of record, encumbrances of any kind or easements
which, in the opinion of the Director, will interfere with the use of the land for park, open
space or recreational purposes.
The subdivider or developer shall be required to present to the City a title insurance
policy on the subject property ensuring the marketable state of the title.
2. Where any reservations, encumbrances or easements exist, the City may require payment
in lieu of the dedication of lands unless it chooses to accept the land subject to
encumbrances.
C. Phased Developments. In a phased development, the required park land for the entire
development shall be dedicated prior to approval of the final plat for the first phase.
Improvements to the land as required by 17.86.30 (A.1.) shall be made prior to approval of
the final plat for the phase that includes the park land.
17.86 - 4
Revised by Ordinance No. 2013-03 (effective 07/03/13)
17.86.40 CASH IN LIEU OF DEDICATION
At the city’s discretion only, the city may accept payment of a fee in lieu of land dedication. The
city may require payment in lieu of land when the park land to be dedicated is less than 3 acres.
A payment in lieu of land dedication is separate from Park Systems Development Charges, and is
not eligible for a credit of Park Systems Development Charges. The amount of the fee in lieu of
land dedication (in dollars per acre) shall be set by City Council Resolution, and it shall be based
on the typical market value of developed property (finished lots) in Sandy net of related
development costs.
1. The following factors shall be used in the choice of whether to accept land or cash in lieu:
a. The topography, geology, access to, parcel size, and location of land in the
development available for dedication;
b. Potential adverse/beneficial effects on environmentally sensitive areas;
c. Compatibility with the Parks Master Plan, Public Facilities element of the
Comprehensive Plan, and the City of Sandy Capital Improvements Program in effect
at the time of dedication;
d. Availability of previously acquired property; and
e. The feasibility of dedication.
2. Cash in lieu of parkland dedication shall be paid prior to approval of the final plat or as
specified below:
a. 50 percent of the payment shall be paid prior to final plat approval, and
b. The remaining 50 percent of the payment pro-rated equally among the lots, plus an
administrative surcharge as determined by the City Council through a resolution, will
constitute a lien against the property payable at the time of sale.
17.86.50 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR OPEN SPACE DEDICATION
The applicant through a subdivision or design review process may propose the designation and
protection of open space areas as part of that process. This open space will not, however, be
counted toward the parkland dedication requirement of Sections 17.86.10 through 17.86.40.
1. The types of open space that may be provided are as follows:
a. Natural Areas: areas of undisturbed vegetation, steep slopes, stream corridors,
wetlands, wildlife habitat areas or areas replanted with native vegetation after
construction.
b. Greenways: linear green belts linking residential areas with other open space areas.
These greenways may contain bicycle paths or footpaths. Connecting greenways
between residences and recreational areas are encouraged.
17.86 - 5
Revised by Ordinance No. 2013-03 (effective 07/03/13)
2. A subdivision or design review application proposing designation of open space shall
include the following information as part of this application:
a. Designate the boundaries of all open space areas; and
b. Specify the manner in which the open space shall be perpetuated, maintained, and
administered; and
c. Provide for public access to trails included in the Park Master Plan, including but not
limited to the Tickle Creek Path.
3. Dedication of open space may occur concurrently with development of the project. At the
discretion of the city, for development that will be phased, the open space may be set
aside in totality and/or dedicated in conjunction with the first phase of the development or
incrementally set aside and dedicated in proportion to the development occurring in each
phase.
4. Open space areas shall be maintained so that the use and enjoyment thereof is not
diminished or destroyed. Open space areas may be owned, preserved, and maintained by
any of the following mechanisms or combinations thereof:
a. Dedication to the City of Sandy or an appropriate public agency approved by the City,
if there is a public agency willing to accept the dedication. Prior to acceptance of
proposed open space, the City may require the developer to submit a Phase I
Environmental Site Assessment completed by a qualified professional according to
American Society of Testing and Materials (ASTM) standards (ASTM E 1527). The
results of this study shall indicate a clean environmental record.
b. Common ownership by a homeowner's association that assumes full responsibility for
its maintenance;
c. Dedication of development rights to an appropriate public agency with ownership
remaining with the developer or homeowner's association. Maintenance responsibility
will remain with the property owner; and/or
d. Deed-restricted private ownership preventing development and/or subsequent
subdivision and providing for maintenance responsibilities.
5. In the event that any private owner of open space fails to maintain it according to the
standards of this Code, the City of Sandy, following reasonable notice, may demand that
the deficiency of maintenance be corrected, and may enter the open space for
maintenance purposes. All costs thereby incurred by the City shall be charged to those
persons having the primary responsibility for maintenance of the open space.
17.90- 1
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
CHAPTER 17.90 - DESIGN STANDARDS
17.90.00 INTENT
Chapter 17.90 is intended to implement the following design standards. In addition to these
standards, several appendices are included to aid in the implementation of these standards.
Applicable appendices are referenced in this chapter and kept on file by the Planning Director at
City Hall. In implementing these standards, the reviewing body shall refer to the following
objectives in evaluating Design Review requests:
A. Protect and enhance the city’s quality of life and community image.
B. Encourage functional, safe, and aesthetically pleasing development, while maintaining
compatibility with the surrounding built and natural environment.
C. Implement the Sandy Style, as described by this chapter. The Sandy Style is based on the
following guiding principles:
1. Celebrate Sandy as the Gateway to Mount Hood through contextually appropriate
landscaping and building designs.
2. Protect and enhance Sandy’s tree canopy, particularly along the Highway 26 Landscape
Management Corridor.
3. Emphasize a “village” scale and character in new development. Village scale means
development is compact and walkable, building entrances are oriented to the street
sidewalk or a plaza, and large building masses are broken down through a combination of
design elements such as articulation, combinations of complementary building materials
and detailing.
4. Express elements of or reflect Cascadian architecture by adapting appropriate elements of
English Arts and Crafts Style (1900-1920) and Oregon Rustic Style (1915-1940), and/or
similar elements, into new buildings and exterior remodels, except in locations where this
code allows or requires a different architectural style (e.g., C-1 Historic Roadside
Commercial District).
5. Encourage green building practices in new construction, such as the use of renewable
energy (e.g., solar and wind), use of recycled materials, integration of water quality
facilities in landscapes, capture of rainwater for irrigation, and similar practices.
D. The city considers the following elements to be incompatible with the Sandy Style. The
reviewing body may deny, or require modifications to, a project with any of the following:
1. Excessive tree removal and/or grading that may harm existing vegetation within a
designated landscape conservation area.
2. Commercial development where buildings are setback from the street behind surface
parking lots.
3. Excessive surface parking lot paving and redundant driveways.
4. Drive-up facilities adjacent to a street that interrupt pedestrian circulation patterns or
create potential safety hazards.
5. Disjointed parking areas, confusing or unsafe circulation patterns.
6. Box-like structures with large, blank, unarticulated wall surfaces.
17.90- 2
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
7. Building materials or colors that do not conform to this code.
8. Highly reflective surfaces or heavily tinted glass storefronts.
9. Strongly thematic architectural styles, forms, colors, materials, and/or detailing, that do
not conform to the Sandy Style, including some forms of franchise architectural styles
associated with some chain commercial establishments.
10. Inadequate landscape buffers adjacent to parking lots, walkways and streets.
11. Visible outdoor storage, loading, and equipment areas.
17.90.10 APPLICABILITY
The provisions of this chapter apply to all zones and uses as follows except as specified in
Sections 17.90.10(B), (C), (D), (E), and (F) below:
A. All construction within a Commercial or Industrial Zoning District or a non-residential use in
a Residential Zoning District including the following:
1. New construction;
2. Replacement of a building that is destroyed as specified in Section 17.08.30;
3. Addition to an existing building;
4. Exterior alterations other than general maintenance on an existing building;
5. Site improvements including changes to landscaping, parking, civic spaces, etc.
B. General Maintenance Exception: General maintenance activities including but not limited to
the replacement of awnings, entryway covers, doors, windows, siding and roofing materials
with like materials, and repainting with the same colors are exempt from these standards.
C. Residential Dwelling Exception: Single family dwellings, duplexes, manufactured dwellings
on individual lots of record, and manufactured dwellings in parks are exempt from all
requirements of this chapter except for Section 17.90.150.
D. Specific Building Exception: Certain buildings contain architectural characteristics that
contribute to the unique character of Sandy’s business community. However, these buildings
are not necessarily designed in conformance with the applicable design standards described
in this chapter. This section allows these buildings to be maintained, repaired, painted or
added on to, in a way that is consistent with the existing architectural design of these
buildings. Additionally, in the event a portion or the entire building is damaged by any
means, this section allows these buildings to be rebuilt as currently designed. This
exemption does not allow the architectural design of these buildings to be changed or altered
from the current design without compliance with the provisions of this code. (as of February
1, 2008, see Appendix A) All other provisions in this chapter related to site design,
landscaping, lighting, and external storage and screening are still applicable. This exception
is applicable to the following buildings:
• Tollgate Inn Restaurant and Bakery (38050 and 38100 Highway 26)
• Joe’s Donut Shop (39230 Pioneer Blvd.)
F. Downtown Area Exceptions: Two areas within downtown Sandy contain several existing
buildings or groupings of buildings that contribute to the unique character of Sandy’s
downtown (Appendix B). As such, new building construction within these areas may either
17.90- 3
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
comply with the Sandy Style design standards of this chapter, or with the details specified
below as shown in Figures 17.90.110-A and 178.90.110-B. All other provisions of this
chapter related to site design, landscaping, lighting, and external storage and screening still
apply.
a. Area A - South side of Pioneer Boulevard between Bruns Avenue and Meinig Avenue,
including the lot at the southeast corner of Pioneer and Meinig (Figure 17.90.110-F):
(1) Use of flat roofs (See Section 17.90.110(C)(8)) with detailed stepped parapet and
regularly spaced picture windows (divided or undivided) framed by pilasters,
transoms, and sills.
(2) Use of masonry block, brick or fluted concrete, consistent with the existing historic
roadside commercial structures is allowed.
(3) Buildings may contain symmetrical forms based on a rectangular building plan and
simple massing.
(4) Building articulation and detailing should express the physical structure of buildings
in this area.
Figure 17.90.110-A: Typical Building Elements in Historic Roadside Commercial
(Roadside Building Style)
b. Area B - South side of Pioneer Boulevard between Scales Avenue and Bruns Avenue,
and for the Odd Fellows Hall on the north side of Pioneer Boulevard:
(1) The preferred siding material for building remodels is wood lap siding, consistent
with the farm-style structures in that area.
(2) Building forms and detailing should express a farmhouse vernacular; buildings should
incorporate front-facing gables, covered porches, and divided or double hung sash
windows.
(3) Paint color should not contrast with the white-washed buildings on this block.
17.90- 4
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
Figure 17.90.110-B: Typical Building Elements in Historic Roadside Commercial
(Farmhouse-Style)
17.90.30 POWERS AND DUTIES
Staff shall review plans for compliance with the Development Code and other applicable
regulations. The Planning Director may tailor the extent of the review by deleting or combining
steps when not warranted by the scale of the development.
17.90.40 TYPE OF REVIEW
A. Type I – Administrative
Type I review applies to single family dwellings, duplex dwellings, manufactured homes on
individual lots, manufactured homes within MH parks, and permitted residential accessory
dwellings and structures.
Type I review also applies to exterior building alterations or additions on existing
commercial or industrial buildings, multi-family dwellings, and non-residential uses on
residentially zoned lots where the proposed alteration or addition meets the following
criteria:
1. Exterior alterations other than general maintenance as defined in Section 17.90.10(B).
2. Modifications to the number of parking spaces by not more than 10 percent;
3. Modifications to the area devoted to landscaping or civic space by not more than 10
percent;
4. Building additions in the C-1 and C-3 zones containing less than 1,000 square feet.
17.90- 5
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
5. Building additions in the C-2, I-1, and I-2 zones containing less than 3,000 square
feet.
B. Type II – Director’s Review
Type II review includes floor area expansions greater than the thresholds for a Type I review
and all other multi-family, commercial, industrial development and non-residential
development on residentially zoned land that is in compliance with code standards, except
where a Type III procedure is requested or required.
C. Type III – Quasi-Judicial
Type III review includes development where the applicant has requested Type III Design
Review or the Director has determined the review will involve more than a nominal amount
of discretion in applying this chapter’s standards to the application. The more a request seeks
to deviate from a standard, the greater the burden on the applicant to demonstrate the request
complies with the standard’s intent.
17.90.70 EXPIRATION OF APPROVAL
Design Review approval shall be void after two (2) years from the date of the Final Order, or
lesser time as the Planning Commission may specify, unless the applicant has submitted plans
for building permit approval or demolition approval, as applicable, within this timeframe. The
Director may grant one extension through a Type I procedure, not to exceed one (1) year, upon a
written request from the applicant prior to the expiration date of the approval and a finding that
the applicant has made a good faith effort to implement the approved plan.
17.90.80 MODIFYING APPROVALS
A. Major Modification. A major modification to a Design Review approval shall be processed
as a new application. Major Modifications include but are not limited to:
1. Changes in proposed land use;
2. Substantial change in building elevation and materials;
3. Changes in type and location of access ways and parking areas where off-site traffic
would be affected;
4. Increase in the floor area proposed for nonresidential use by more than 10 percent from
what was previously specified;
5. Increase in the total ground area proposed to be covered by structures or parking by more
than 10 percent from what was previously specified;
6. Reduction of project amenities provided, such as civic space, recreational facilities,
screening, and/or landscaping provisions by more than 10 percent from what was
previously specified, and;
7. Any other modification to a requirement established at the time of Design Review
approval.
B. Minor Modification. Minor Modifications may include any of the changes listed above
provided the change is below the quantifiable thresholds for a Major Modification, per
17.90- 6
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
Section 17.90.80(A). Minor modifications shall be processed as a Type I or Type II decision
at the Director’s discretion; a Type II procedure shall be used where the modification
requires interpretation of a discretionary standard.
17.90.90 SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS - TYPE I
A. Number of Copies: 2
B. Site Plan. As determined by the Planning Director, the site plan shall be drawn at an
approved engineering scale (e.g., 1”=100’; 1”=50’; 1”=20’; or 1”=10’) and shall include the
applicant’s entire property including:
1. Dimensions of the property;
2. Proposed building location;
3. Easements of record;
4. Parcel boundaries;
5. Driveway location;
6. Contour lines at the following minimum intervals;
a. 2’ intervals for slopes 0%-14.9%
b. 5’ or 10’ intervals for slopes between 15%-25%
c. Identification of areas exceeding 25%
7. Flood and Slope Hazard Overlay District boundaries;
8. Drainage, including adjacent lands;
9. Natural hazard areas, including potential flood or high ground water, landslides, erosion,
drainage ways, and weak foundation soils;
10. Marsh or wetland areas, underground springs, wildlife habitat areas, wooded areas, and
surface features such as earth mounds and large rock outcroppings;
11. Streams and stream corridors;
12. Location of trees over 11-inches or greater DBH (6-inches or greater in FSH Overlay
District);
13. Additional information as required by the Director such as soils, geology, hydrologic
study, photometric analysis, etc.
C. Building elevations showing the required design standards.
17.90.100 SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS - TYPE II AND TYPE III
A. Number of Copies: Type II – 8 copies, Type III – 15 copies
B. Digital Version – A compact disc containing a digital version of the required narrative in
Microsoft Word format and a plan set in PDF format.
C. Project Narrative documenting compliance with applicable code criteria. If the application
involves any deviations from the Code standards (i.e., Type III Design Review), the narrative
17.90- 7
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
shall describe how the proposal meets or exceeds the intent of the standard(s) for which a
deviation is requested.
D. Site Analysis Map. An analysis of the site showing the relationship between the site and
adjacent properties to contain the following:
1. Property boundaries, dimensions, and gross area;
2. Topographic contour lines at two-foot intervals for slopes 0-10 percent and five foot
intervals for slopes greater than 10 percent;
3. Location of approved Flood and Slope Hazard Overlay District boundaries and restricted
development areas per Chapter 17.60;
4. Site features including existing structures, pavement, large surface features such as earth
mounds and large rock outcroppings;
5. Contour lines at the following intervals:
a. 2’ intervals for slopes 0-14.9%
b. 5’ or 10’ intervals for slopes between 15%-25%
c. Identification of areas exceeding 25%;
6. Location and width of public and private streets, drives, sidewalks, rights-of-ways, and
easements;
7. Location, size, and species of trees 11-inches and greater DBH (6-inches or greater DBH
in FSH Overlay District);
8. North arrow, scale, names and addresses of all persons listed as owners of the subject
property on the most recently recorded deed;
9. Name and address of project designer, engineer, surveyor, and/or planner, if applicable;
10. Other information as required by the Director such as soils, geology, hydrologic study,
etc.
E. Proposed site plan. The site plan shall contain the following information:
1. The proposed development site, including boundaries, dimensions, and gross area;
2. Features identified on the existing site analysis maps that are proposed to remain on the
site;
3. Features identified on the existing site map, if any, which are proposed to be removed or
modified by the development;
4. The location and dimensions of all proposed public and private streets, drives, rights-ofway,
and easements;
5. The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed structures, utilities, pavement
and other improvements on the site. Setback dimensions for all existing and proposed
buildings shall be provided on the site plan;
6. The location and dimensions of entrances and exits to the site for vehicular, pedestrian,
and bicycle access;
7. The location and dimensions of all parking and vehicle circulation areas (show striping
for parking stalls and wheel stops);
17.90- 8
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
8. Pedestrian and bicycle circulation areas, including sidewalks, internal pathways, pathway
connections to adjacent properties, and any bicycle lanes or trails;
9. Loading and service areas for waste disposal, loading and delivery;
10. Outdoor recreation spaces, common areas, plazas, outdoor seating, street furniture, and
similar improvements;
11. Location, type, and height of outdoor lighting;
12. Location of mail boxes, if known;
13. Name and address of project designer, if applicable;
14. Locations of bus stops and other public or private transportation facilities;
15. Locations, sizes, and types of signs;
16. Location of retaining walls.
F. Preliminary Utility Plan. (Including the location of all electrical transformers and utility
meters)
G. Traffic Impact Study or Traffic Letter (as determined by the Planning Director) in
compliance with City standards.
H. Photometric Analysis and cut sheets of proposed lighting demonstrating compliance with
Chapter 15.30, Dark Sky Ordinance.
I. Preliminary Grading Plan. A preliminary grading plan indicating where and to what extent
grading will take place, including general contour lines, slope ratios, slope stabilization
proposals, and natural resource protection proposals consistent with the provisions of this
code.
J. Architectural Drawings. Architectural drawings shall contain the following:
1. Building elevations;
2. Building materials: colors and type (including color board);
3. Retaining walls including type and height;
4. Other drawings or studies (e.g., line-of-sight analysis, perspective, model, visual
simulation, etc.) as deemed necessary for evaluating the application as determined
necessary by the Planning Director.
K. Landscape Plan. Landscape plans shall contain the following:
1. Property and lot boundaries and rights-of-way;
2. Structures and impervious surfaces including parking lots;
3. General landscape development plan, including plant specifications keyed to plan map
and including botanical names, common names, sizes, numbers, and methods of planting
and maintenance, location of existing plants and groups of plants proposed;
4. Description of soil conditions and plans for soil treatment such as stockpiling of topsoil,
addition of soil amendments, and plant selection requirements, relating to soil conditions;
5. Details of irrigation method;
17.90- 9
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
6. Landscape-related structures such as fences, decks, terraces, patios, shelters, play areas,
etc.;
7. Boundaries of open space, recreation or reserved areas;
8. Location of pedestrian or bicycle circulation.
L. Signs. Proposed sign details and dimensions in conformance with Chapter 15.32.
M. Other Information or studies determined to be necessary by the Director prepared by
qualified professionals to address specific site features or project impacts (e.g. arborist report,
natural hazards, Geotechnical, etc.).
17.90.110 DOWNTOWN AND VILLAGE COMMERCIAL (C-1 AND C-3) DESIGN
STANDARDS
Development in the C-1 and C-3 districts shall conform to all of the following standards, as
applicable. Where a conflict exists between the requirements of this Chapter and any other code
provision, this Chapter shall prevail.
A. Site Layout and Vehicle Access
Intent: To provide for compact, walkable development, and to design and manage vehicle access
and circulation in a manner that supports pedestrian safety, comfort and convenience. (Figures
17.90.110-C and 17.90.110-D)
1. All lots shall abut or have cross access to a dedicated public street.
2. All lots that have access to a public alley shall provide for an additional vehicle access from
that alley.
3. Off-street parking shall be located to the rear or side of buildings with no portion of the
parking lot located within required setbacks or within 10-feet of the public right-of-way,
as shown in Figure 17.90.110(C). When access must be provided directly from a public
right-of-way, driveways for ingress or egress shall be limited to one per 150 ft. For lots
with frontage of less than 150 ft. or less, shared access may be required.
4. Adjacent parking lots shall be connected to one another when the City determines it is
practicable to do so. Developments shall avoid creating barriers to inter-parcel
circulation.
5. Urban design details, such as raised or painted pedestrian crossings and similar devices
incorporating changes in paving materials, textures or color, shall be used to calm traffic
and protect pedestrians in parking areas.
6. Where openings occur between buildings facing Proctor Boulevard or Pioneer Boulevard,
pedestrian ways shall connect the street sidewalk to any internal parking areas.
Development shall avoid creating barriers to pedestrian circulation.
7. Parking lots may include public alley accessed garages at the rear property line, except
where a setback is required for vision clearance or to conform to other city standards.
8. Raised walkways or painted crossings from the public street sidewalk to the building
entrance(s) are required. Crosswalks through parking lots and drive aisles shall be
constructed of a material contrasting with the road surface or be painted (e.g., colored
concrete inlay in asphalt).
17.90- 10
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
9. Joint use of access points and interconnections and cross-over easements between parcels
shall be required, where the City determines it is practicable and necessary. A
development approval may be conditioned to require a joint use access easement and
interconnecting driveways or alleys to comply with access spacing and other applicable
code requirements.
10. Connection to Adjacent Properties: The location of any real improvements to the property
must provide for a future street and pedestrian connection to adjacent properties where
the City determines this is practicable and necessary.
11. Through lots and corner lots may be permitted with two access points, one onto each
abutting street, where necessary to serve a centralized, shared parking facility. Such
access points must conform to the above access spacing requirements and parking must
be internalized to the property.
12. Free-standing buildings shall be connected to one another with a seamless pedestrian
network that provides access to building entrances and civic spaces.
Figure 17.90.110-C: Downtown Block Elements
“Activate” at least
two elevations on
every building (bldg
entry, window
transparency,
weather protection)
Orient buildings
to streets and
central plazas
Create
“collections” of
related buildings
(form, materials,
detailing)
Connect freestanding
buildings to
one another with a
seamless pedestrian
network and civic
spaces
Connect pockets of
shared parking to one
another, and use
urban design details
to calm traffic
Provide direct
pedestrian connections
and minimize vehicle
access onto Pioneer
and Proctor Blvds (use
side streets for
vehicles where
practical)
Side Street
Side Street
Boulevard
Boulevard
parking
parking
parking
parking
parking
parking
17.90- 11
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
Figure 17.90.110-D: Downtown Building Orientation
“Activate” at least
two elevations on
every building
(bldg entry,
window
transparency,
weather
protection)
Orient primary
access to streets
or civic space
Place parking
behind or beside
buildings, and
provide for future
cross access
easements
between parcels
Do not place
parking between
primary building
entrances and
street
Avoid creating
barriers to interparcel
circulation
Avoid creating
blank walls and
“barriers to
pedestrian
circulation
between uses.
Fence
Proper Orientation Inappropriate Orientation
Avoid pedestrian
crossings through
parking lots
Fence
Building not
“activated” on at
least two
elevations
B. Building Facades, Materials, and Colors
Intent: To provide building façades, materials and colors consistent with the Sandy Style. For
purposes of interpreting the Sandy Style, representative illustrations and photos are provided.
(Figures 17.90.110-C, 17.90.110-D, 17.90.110-E, 17.90.110-F, 17.90.110-G, 17.90.110-H,
17.90.110-I, Color Palettes (Appendices C and D), and photos (Appendix E)
1. Articulation. The Sandy Style includes asymmetrical building forms, which by definition
require buildings to be articulated, varied, and provide visual interest. This standard is met
by dividing elevations of a structure visible from an abutting public street or pedestrian way
into smaller areas or planes to minimize the appearance of bulk as viewed from the street as
follows:
a. All elevations visible from an abutting public street or pedestrian way shall be
divided into distinct planes no more than 30 lineal feet long to include the following:
1) Wall planes meeting this standard shall include a feature or variation in the wall
plane that projects or recedes at least six (6) inches from the adjacent plane, for a
length of at least four (4) feet. Changes in plane may include but are not limited to
recessed entries, bays, secondary roof forms (e.g., gables, lower roof sheds,
dormers and towers), canopies, awnings, projections, recesses, alcoves, pergolas,
porticos, roof overhangs, or other features consistent with the Sandy Style.
2) Wall planes shall incorporate at least one visually contrasting and complementary
change in materials or changes in texture or patterns, including trim, moldings, or
other ornamental devices.
3) The lower and upper floors of multi-story buildings shall be clearly delineated by
using pedestrian shelters, change in siding materials, heavy timber or natural
wood accents (e.g., brackets, paneling or other detailing).
17.90- 12
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
2. Pedestrian Shelters. Buildings must incorporate pedestrian shelters, as follows:
a. Pedestrian shelters shall be provided over the building’s primary entrance(s) and
pedestrian areas (i.e., sidewalks and civic spaces) abutting the subject building.
b. Features such as canopies, arcades, awnings, roofs overhangs, covered porches,
alcoves, and/or porticoes are required.
c. Pedestrian shelters must extend at least five (5) feet over the pedestrian area.
d. Shelters designed with gables (e.g., over building entrances) are preferred over flat
shelters, and must comply with the roof pitch standards in Section 17.90.110(C).
Dome or bubble shaped awnings are not permitted.
3. Building Materials. Exterior building materials shall convey an impression of strength and
durability consistent with the Sandy Style, as follows:
a. Buildings on the same site shall be architecturally unified. This provision shall apply
to new construction, additions, and remodeling such that buildings are related in
architectural style and share some common elements, such as color scheme, materials,
roof forms, and/or detailing. Unity does not mean repetition or mirroring of building
elevations.
b. Strong base materials such as natural stone (e.g., basalt, granite, river stone), splitfaced
rusticated concrete block, or brick are required. Cultured stone may be allowed
if it has a stone texture and is similar in appearance and durability to natural stone. A
building’s base must extend at least 36 inches but not more than 60 inches above the
adjacent finished grade and be included on those sides of the building visible from the
abutting public street. If the site contains a grade differential making construction of
a minimum 36-inch base impracticable, the reviewing body may allow portions of the
base to be less than 36-inches.
c. Foundations shall be designed to match the scale of the building being supported.
Examples include sheathing the foundation structure with base materials and wall
siding.
d. Siding shall consist of wood, composite-wood (e.g., concrete fiberboard, panels or
shingles), stone, brick, split-faced or rusticated concrete block, or a combination of
these materials. Stucco, synthetic stucco, and metal are permitted only as specified
below. Vinyl, plastic or similar siding is not permitted.
1) Where wood siding is used, it shall consist of horizontal (e.g., lap, v-groove, or
tongue-and-groove) siding, vertical (board and batten) siding, shingles, or
combinations thereof. Vertical grooved (i.e., T1-11) sheet siding and similar
materials are prohibited.
2) Where board-and-batten siding is used, battens shall be a minimum of 2-inches
wide x 1-inch deep and spaced 24 inches apart or closer; rough-sawn boards
(specialty panel) are preferred over panels having a resin overlay.
3) Where masonry siding is used, it shall consist of brick, stone, or rusticated
concrete block, and must incorporate decorative patterns over not less than 15
percent of every elevation where it is used. Examples of decorative patterns
include multi-toned masonry units, such as brick, stone, or cast stone, in layered
or geometric patterns or split-faced concrete block to simulate rusticated stone17.90-
13
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
type construction. Changes in pattern should be used to accentuate breaks in
building stories, corners, windows, structural bays, and building tops (e.g.,
parapets where flat roofs are allowed).
4) Where metal siding is used, it shall be used as an accent only, comprising not
more than 20 percent of the surface area of the building elevation (e.g.,
wainscoting or other accent paneling). Metal must be architectural grade and have
a non-reflective (burnished or painted) finish conforming to the approved Color
Palette. Metal may also be used for flashing, gutters, downspouts, brackets,
lighting, and signage and similar functional elements.
5) Where stucco or synthetic stucco is used, it shall be used as an accent only,
comprising not more than 20 percent of the surface area of the building elevation.
e. Building elevations facing a public right-of-way or civic space shall incorporate at
least three (3) of the following features: Using these features may also address other
code requirements, such as those related to building articulation, change in relief,
pedestrian shelters, and storefront elements.
1) Exposed, heavy timbers;
2) Exposed natural wood color beams, posts, brackets and/or trim (e.g., eaves or trim
around windows);
3) Natural wood color shingles (e.g., used as siding or to accent gable ends);
4) Metal canopies;
5) Heavy metal brackets (e.g., cast iron or similar appearance), which may be
structural brackets or applied as cosmetic detailing; and,
6) Similar features, consistent with the Sandy Style.
f. Materials required on elevations visible from an abutting public street must turn the
building corner and incorporate appropriate transitions onto elevations not requiring
these materials for a distance of not less than two (2) feet.
4. Colors. Building exteriors shall comply with the following standards:
a. Permitted colors include warm earth tones (tans, browns, reds, grays and greens)
conforming to the Color Palette provided in Appendix C.
b. High-intensity primary colors, metallic colors and black, may be utilized as trim and
detail colors only, not to exceed one (1) percent of the surface area of any elevation.
Such color shall not be used as primary wall colors.
c. Day-glow colors, highly reflective colors, and similar colors are not permitted.
17.90- 14
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
Figure 17.90.110-E: Typical Building Elements in Sandy Style (Mixed Use Example)
Pitched roof
Vent and shingle
accent on upper
gable
Metal or
composition
roofing
Civic space with covered
seating and planter at
street corner, public art
opportunity
Heavy base: stone
or masonry block
Weather
protection over
primary entry
Articulation:
columns, canopies,
and window bays
Changes in materials (e.g.,
shingles & lap siding)
define building stories; use
of multi-paned windows
Top defined by sheds,
gables, change in
materials
Asymmetrical
composition
Build-to line (0’-
5’) to sidewalk or
civic space
Scale of upper
floor windows
and panes
17.90- 15
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
Figure 17.90.110-F: Typical Building Elements in Sandy Style (Mixed Use Example)
Pitched roof: use cross
gables or shed dormers
to break up large
elevations
Change in materials (shingle/board
siding) defines building stories
Tower serves as a
landmark on corner,
expressing Sandy
Style (allowed vertical
projection)
Heavy base
Weather
protection over
primary entry and
along full frontage
Articulation: offsets,
projecting upper-story,
changes in material, gables,
tower, canopies, etc.
Board or shingle siding with
groupings of multi-pane
windows; changes in
materials define building
stories and break up large
elevations
Top defined by
sheds, roof forms,
change in materials
Asymmetrical composition
Build-to line (0’-
5’) to sidewalk or
civic space
Metal fixtures
and wood trim
and detailing
Size and scale of
upper floor
windows
Figure 17.90.110-G: Typical Building Elements in Sandy Style (Commercial Building)
Pitched roof
Vent and shingle
accent on upper
gable
Metal or
composition
roofing
Stone, masonry or
rusticated concrete
base
Heavy base
Weather
protection over
primary entry
Wood/timber
columns and
brackets
Board or shingle siding
with groupings of multipane
windows
Top defined by trim,
change in materials,
eave/overhang
Asymmetrical
composition
17.90- 16
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
C. Roof Pitch, Materials, and Parapets
Intent: To provide roof forms and detailing consistent with the Sandy Style. For purposes of
interpreting the Sandy Style, representative illustrations and photos are provided. (See Figures
17.90.110-C, 17.90.110-D, 17.90.110-E, 17.90.110-F, 17.90.110-G, 17.90.110-H, 17.90.110-I
and representative photos in Appendix E)
1. Except as provided in subsections 17.90.110(C)(8), below, pitched (gabled or hipped)
roofs are required on all new buildings with a span of 50-feet or less. Gable and hipped
roof forms must achieve a pitch not less than the following:
Zoning District Primary Roof Forms
(minimum)
Secondary Roof
Forms (minimum)
C-1, C-3 6:12 4:12
2. As provided above, “Primary Roof Forms” are those that individually comprise 20
percent or more of the total surface area of a roof elevation. Secondary roof forms (e.g.,
dormers, towers, cupolas, etc.) are those that comprise less than 20 percent of the roof
elevation. See also, Section 17.74.20 Vertical Projections.
3. When practicable, buildings shall be oriented so the gable end of the roof faces the
abutting street.
4. Pitched roof surfaces visible from an abutting public street shall provide a secondary roof
form (e.g. dormer) in the quantity specified below. Secondary roof forms may be located
anywhere on the roof, although grouping these features is preferred.
Roof Length Number of Secondary Roof Forms
30 – 40 feet 1
41 – 80 feet 2
81 feet and greater 4
5. Visible roof materials must be wood shingle or architectural grade composition shingle,
slate, or concrete tile. Metal with standing or batten seam may also be used conforming
to the Color Palette in Appendix D.
6. All roof and wall-mounted mechanical, electrical, communications, and service
equipment, including satellite dishes and vent pipes, shall be screened from view from
public rights-of-way and civic spaces by parapets, walls or by other approved means.
Roof plans and elevations must show proposed equipment locations, approximate
dimensions, and line of sight from public rights-of-way and civic spaces. The reviewing
body may require additional equipment setbacks, screen walls, or other mitigation to
ensure compliance.
7. A-frame buildings and Mansard-style roofs are not permitted.
17.90- 17
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
8. Exception to Pitched Roof: When a building requires a roof span greater than 50-feet, or
the internal function of the building or a portion of the building makes construction of a
pitched roof impractical, the reviewing body may allow an alternative roof form. An
alternative roof form includes an “applied pitched roof” or flat roof constructed over the
building or portion of the building as specified below. An example when a pitched roof
is considered impractical would be the need to have large rooftop stove vents over the
kitchen portion of a restaurant. Roof forms constructed under this exception shall comply
with the standards below.
a. Applied Pitched Roof: An “applied pitched roof” is the preferred alternative roof
form and shall be considered first. An “applied pitched roof” is a roof form with the
general appearance of a pitched roof in terms of materials, pitch, and overhang, but
does not extend all the way from the eave of the building to the ridge of the roof as a
typical pitched roof. An “applied pitched roof” shall be constructed according to the
following:
1) For buildings with a span of less than 50 feet, the “applied pitched roof” shall
extend at least 50 percent of the distance from the eave to the ridge as if had been
constructed as a pitched roof;
2) For buildings with a span of 50 feet or greater, the applied pitched roof shall
extend at least 12 feet from eave.
3) The reviewing body may require buildings with a span of 50 feet or greater to
include an “applied pitched roof” in lieu of a flat roof along street facing
elevations.
b. Flat Roof: Flat roofs shall comply with the following standards:
1) Sandy Style stepped parapets and detailed coursing shall be provided on those
elevations visible from an abutting public street. Parapets shall be varied so that
the length of a parapet does not exceed 30 feet without a change in the parapet
height of at least 2 feet or as necessary to hide rooftop equipment.
2) Average parapet height shall not exceed 15 percent of the supporting wall height,
and the maximum parapet height shall not at any point exceed one-third (1/3) of
the height of the supporting wall;
3) A cornice projecting at least six (6) inches from the building face shall be
provided at the roofline of all elevations visible from abutting public rights-ofways
and pedestrian ways;
4) Parapet corners shall be stepped and the parapet be designed to emphasize the
center or primary entrance(s), unless the primary entrance is at the corner of the
building.
D. Building Orientation and Entrances
Intent: To maintain and enhance downtown and village commercial streetscapes as public
spaces, emphasizing a pedestrian-scale and character in new development, consistent with the
Sandy Style; and to provide for a continuous pedestrian network that promotes pedestrian safety,
comfort and convenience, and provides materials and detailing consistent with the Sandy Style.
(Figures 17.90.110-A, 17.90.110-B, 17.90.110-C, 17.90.110-D, 17.90.110-E, 17.90.110-F,
17.90.110-G, 17.90.110-H, 17.90.110-I and representative photos in Appendix E)
17.90- 18
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
1. Buildings shall be oriented to a public street or civic space. This standard is met when at
least 50 percent of the subject site’s street frontage is comprised of building(s) placed within
10 feet of a sidewalk or an approved civic space and not more than 20 percent of the offstreet
parking on a parcel as required by SDC 17.98, tract or area of land is located between
a building’s front façade and the adjacent street(s).
2. Where parking is placed between a front façade and a street, a landscaped berm and/or
architectural features, such as a knee wall, colonnade, arbor, trellis and/or similar device,
shall be placed behind the sidewalk to partially screen the parking area from the sidewalk.
The partial screen shall be designed to achieve at least 50 percent opacity at the time of
installation, with openings for walkways connecting to the building’s primary entrance.
3. Ground floor spaces shall face a public street and shall be connected to it by a direct
pedestrian route (i.e., avoid out-of-direction travel). Where the reviewing authority
determines that facing the building to a street is not practical, it may require the building to
face a civic space.
4. Buildings located at the intersection of two streets shall use a corner building entrance;
where a corner entrance is not practical due to the internal functioning of the building space
or due to physical constraints of the site (e.g., topography, accessibility, or similar
circumstances), a building entrance must be provided within 40 feet of the corner. The
building corner must use detailing that emphasizes the corner location and is consistent with
the Sandy Style. Examples of acceptable detailing include a rounded or chamfered (beveled)
corner, weather protecting canopy, plaza, sculpture, and/or similar pedestrian-oriented
features.
5. Upper story residential units shall have an entrance separate from the ground floor
(commercial) space and conform to applicable building codes.
6. Buildings shall provide at least two elevations where the pedestrian environment is
“activated”. An elevation is “activated” when it meets the window transparency
requirements in subsection 17.90.110(E), below, and contains a customer entrance with a
pedestrian shelter extending at least five (5) feet over an adjacent sidewalk, walkway or
civic space. Where providing a customer entrance on two (2) elevations is not practical, the
reviewing body may allow a single entrance.
7. Primary entries shall face a public street or a civic space and shall be spaced not more than
30 feet apart on average. Ancillary shops shall provide entries every 30 feet, on average.
8. Primary entrances shall be architecturally emphasized and visible from the abutting public
right-of-way or civic space and shall be sheltered with a canopy, overhang, or portico with a
depth of at least five (5) feet. Architectural emphasis should be provided by a gabled shelter
where practical, consistent with the Sandy Style. Detailing around the base of the building,
such as stonework, benches or art, should also be used to emphasize an entrance.
E. Windows
Intent: To promote business vitality, public safety and aesthetics through effective window
placement and design, consistent with the Sandy Style. (See Figures 17.90.110-C, 17.90.110-D,
17.90.110-E, 17.90.110-F, 17.90.110-G, 17.90.110-H, and 17.90.110-I, and representative
photos in Appendix E.
17.90- 19
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
1. Unified Design. Building plans must provide for unity in window placement and design
so that all sides of a building relate to one another and multiple buildings on a
development site relate to one another.
2. Ground Floor Windows. The ground floor elevation of all new buildings shall contain
display areas, windows, and doorways along street frontages and where the building
abuts a civic space as follows: Lots with multiple street frontages are required to meet
this standard on only two frontages.
Building Size Percentage Windows Required
0 - 10,000 sq. ft. 40 percent of ground floor elevation
Greater than 10,000 sq. ft. 25 percent of ground floor elevation
a. Windows shall contain clear glass to allow views to interior activity or display areas.
The bottom edge of windows shall be no less than three (3) feet above the adjacent
finished grade. Where the internal functions of a building preclude windows at this
height, the reviewing body may approve locating windows above or below this
height. Display boxes affixed to a building’s exterior are not counted in meeting the
above standard.
b. Windows shall be square or vertically oriented and may consist of vertically stacked
or horizontally banked window units. Windows located over a door or transom
windows may be horizontally oriented.
c. Windows with any dimension exceeding six (6) feet shall be divided into smaller
panes (e.g., 2 foot by 2 foot grid) with real divided panes, vinyl inserts or applied
dividers.
d. Windows shall have trim or moldings at least three (3) inches in width around them,
or have reveals of at least three (3) inches in depth. Casings shall consist of a drip
cap, head casing, side casings, and/or sills.
3. Upper Floor Window Standards.
a. The reviewing authority may require buildings exceeding 20 feet in height to provide
upper-story windows along “activated” frontages. Such windows may be required for
attic space, or applied to roof forms where no second story exists, to meet the
articulation requirements under Section 17.90.110(B)(1).
b. Windows shall be square or vertically oriented. Individual window units shall not
exceed five (5) feet by seven (7) feet. Any portion of a window unit with a dimension
exceeding four (4) feet shall be divided into smaller panes.
c. At least half of all the window area in upper floors shall be made up of glass panes
with dimensions no greater than two (2) feet by three (3) feet, unless approved by
variance or adjustment. Upper story windows that have 1 foot by 1 foot grid inside
double pane glass are appropriate and are encouraged.
d. Window trim and moldings shall be compatible with those used on the ground floor.
4. Prohibited Windows. The following window types are prohibited:
17.90- 20
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
a. Darkly tinted windows, mirrored windows, and similar windows are prohibited
adjacent to street sidewalks, civic spaces and walkways.
b. Glass curtain windows are not permitted facing public right-of-ways, except where
the reviewing body finds that such windows are consistent with the Sandy Style.
F. Landscaping and Streetscape Design
Intent: To promote business vitality, public safety and aesthetics through effective landscaping
and streetscape design, consistent with the Sandy Style; and to provide for a pedestrian network
that promotes pedestrian safety, comfort and convenience, and provides materials and detailing
consistent with the Sandy Style. (Figures 17.90.110-A, 17.90.110-B, 17.90.110-C, 17.90.110-D,
17.90.110-E, 17.90.110-F, 17.90.110-G, 17.90.110-H, 17.90.110-I, and Downtown Sandy
Streetscape Design)
1. The provisions of Chapter 17.92, Landscaping and Screening General Standards shall
apply except in the C-1 Zoning District where conformance with the Downtown Sandy
Streetscape Design, as illustrated in Appendix F is required.
2. Where any conflict arises between provisions of the Sandy Streetscape Design and other
city standards (e.g., sidewalk width, materials, or similar specifications), the Streetscape
Design shall prevail. All applicable provisions of Chapter 17.92 Landscaping and
Screening General Standards must be met, except as modified by the Downtown Sandy
Streetscape Design.
G. Civic Space
Intent: To connect buildings to the public realm and create comfortable and attractive gathering
places and outdoor seating areas for the public, consistent with Sandy’s Downtown Streetscape
Design. (See Figures 17.90.110-H and 17.90.110-I).
1. Not less than three (3) percent of the ground floor area of every development shall be
improved as civic space.
2. All civic spaces shall have dimensions of not less than eight (8) feet across and have a
surface area of not less than 64 square feet. No civic space is required if the size of this
space results in an area of less than 64 square feet.
3. Civic space improvements may include plazas, private extensions of sidewalks and
walkways (i.e., to accommodate outdoor seating), public art, pedestrian-scale lighting,
bus waiting areas, tourist amenities (e.g., way finding signs as approved by the city) or
similar pedestrian amenities as approved through Design Review.
4. The highest priority locations for civic space are those areas with the highest pedestrian
activity (e.g., street corners and mid-block pedestrian access ways) that have a western or
southern exposure.
5. Unless impractical, civic spaces shall abut a public right-of-way or otherwise be
connected to and visible from a public right-of-way by a sidewalk or pedestrian access
way; access ways shall be identifiable with a change in paving materials (e.g., pavers
inlaid in concrete or a change in pavement scoring patterns and/or texture) or painted.
Where a right-of-way connection is not possible, the owner must provide a public access
way easement to the civic space. Civic spaces shall not be gated or closed to public
access, unless otherwise required by the city.
17.90- 21
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
6. Exceptions: Building additions and remodels subject to Type I Design Review are not
required to set aside or improve civic space, though they are encouraged to do so.
Figure 17.90.110-H: Civic Space Example 1
Figure 17.90.110-I: Civic Space Example 2
Weather Protection
Main Entry
Street Trees in
Sidewalk Cut-Outs
Bus Stop Seating
or Shelters (where
applicable)
Pedestrian Scale
Lighting
Street Furnishing Zone Pedestrian Through Zone Building and/or Outdoor Seating and
(width may vary) Civic Space/Plaza Zone
Extra wide Sidewalk Sitting Space
Display Windows
17.90- 22
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
H. Lighting
Intent: To promote business vitality, public safety and aesthetics through effective outdoor
lighting, consistent with the Sandy Style.
1. Streetscape lighting shall conform to the Downtown Sandy Streetscape Design and the
requirements of Chapter 15.30, Dark Sky Ordinance.
2. Exterior lighting must be an integral part of the architectural design and must
complement any ornamental street lighting and remain in context with the overall
architectural character of the district. On-site light fixtures conforming to the Sandy Style
are encouraged.
3. Lighting must be adequate for safety purposes. Walkways, parking lots, and building
entrances should be illuminated at 1.5 – 2.0 foot candles.
I. Safety and Security
Intent: To promote natural surveillance of public spaces for safety and security.
1. Locate windows in a manner that enables tenants, employees and police to watch over
pedestrian, parking and loading areas.
2. In commercial, public and semipublic development, including civic spaces, locate
windows in a manner that enables surveillance of interior activity from the public rightof-
way.
3. Provide street address numbers measuring a minimum of six (6) inches high, which
clearly locates buildings and their entries for patrons and emergency services.
4. Locate, orient and select on-site lighting to facilitate surveillance of on-site activities
from the public right-of-way and other public areas. (See also, subsection H Lighting.)
J. External Storage and Screening
Intent: To promote land use compatibility and aesthetics, particularly where development abuts
public spaces.
1. Exterior storage of merchandise and/or materials, except as specifically authorized as a
permitted accessory use, is prohibited.
2. Where such storage is allowed, it must be screened from view from public rights of way
and civic spaces.
3. Mechanical, electrical, communications equipment including meters and transformers,
and service and delivery entrances and garbage storage areas shall be screened from view
from public rights-of-way and civic spaces.
4. Trash collection and recycling storage areas must be located within the structure or
otherwise screened from view in an enclosed facility. Such facilities must be screened
from view from public rights-of-way and civic spaces behind a screening wall
constructed to match the materials used on the primary building(s) on the subject site.
5. Exceptions to the above provisions may be allowed through Design Review where no
other practical alternative exists and such equipment is made to be visually subordinate to
17.90- 23
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
the proposed building and landscape, for example, through the use of common materials
for screening walls or landscape berms. The reviewing body may require additional
setbacks, screening walls or other mitigation, for aesthetic reasons and to minimize odors
or noise impacts on adjoining properties, public rights-of-way or civic spaces.
17.90.120 GENERAL COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL (C-2 and I-1) AND NONRESIDENTIAL
USES IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES DESIGN STANDARDS
Development in the C-2 and I-1 districts and non-residential uses in a residential zone shall
conform to all of the following standards, as applicable. Where a conflict exists between the
requirements of this Chapter and any other code provision, this Chapter shall prevail.
A. Site Layout and Access.
Intent: To provide for compact, walkable development, and to design and manage vehicle access
and circulation in a manner that supports pedestrian safety, comfort and convenience. (Figures
17.90.120-A and 17.90.120-B)
1. All lots shall abut or have cross access to a dedicated public street.
2. All lots that have access to a public alley shall provide for an additional vehicle access from
that alley.
3. Off-street parking shall be located to the rear or side of buildings with no portion of the
parking lot located within required setbacks or within 10-feet of the public right-of-way,
as shown in Figure 17.90.120-A. When access must be provided directly from a public
right-of-way, driveways for ingress or egress shall be limited to one per 150 ft. For lots
with frontage of less than 150 ft. or less, shared access may be required.
4. Adjacent parking lots shall be connected to one another when the City determines it is
practicable to do so. Developments shall avoid creating barriers to inter-parcel circulation.
5. Urban design details, such as raised or painted pedestrian crossings and similar devices
incorporating changes in paving materials, textures or color, shall be used to calm traffic and
protect pedestrians in parking areas.
6. Parking lots may include public alley accessed garages at the rear property line, except
where a setback is required for vision clearance or to conform to other city standards.
7. Walkways from the public street sidewalk to the building entrance(s) are required.
Crosswalks through parking lots and drive aisles shall be constructed of a material
contrasting with the road surface or painted (e.g., colored concrete inlay in asphalt).
8. Connection to Adjacent Properties: The location of any real improvements to the property
must provide for a future street and pedestrian connection to adjacent properties where the
City determines this is practicable and necessary. Where openings occur between buildings
adjacent to Highway 26, pedestrian ways should connect the street sidewalk to any
internal parking areas and building entrances. Development should avoid creating
barriers to pedestrian circulation.
9. Joint use of access points and interconnections and cross-over easements between parcels
shall be required, where the City determines it is practicable and necessary. A
development approval may be conditioned to require a joint use access easement and
17.90- 24
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
interconnecting driveways or alleys to comply with access spacing and other applicable
code requirements.
10. Through lots may be permitted with two access points, one onto each abutting street,
where necessary to serve a centralized, shared parking facility. Such access points must
conform to the above access spacing requirements and parking must be internalized to the
property.
11. Free-standing buildings shall be connected to one another with a seamless pedestrian
network that provides access to building entrances and adjacent civic spaces.
12. Minimum parking requirements are contained in Chapter 17.98. For developments
containing more than 150 parking spaces, at least 20 percent of all parking spaces shall be
constructed of permeable materials such as permeable asphalt, permeable concrete,
pavers, and/or similar materials as approved by the City.
Figure 17.90.120-A: Typical Block Layout
Orient buildings
to streets and
central plazas
Create
“collections” of
related buildings
(form, materials,
detailing)
Connect freestanding
buildings to
one another with a
seamless pedestrian
network and civic
spaces
Connect pockets of
shared parking to one
another, and use
urban design details
to calm traffic
All driveways designed
as “streets” with
sidewalks, street trees
and lighting
Smaller “village” scale
buildings at front
Parking internalized as
much as possible
Enhanced paving at
main intersections
Main entrances with
courtyard frontages
Bigger scale
buildings at rear
parking
parking
parking
parking
parking
parking
Side Street
Side Street
Limited direct access to Hwy
17.90- 25
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
Figure 17.90.120-B: Alternative Shopping Street Block Layout
B. Building Facades, Materials, and Colors
Intent: To provide building façades, materials and colors consistent with the Sandy Style. For
purposes of interpreting the Sandy Style, representative illustrations and photos are provided.
(Figures 17.90.120-C, 17.90.120-D, 17.90.120-E, 17.90.120-F, 17.90.120-G, 17.90.120-H, and
17.90.120-I; and the Color Palette and representative photos provided in the Appendix E.)
1. Articulation. The Sandy Style includes asymmetrical building forms, which by
definition require buildings to be articulated, varied, and provide visual interest. This
standard is met by dividing elevations visible from an abutting public street or pedestrian
way into smaller areas or planes to minimize the appearance of bulk as follows:
a. All elevations visible from an abutting public street or pedestrian way shall be
divided into distinct planes of no more than 40 lineal feet long to include the
following:
1) Wall planes meeting this standard shall include a feature or variation in the wall
plane that are those that are entirely separated from other wall planes by a
recessed or projecting section of the structure that projects or recedes at least six
(6) inches from the adjacent plane, for a length of at least four (4) feet. Changes in
plane may include but are not limited to recessed entries, bays, secondary roof
forms (e.g., gables, lower roof sheds, dormers and towers), building bases,
canopies, awnings, projections, recesses, alcoves, pergolas, porticos, roof
overhangs, or other features consistent with the Sandy Style.
2) Wall planes shall incorporate at least one visually contrasting and complementary
change in materials or changes in texture or patterns, including trim, moldings, or
other ornamental devices.
“Activate” at least
two elevations on
every building (bldg
entry, window
transparency,
weather protection)
Orient buildings
to streets or
“shopping street”
Place parking behind
or beside buildings,
and provide for future
cross access
easements between
parcels
Provide a continuous
pedestrian walkway
network
Provide for interparcel
vehicle
circulation
Provide civic
space in shopping
centers
Public Street
Building
Building
Building
Shopping Street
17.90- 26
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
3) The lower and upper floors of multi-storied buildings shall be delineated by using
pedestrian shelters, changes in siding materials, heavy timbers, or natural wood
accents (e.g. brackets, paneling, or other detailing).
Figure 17.90.120-C: Articulation Example – Bays
Building Wall
Reveals
Projected Ribs
Offsets
2. Pedestrian Shelters. Buildings must incorporate pedestrian shelters, as follows:
a. Pedestrian shelters shall be provided over the building’s primary entrance(s) and all
pedestrian areas (i.e., sidewalks, and civic spaces) abutting the subject building,
where pedestrians are likely to use these facilities.
b. Features such as canopies, arcades, awnings, roofs overhangs, covered porches,
alcoves, and/or porticoes are required to protect pedestrians from the rain and sun.
c. Pedestrian shelters must extend at least five (5) feet over the pedestrian area.
d. Shelters designed with gables (e.g., over building entrances) are preferred over flat
shelters, and must comply with the roof pitch standards in Section 17.90.120(C).
Dome or bubble shaped awnings are not permitted.
3. Building Materials. Exterior building materials shall convey an impression of strength
and durability consistent with the Sandy Style, as follows:
a. Buildings on the same site shall be architecturally unified. Architectural unity means
buildings are related in architectural style and share some common elements, such as
color scheme, materials, roof forms, and/or detailing. Unity does not mean repetition
or mirroring of building elevations.
b. Strong base materials such as natural stone (e.g., basalt, granite, river stone), splitfaced
rusticated concrete block, brick, or concrete form liner replicating these
materials are required. Cultured stone may be allowed if it has a stone texture and is
similar in appearance and durability to natural stone. A building’s base must extend at
least 36 inches but not more than 60 inches above the adjacent finished grade and be
included on those sides of the building visible from an abutting public street. If the
site contains a grade differential making construction of a minimum 36-inch base
impracticable, the reviewing body may allow portions of the base to be less than 36-
inches.
c. Foundations shall be designed to match the scale of the building being supported.
Sheathing the foundation structure with base materials and wall siding are examples
of methods which accomplish this purpose.
d. Siding shall consist of wood, composite-wood (e.g., concrete fiberboard, panels or
shingles), stone, brick, split-faced or rusticated concrete block, concrete form liner or
17.90- 27
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
a combination of these materials. Stucco, synthetic stucco, or metal are only
permitted as specified below. Vinyl, plastic or similar siding is not permitted.
1) Where wood siding is used, it shall consist of horizontal (e.g., lap, v-groove, or
tongue-and-groove) siding, vertical (board and batten) siding, shingles, or
combinations thereof. Vertical grooved (i.e., T1-11) sheet siding and similar
materials are prohibited.
2) Where board-and-batten siding is used, battens shall be a minimum of 2-inches
wide x 1-inch deep and spaced 24 inches apart or closer; rough-sawn boards
(specialty panel) are preferred over panels having a resin overlay.
3) Where masonry siding is used, it shall consist of brick, stone, or rusticated
concrete block, and must incorporate decorative patterns over not less than 15
percent of every elevation where it is used. Examples of decorative patterns
include multicolored masonry units, such as brick, stone, or cast stone, in layered
or geometric patterns or split-faced concrete block to simulate a rusticated stonetype
construction. Changes in pattern should be used to accentuate breaks in
building stories, corners, windows, and building tops (e.g., parapets where flat
roofs are allowed).
4) Where metal siding is used, it shall be used as an accent only, comprising not
more than 30 percent of the surface area of the building elevation (e.g.,
wainscoting or other accent paneling). Metal must be architectural grade and have
a non-reflective (burnished or painted) finish conforming to the Color Palette in
Appendix C. Metal may also be used for flashing, gutters, downspouts, brackets,
lighting, and signage and similar functional elements.
5) Where stucco or synthetic stucco is used, it shall only be used as an accent
comprising not more than 30 percent of the surface of the building elevation.
6) Where concrete form liner is used, it shall be limited to patterns replicating
horizontal wood siding, stone, or brick as shown in Appendix H and shall not
include ribbed, fluted, or similar patterns.
e. Building elevations facing a public street shall incorporate at least three (3) of the
following features: Using these features may also address other code requirements,
such as those related to building articulation, change in relief, pedestrian shelters,
storefront elements.
1) Exposed, heavy timbers;
2) Exposed natural wood color beams, posts, brackets and/or trim (e.g., eaves or trim
around windows);
3) Natural wood color shingles (e.g., used as siding or to accent gable ends);
4) Metal canopies;
5) Heavy metal brackets (e.g., cast iron or similar appearance), which may be
structural brackets or applied as cosmetic detailing, and/or;
6) Similar features, consistent with the Sandy Style.
f. Materials required on elevations visible from an abutting public street must turn the
building corner and incorporate appropriate transitions onto elevations not requiring
these materials for a distance of not less than four (4) feet.
17.90- 28
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
4. Colors. Building exteriors shall comply with the following standards:
a. Permitted colors include warm earth tones (tans, browns, reds, grays and greens)
conforming to Color Palette in Appendix C.
b. High-intensity primary colors, metallic colors and black, may be utilized as trim and
detail colors only, not to exceed one percent (1%) of the surface area of any elevation.
Such color shall not be used as primary wall colors.
c. Day-glow colors, highly reflective colors, and similar colors are not permitted.
Figure 17.90.120-D: Large-Scale Building with Sandy Style Elements
Pitched roof or applied
roof form (screen
HVAC)
Wood, metal and/or
wood-composite
siding and roofing
Reduce height and bulk by
varying building mass;
compose buildings in
segments
Emphasized
primary entrance
Weather protection / Heavy base
arcade with storage
areas screened
Secondary
entrance(s)
Exposed timbers
and roof
overhangs
Articulation
(offsets and
detailing)
Upper floor windows
and/or details
Landscaping/screening
Figure 17.90.120-E: Large-Scale Building with Sandy Style Elements
Covered entry
Metal siding
and light
fixtures
Split-face concrete
block with “applied” sign
lettering
Expressed structure/articulation
Upper portion
and cap
Storefront with
transparency and
windows with
molding and
detailing
Heavy base
Concrete/masonry
plinths
Heavy timber
trusses
Exposed metal
brackets
Heavy timber and/or metal
canopy/awning covering
majority of pedestrian way
Heavy timber
columns
Landscaping
17.90- 29
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
Figure 17.90.120-F: Large-Scale Building without Sandy Style Elements
Visible mechanical
equipment (lack of
cornicing/parapet)
Undesirable building bulk/mass.
Lack of vertical and horizontal
building offsets/relief
Minimal detailing (eg.
paint, texture, cornice,
wainscoting, pilasters)
Exposed/unprotected cart
storage with no relation
to primary architecture
Undesirable entrance treatment (eg.
lack of canopy, pitched roof, awning,
ornamental devices)
Lack of ground floor
windows, additional
entrances and
pedestrian sheltering
No landscaping or
pedestrian sheltering
No change is
siding materials
No base detailing
Figure 17.90.120-G: Small Building with Sandy Style Elements
Gable accent on
otherwise flat
roof
Prominent
covered
entrance
Metal, shake, or
composition roof
Stone, masonry or
rusticated concrete
base
Heavy base
Timber/wood
columns and
brackets
Board and batten siding
with groupings of smallpane
divided windows
Top defined by trim,
change in materials,
gable
Metal fixtures
(lighting,
brackets)
Integrated signage
band or individually
applied letters
(pedestrian height
and scale)
Transparency of
building. Note window
molding and detail
Window Trim
17.90- 30
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
Figure 17.90.120-H: Small Building without Sandy Style Elements
Inappropriate roof form, out of scale with building; use
of plain lumber, lacks appropriate fixtures (brackets)
and detailing
Landscape berms
inconsistent with
village character /
streetscape plan
Blank wall lacks
transparency and
detailing
Top not well defined,
lacks roof pitch
(gable)
Entrance not well
defined
Building frontage lacks canopy or
pedestrian shelter
Inappropriate building
setback - does not
address street
Base not well
defined with
appropriate
materials
C. Roof Pitch, Materials, and Parapets
Intent: To provide roof forms and detailing consistent with the Sandy Style. For purposes of
interpreting the Sandy Style, representative illustrations and photos are provided. (Figures
17.90.120-D, 17.90.120-E, 17.90.120-F, 17.90.120-G, 17.90.120-H, and 17.90.120-I and
representative photos in Appendix E)
1. Except as provided in subsections 17.90.120(C)(8), below, pitched (gabled or hipped)
roofs are required on all new buildings with a span of 50-feet or less. Gable and hipped
roof forms must achieve a pitch not less than the following:
Zoning District Primary Roof Forms
(minimum)
Secondary Roof
Forms (minimum)
C-2 and I-1 6:12 4:12
2. As provided above, “Primary Roof Forms” are those that individually comprise 20
percent or more of the total surface area of a roof elevation. Secondary roof forms (e.g.,
dormers, towers, cupolas, etc.) are those that comprise less than 20 percent of the roof
elevation. See also, Section 17.74.20 Vertical Projections.
3. When practicable, buildings shall be oriented so the gable end of the roof faces the
abutting street.
4. Pitched roofs visible from an abutting public street shall provide a secondary roof form
(e.g. dormer) in the quantity specified below. Secondary roof forms may be located
anywhere on the roof, although grouping these features is preferred.
17.90- 31
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
Roof Length Number of Secondary Roof Forms
30 – 40 feet 1
41 – 80 feet 2
81 feet and greater 4
5. Visible roof materials must be wood shingle or architectural grade composition shingle,
slate, or concrete tile. Metal with standing or batten seam may also be used conforming
to the Color Palette in Appendix D.
6. All roof and wall-mounted mechanical, electrical, communications, and service
equipment, including satellite dishes and vent pipes, shall be screened from view from all
adjacent public rights-of-way and civic spaces by parapets, walls or by other approved
means. Roof plans and elevations must show proposed equipment locations, approximate
dimensions, and line of sight from public rights-of-way and civic spaces. The reviewing
body may require additional equipment setbacks, screen walls, or other mitigation to
ensure compliance.
7. A-frame buildings and Mansard-style roofs are not permitted.
8. Exception to Pitched Roof: When a building requires a roof span greater than 50-feet, or
the internal function of the building or a portion of the building make construction of a
pitched roof impractical, the reviewing body may allow an alternative roof form. An
alternative roof form includes an “applied pitched roof” or flat roof constructed over the
building or portion of the building as specified below. An example when a pitched roof
is considered impractical would be the need to have large rooftop stove vents over the
kitchen portion of a restaurant. Roof forms constructed under this exception shall comply
with the standards below.
a. Applied Pitched Roof: An “applied pitched roof” is the preferred alternative roof
form and shall be considered first. An “applied pitched roof” is a roof form with the
general appearance of a pitched roof in terms of materials, pitch, and overhang, but
does not extend all the way from the eave of the building to the ridge of the roof as a
typical pitched roof. An “applied pitched roof” shall be constructed according to the
following:
1) For buildings with a span of less than 50 feet, the “applied pitched roof” shall
extend at least 50 percent of the distance from the eave to the ridge as if had been
constructed as a pitched roof;
2) For buildings with a span of 50 feet or greater, the applied pitched roof shall
extend at least 12 feet from eave.
3) The reviewing body may require buildings with a span of 50 feet or greater to
include an “applied pitched roof” in lieu of a flat roof along street facing
elevations.
b. Flat Roof: Flat roofs shall comply with the following standards:
17.90- 32
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
1) Sandy Style stepped parapets and detailed coursing shall be provided on those
elevations visible from a public street. Parapets shall be varied so that the length
of a parapet does not exceed 40 feet without a change in the parapet height of at
least 2 feet or as necessary to hide rooftop equipment.
2) Average parapet height shall not exceed 15 percent of the supporting wall height,
and the maximum parapet height shall not at any point exceed one-third (1/3) of
the height of the supporting wall;
3) A cornice projecting at least six (6) inches from the building face shall be
provided at the roofline of all elevations visible from public rights-of-way;
4) Parapet corners shall be stepped and the parapet be designed to emphasize the
center or primary entrance(s), unless the primary entrance is at the corner of the
building;
Figure 17.90.120-I: Parapet Detailing
D. Building Orientation and Entrances
Intent: To maintain and enhance General Commercial and Industrial streetscapes as public
spaces, emphasizing pedestrian-scale and character in new development, consistent with the
Sandy Style. (Figures 17.90.120-A, 17.90.120-B, 17.90.120-D, 17.90.120-E, 17.90.120-F,
17.90.120-G, and 17.90.120-H) and representative photos in Appendix E.
1. Buildings shall be oriented to a public street or civic space. This standard is met when at
least 50 percent of the subject site’s street frontage is comprised of building(s) placed within
20 feet of a sidewalk, walkway or civic space and not more than 20 percent of the off-street
parking on a parcel as required by SDC 17.98, tract or area of land is located between a
building’s front façade and the adjacent street(s).
2. Where parking is placed between a front façade and a street, a landscaped berm and/or
architectural features, such as a knee wall, colonnade, arbor, trellis and/or similar device,
17.90- 33
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
shall be placed behind the sidewalk to partially screen the parking area from the sidewalk.
The partial screen shall be designed to achieve at least 50 percent opacity at the time of
installation, with openings for walkways connecting to the building’s primary entrance.
3. Ground floor spaces shall face a public street or civic space and shall be connected to it by a
direct pedestrian route (i.e., avoid out-of-direction travel).
4. Buildings located at the intersection of two streets shall use a corner building entrance;
where a corner entrance is not practical due to the internal functioning of the building
space or due to physical constraints of the site (e.g., topography, accessibility, or similar
circumstances), a building entrance must be provided within forty feet of the corner. The
building corner must use detailing that emphasizes the corner location and is consistent
with the Sandy Style. Examples of acceptable detailing include a rounded or chamfered
(beveled) corner, weather protecting canopy, plaza, sculpture, and/or similar pedestrianoriented
features.
5. For structures greater than 40,000 gross square feet, there shall be at least two (2) clearly
articulated public entrances on the structure; at least one such entrance shall be visible from
a public street and connected to that street by a pedestrian sidewalk or walkway.
6. Retail buildings shall provide at least one customer entrance for every 200 lineal feet of
anchor store space along at least one of the building’s street-facing elevation(s). Such
entrances may be oriented to a public street or designated civic space. Where ancillary stores
or offices are provided, entrances to those spaces must be placed not more than 40 feet apart
on average. For example, a 300 foot long building with one anchor store and four ancillary
stores would provide no fewer than two anchor space entrances spaced not more than 200
feet apart and four ancillary entrances placed not more than 40 feet apart on average.
7. Buildings shall provide at least one (1) elevation where the pedestrian environment is
“activated”. An elevation is “activated when it meets the window transparency requirements
in subsection 17.90.120(E), below, and contains a public entrance with a pedestrian shelter
extending at least five (5) feet over an adjacent sidewalk, walkway or civic space.
8. Primary entrances must be architecturally emphasized and visible from the public rightof-
way and shall be sheltered with a canopy, overhang, or portico with a depth of at least
five (5) feet. Architectural emphasis should be provided by a gabled shelter where
practical, consistent with the Sandy Style. Detailing around the base of the building, such
as stonework, benches or art, should also be used to emphasize an entrance.
E. Windows
Intent: To promote business vitality, public safety and aesthetics through effective window
placement and design, consistent with the Sandy Style. (Figures 17.90.120-A, 17.90.120-B,
17.90.120-D, 17.90.120-E, 17.90.120-F, 17.90.120-G, and 17.90.120-H)
1. Unified Design. Building plans must provide for unity in window placement and design
so that all sides of a building relate to one another and multiple buildings on a
development site relate to one another.
2. Ground Floor Windows. The ground floor elevation of all new buildings shall contain
ground floor display areas, windows, and doorways on the “activated” frontage. as
follows:
Building Size Percentage Windows Required
17.90- 34
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
0 - 10,000 sq. ft. 30 percent of elevation
10,000 sq. ft. - 30,000 sq. ft. 25 percent of elevation
Greater than 30,000 sq. ft. 20 percent of elevation
a. Windows shall contain clear glass to allow views to interior activity or display areas.
The bottom edge of windows shall be no less than three (3) feet above the adjacent
finished grade. Where the internal functions of a building preclude windows at this
height, the reviewing body may allow windows above or below this height. Display
boxes affixed to a building’s exterior are not counted in meeting the above standard.
b. Windows shall be square or vertically oriented and may consist of vertically stacked
or horizontally banked window units. Windows located over a door or transom
windows may be horizontally oriented.
c. Windows with any dimension exceeding six (6) feet shall be divided to contain two or
more smaller panes with real divided panes, vinyl inserts, or applied dividers.
d. Windows shall have trim or moldings at least three (3) inches in width around them,
or have reveals of at least three (3) inches in depth. Casings shall consist of a drip
cap, head casing, side casings, and/or sills.
3. Upper Floor Window Standards.
a. The reviewing authority may require buildings exceeding 20 feet in height to provide
upper-story windows along the “activated” frontage. Such windows may be required
for attic space, or applied to roof forms where no second story exists, to meet the
articulation requirements under Section 17.90.120(B)(1).
b. Windows shall be square or vertically oriented. Individual window units shall not
exceed five (5) feet by seven (7) feet. Any portion of a window unit with a dimension
exceeding four (4) feet shall be divided into smaller panes.
c. At least half of all the window area in upper floors shall be made up of glass panes
with dimensions no greater than two (2) feet by three (3) feet, unless approved by
variance or adjustment. Upper story windows that have one (1) foot by one (1) foot
grid inside double pane glass are appropriate and are encouraged.
d. Window trim and moldings shall be compatible with those used on the ground floor.
4. Prohibited Windows.
a. Darkly tinted windows, mirrored windows, and similar windows are prohibited
adjacent to street sidewalks, civic spaces and walkways.
b. Glass curtain windows are not permitted facing public right-of-ways, except where
the reviewing body finds that such windows are consistent with the Sandy Style.
F. Landscaping and Streetscape Design
Intent: To promote business vitality, public safety and aesthetics through effective landscaping
and streetscape design, consistent with the Sandy Style, and to provide for a continuous
pedestrian network that promotes pedestrian safety, comfort and convenience, and provides
17.90- 35
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
materials and detailing consistent with the Sandy Style. (See Figures 17.90.120-J and 17.90.120-
K and Appendix G)
1. The provisions of Chapter 17.92 Landscaping and Screening General Standards shall
apply.
2. Parcels abutting Highway 26 shall provide a landscape buffer comprising not less than 30
percent of the highway frontage, to a depth of not less than 20 feet. Within the buffer,
existing trees shall be preserved to the extent practicable. New trees, shrubs, and
groundcover shall be planted to create a landscape buffer and partial visual screen along
the highway as specified below or as approved by the reviewing authority. If approved in
writing by the Oregon Department of Transportation, this buffer may be located within
the public right-of-way. Any new or modified access must fall outside the designated
buffer. Landscape plans shall indicate proposed landscaping, signage and other proposed
development.
3. Landscape buffer plantings shall contain a mixture of both deciduous and evergreen
species selected from the list below and shall be of a sufficient quantity to provide a
partial buffer within two years from the date they are planted:
• Trees – Deciduous (minimum 1 1/2-inch caliper) -Autumn Blaze Maple, Red
Sunset Maple, Scarlet Oak. Evergreen (minimum 8-10 feet) - Hogan Cedar,
Incense Cedar, Western Red Cedar, Douglas fir.
• Small Trees/Shrubs – Vine Maple, Serviceberry, Chinese Kousa Dogwood,
Red flowering Currant, Ceanothus ‘Blue Blossom’, Rhododendron, Pacific
Wax Myrtle.
• Groundcover – Kinnickinick, Salal, Low Oregon Grape, Coastal Strawberry,
Rock Rose.
4. All service and storage areas must be screened from view from all adjacent rights-of-way.
(See Figure 17.90.120-K below.)
17.90- 36
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
Figure 17.90.120-J: Landscape Management Area Detail – Plantings with Planned
Openings
Percentage of
frontage open for
visibility
Conifer corridor
opens at entries
Figure 17.90.120-K: Landscape Management Area Detail – Screening of Parking and
Loading Areas
17.90- 37
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
G. Civic Space
Intent: To connect buildings to the public realm and create comfortable and attractive gathering
places and outdoor seating areas for customers and the public, consistent with Sandy’s
Downtown Streetscape Design. (See Figures 17.90.120-L and 17.90.120-M)
1. Not less than three (3) percent of the building area of every development shall be
improved as civic space.
2. All civic spaces shall have dimensions of not less than eight (8) feet across and have a
surface area of not less than 64 square feet. No civic space is required if the size of this
space results in an area of less than 64 square feet.
3. Civic space improvements may include plazas, private extensions of sidewalks and
walkways (i.e., to accommodate outdoor seating), public art, pedestrian-scale lighting,
bus waiting areas, tourist amenities (e.g., way finding signs as approved by the city) or
similar pedestrian amenities as approved through Design Review.
4. The highest priority locations for civic space are those areas with the highest pedestrian
activity (e.g., street corners and mid-block pedestrian access ways) that have a western or
southern exposure.
5. Civic spaces should abut a public right-of-way or otherwise be connected to and visible
from a public right-of-way by a sidewalk or approved pedestrian access way; access ways
shall be identifiable with a change in paving materials (e.g., pavers inlaid in concrete or a
change in pavement scoring patterns and/or texture) or painted. Where a right-of-way
connection is not possible, the owner must provide a public access way easement to the
civic space. Civic spaces shall not be gated or closed to public access, unless otherwise
required by the city.
6. The reviewing authority may consider the voluntary provision of civic space or
pedestrian amenities in quantities exceeding the minimum standards of this code in
approving an adjustment or variance.
7. Exceptions:
a. Building additions and remodels subject to Type I Design Review are not required to
set aside or improve civic space, though they are encouraged to do so.
17.90- 38
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
Figure 17.90.120-L: Civic Space Example 1
Figure 17.90.120-M: Civic Space Example 2
Weather Protection
Main Entry
Street Trees in
Sidewalk Cut-Outs
Bus Stop Seating
or Shelters (where
applicable)
Pedestrian Scale
Lighting
Street Furnishing Zone Pedestrian Through Zone Building and/or Outdoor Seating and
(width may vary) Civic Space/Plaza Zone
Extra wide Sidewalk Sitting Space
Display Windows
17.90- 39
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
H. Lighting
Intent: To promote business vitality, public safety and aesthetics through effective outdoor
lighting, consistent with the Sandy Style. (Figures 17.90.120-G, 17.90.120-H, and 17.90.120-M)
1. Streetscape lighting shall conform to Chapter 15.30 Dark Sky Ordinance.
2. Exterior lighting must be an integral part of the architectural design and must
complement any ornamental street lighting and remain in context with the overall
architectural character of the district. On-site light fixtures conforming to the Sandy Style
are encouraged.
3. Lighting must be adequate for safety purposes. Walkways and parking lots should be
illuminated at 1.5 – 2.0 foot candles.
I. Safety and Security
Intent: To promote natural surveillance of public spaces for safety and security.
1. Locate windows in a manner that enables tenants, employees and police to watch over
pedestrian, parking and loading areas.
2. In commercial, public and semipublic development, including civic spaces, locate
windows in a manner that enables surveillance of interior activity from the public rightof-
way.
3. Provide street address numbers measuring a minimum of six (6) inches high, which
clearly locates buildings and their entries for patrons and emergency services.
4. Locate, orient and select on-site lighting to facilitate surveillance of on-site activities
from the public right-of-way and other public areas.
J. External Storage
Intent: To promote land use compatibility and aesthetics, particularly where development abuts
public spaces. (Figure 17.90.120-K)
1. The exterior storage of merchandise and/or materials, except as specifically authorized as
a permitted accessory use, is prohibited.
2. Where such storage is allowed, it must be screened from view from public rights of way
and civic spaces at least eight (8) feet and not more than 10 feet unless the screen is a
continuation of the building wall.
3. Mechanical, electrical, and communications equipment including meters and
transformers, service and delivery entrances, and garbage storage areas shall be screened
from view from all public rights-of-way and civic spaces.
4. Trash collection and recycling storage areas must be located within the structure or
otherwise screened from view in an enclosed facility. Such facilities must be screened
from view from all public rights of way and civic spaces behind a screening wall
constructed to match the materials used on the primary building(s) on the subject site.
5. Exceptions to the above provisions may be allowed through Design Review where no
other practical alternative exists and such equipment is made to be visually subordinate to
17.90- 40
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
the proposed building and landscape, for example, through the use of common materials
for screening walls or landscape berms. The reviewing body may require additional
setbacks, screening walls or other mitigation, for aesthetic reasons and to minimize odors
or noise impacts on adjoining properties, public rights-of-way or civic spaces.
17.90.130 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL (I-2) DESIGN STANDARDS
A. ACCESS
1. All lots shall abut or have access to a dedicated public street.
2. All lots which have access to a public alley shall provide for all personal and service access
for vehicles from that alley.
3. Parking lots may include public alley accessed garages at the rear property line.
4. Joint use of access points and interconnections shall be required, where deemed needed
by the Director and City Engineer.
5. Each lot shall be permitted one access point, except lots with street frontage of one
hundred fifty feet or more may be permitted one or more additional access point, if
approved by the City Engineer.
6. Connection to Adjacent Properties: The location of any real improvements to the property
must provide for a future street and pedestrian network to adjacent properties.
B. PEDESTRIAN ACCESSIBILITY
1. Special attention shall be given to designing a primary building entrance, which is both
attractive and functional.
2. Building entries must comply with the accessibility requirements of the Oregon State
Structural Specialty Code.
3. Buildings located at the intersection of two streets shall consider the use of a corner
entrance to the building.
4. Pedestrian environment may be enhanced by street furniture, landscaping, awnings, and
movable planters of seasonal flowers.
C. BUILDING FACADES, MATERIALS AND COLORS
1. Facades. Facades shall be varied and articulated to provide visual interest to pedestrians.
Within larger projects, variations in facades, floor levels, architectural features, and
exterior finishes shall create the appearance of several smaller buildings.
2. Building Materials. Exterior building materials shall convey an impression of durability.
Materials such as masonry, stone, stucco, and wood are encouraged. Metal is not allowed
as the primary exterior building material except in the I-2 and I-3 districts, but it may be
used for accents including awnings.
17.90- 41
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
3. Siding. Lap or horizontal siding or walls of brick, masonry or stone shall be required.
Vertical grooved (i.e., T1-11) sheet siding is prohibited.
4. Masonry Finishes. Where masonry is used for exterior finish, decorative patterns must be
incorporated. Examples of these decorative patterns include multicolored masonry units,
such as brick, stone, or cast stone, in layered or geometric patterns or split-faced concrete
block to simulate a rusticated stone-type construction.
5. Change in Relief. Buildings must include changes in relief on 10% of the facades facing
public streets or residential development. Relief changes include cornices, bases,
fenestration, fluted masonry or other treatments for pedestrian interest and scale.
6. Colors. Preferred colors for exterior building finishes are earth tones, creams, and pastels
of earth tones. High-intensity primary colors, metallic colors, and black may be utilized
as trim and detail colors but shall not be used as primary wall colors.
7. Ornamental Devices. Ornamental devices, such as molding, entablature and friezes, are
encouraged at the roofline. Where such ornamentation is present in the form of a linear
molding or board, the band must be at least 8 inches wide.
8. Alcoves, Porches, Arcades, etc. Building must incorporate features such as arcades,
awnings, roofs, porches, alcoves, and porticoes to protect pedestrians from the rain and
sun. Awnings and entrances may be designed to be shared between two structures.
9. Continuous Outdoor Arcades. Continuous outdoor arcades are strongly encouraged.
10. Traditional Storefront Elements. For buildings designed to house retail, service, or office
businesses, traditional storefront elements are required. These elements include:
a. Clearly delineated upper and lower facades;
b. A lower facade dominated by large display windows and a recessed entry or entries;
c. Smaller, regularly spaced windows in the upper floor;
d. Decorative trim, such as window hoods, surrounding upper floor windows;
e. A decorative cornice near the top of the facade.
D. ROOF PITCH, MATERIALS, AND PARAPETS
1.
Zoning District Pitch
I-2 3:12
2. Flat roofs (with minimum pitch for drainage) are permitted with detailed stepped parapets
or detailed brick coursing.
3. Parapet corners must be stepped or the parapet must be designed to emphasize the center
or primary entrance(s), unless the primary entrance is at the corner of the building.
17.90- 42
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
4. Visible roof materials must be wood or architectural grade composition shingle, slate, tile
or sheet metal with standing or batten seam.
5. All roof and wall-mounted mechanical, electrical, communications, and service
equipment, including satellite dishes and vent pipes, must be screened from public view
by parapets, walls or by other approved means.
E. BUILDING ORIENTATION AND ENTRANCE STANDARDS
1. Primary entries shall face a public street or designated pedestrian way
2. Primary entrances must be architecturally emphasized and visible from the public rightof-
way.
3. Buildings must have an entrance connecting directly between the right-of-way and the
building interior.
4. Secondary entries may face parking lots or loading areas. Buildings must have an entrance
connecting directly between the street and the building interior.
5. Entries shall be sheltered with an overhang or portico with a depth of at least 4 feet.
6. Multiple units: Ground floor units shall face a public street or designated pedestrian way and
be visible from the street whenever feasible and shall avoid out-of-direction travel.
F. WINDOWS
1. Windows, which allow views to the interior activity or display areas, are encouraged.
Windows shall include sills at bottom and pediments at the top. Glass curtain walls,
reflective glass, and painted or darkly tinted glass shall not be used.
2. Ground Floor Windows. All new buildings must provide ground floor windows along
street frontages.
a. Required window areas must be either windows that allow views into working areas
or lobbies, pedestrian entrances, or display windows.
b. Required windows must have a sill no more than 4 feet above grade. Where interior
floor levels prohibit such placement, the sill must be raised to allow it to be no more
than 2 feet above the finished floor level, up to a maximum sill height of 6 feet above
grade.
c. Darkly tinted windows and mirrored windows that block two way visibility are
prohibited for ground floor windows along street facades.
d. Any wall that faces a public right-of-way must contain at least 10% of the ground
floor wall area in display areas, windows, and doorways. Blank walls facing a public
right-of-way are prohibited.
e. Glass curtain windows are not permitted fronting public right-of-ways.
3. Upper Floor Window Standards.
a. Glass area dimensions shall not exceed 5 feet by 7 feet. (The longest dimension may
be taken either horizontally or vertically.)
b. Windows must have trim or molding at least two inches wide around their perimeters.
17.90- 43
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
c. At least half of all the window area in upper floors must be made up of glass panes
with dimensions no greater than 2 feet by 3 feet. Windows that have 1 foot by 1 foot
grid inside double pane glass are appropriate and are encouraged.
G. LANDSCAPING/STREETSCAPE
1. Benches, outdoor seating, and trash receptacles must complement the existing ornamental
street lighting and be in keeping with the overall architectural character of the area.
2. Benches and other streetscape items may be placed within the public right-of-way but
must not block free movement of pedestrians. A minimum pedestrian walkway width of 5
feet must be maintained at all times.
H. LIGHTING
1. All building entrances and exits must be well lighted.
2. Exterior lighting must be an integral part of the architectural design and must
complement any ornamental street lighting and remain in context with the overall
architectural character of the district.
3. Lighting must be adequate for safety purposes.
4. Lighting must be of a pedestrian scale and the source light must be shielded to reduce
glare.
I. SAFETY AND SECURITY
1. Locate windows in a manner, which enables tenants, employees and police to watch over
pedestrian, parking and loading areas.
2. In commercial, public and semipublic development and where possible in industrial
development, locate windows in a manner which enables surveillance of interior activity
from the public right-of-way.
3. Provide an identification system, which clearly locates buildings and their entries for
patrons and emergency services.
4. Locate, orient and select on-site lighting to facilitate surveillance of on-site activities
from the public right-of-way or other public areas.
J. EXTERNAL STORAGE
1. The exterior storage of merchandise and/or materials, except as specifically authorized as
a permitted accessory use, is prohibited.
K. TRASH COLLECTION / RECYCLING AREAS.
1. All trash collection areas must be located within the structure or behind the building in an
enclosure in accordance with the provisions of the City of Sandy Design Standards,
Appendix A.
17.90- 44
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
17.90.140 MANUFACTURED DWELLINGS NOT IN A MANUFACTURED HOME
PARK REQUIREMENTS
A. Manufactured homes that are not located in a manufactured home park shall comply with the
following requirements:
1. Be multi-sectional (doublewide or wider) and enclose a floor area of not less than 1,000
sq. ft., excluding garages.
2. Have a backfill style foundation or skirting of pressure treated wood, masonry, or
continuous concrete footing wall construction, complying with the minimum set-up
standards of the adopted Manufactured Dwelling Administrative Rules, Chapter 918.
3. Have a pitched roof with a minimum 3 ft. in height for each 12 ft. in width.
4. Have siding or roofing that is non-reflective.
5. Be certified by the manufacturer to have an exterior thermal envelope meeting
performance standards specified by State law for single-family dwelling constructed
under the State one- and two-family dwelling code.
6. In addition to these requirements manufactured homes shall comply with the design
standards in Section 17.90.150.
17.90.150 RESIDENTIAL DESIGN STANDARDS
A. Intent: These design standards are intended to:
• Enhance the appearance of Sandy through the creation of attractively designed houses
and streetscapes;
• Ensure there is a physical and visual connection between the living area and entrance of
the dwelling and the street;
• Improve public safety for residents and visitors and provide opportunities for community
interaction;
• Provide guidelines for good design at reasonable costs and with multiple options to
achieve the purposes of this chapter.
B. Applicability: These standards apply to the street facing facades of all new single family
dwellings and each half of duplexes with or without a garage including additions or
alterations.
Exemptions: The following are exempt from the design standards of this section:
1. Additions and alterations adding less than 50 percent to the existing floor area of the
structure.
2. Additions or alterations not facing a public street.
C. Garage Width Formula: The width of the garage relative to the total width of the street facing
facade is used to determine the required number of design elements from the list specified in
Section (F) below:
17.90- 45
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
1. Formula: width of garage divided by width of primary street facing façade multiplied by
100. For example: A 40 foot wide home with a 20 foot width garage would result in 50
percent (20/40 = 0.5 x 100 = 50 percent) garage to home ratio.
2. The width of the garage is measured from the outside garage walls. The width of the
primary street facing façade is the entire width of the structure including the garage
facing the front lot line.
3. A garage-under home design where the garage is on the lower level and the entrance to
the home is above, is permitted in compliance with the design feature requirements as
specified below.
Figure 17.90.150 – A: Measuring Garage Width
D. General Provisions.
1. In no case shall the width of the garage exceed 70 percent of the primary street facing
façade except for a garage-under home design as specified above.
2. The primary building entrance of each structure shall:
a. Face the street; or
b. Be at an angle up to 45 degrees from the street; or
c. Open onto a covered porch that is at least 30 square feet with a minimum depth of
five feet on the front or, in the case of a corner lot, the side of the residence.
3. All windows and doors on the primary street facing façade shall be provided with trim (4
inch minimum nominal width).
4. Corner Lots: Dwellings on corner lots shall provide windows and doors with trim (4 inch
minimum nominal width) occupying a minimum of ten percent on all secondary street
facing facades.
5. A detached garage may not be located closer to the front lot line than the dwelling.
E. Number of Required Design Elements.
1. Primary Street Facing Façade: The number of design elements required on the primary
street facing façade is specified in the table below.
17.90- 46
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
Table 17.90.150 – A: Number of Required Design Elements
Garage Width Percent
(Street Facing Attached Garage)
Number of Required Design
Elements
Up to 50 percent 5 elements
Greater than 50 percent and up to 60 percent 6 elements
Greater than 60 percent and up to 70 percent or
a garage under home design
7 elements
Other Garage Types
Garage door 90 degrees to street
3 elements plus windows occupying 10
percent of garage wall facing the street
Detached Garage (An independent, selfsupporting
structure separated from the
dwelling by at least 6 feet)
4 elements plus 4 elements on the garage
Rear-Loaded Garage or no Garage 4 elements
2. Additional Street Facing Façades: All additional street facing facades shall provide a
minimum of three (3) design elements.
F. Required Design Elements.
1. Dormers at least three (3) feet wide.
2. Covered porch entry – minimum 40 square foot covered front porch, minimum five (5)
feet deep.
3. Front porch railing around at least two (2) sides of the porch.
4. Front facing second story balcony – projecting from the wall of the building a minimum
of four (4) feet and enclosed by a railing or parapet wall.
5. Building face containing two (2) or more off-sets of 16 inches or greater.
6. Roof overhang of 16 inches or greater.
7. Columns, pillars or posts at least four (4) inches wide and containing larger base
materials.
8. Decorative gables – cross or diagonal bracing, shingles, trim, corbels, exposed rafter
ends, or brackets (does not include a garage gable if garage projects beyond dwelling unit
portion of street façade).
9. Decorative “belly-band” between building floors or gables (minimum nominal width of
band is six (6) inches).
10. Decorative molding above windows and doors.
11. Decorative pilaster or chimneys.
12. Shakes, shingles, brick, stone or other similar decorative materials occupying at least 60
square feet of the street façade.
13. Bay or bow windows – extending a minimum of 12 inches outward from the main wall of
a building and forming a bay or alcove in a room within the building.
14. Windows and front door – occupying a minimum of 10 percent of the primary street
facing façade (not including the roof and excluding any windows in a garage door).
15. Sidelight and/or transom windows associated with the front door or windows in the front
door.
16. Window grids on all façade windows (excluding any windows in the garage door or front
17.90- 47
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
door).
17. Maximum nine (9) foot wide garage doors or a garage door designed to resemble two (2)
smaller garage doors and/or windows in the garage door (only applicable to street facing
garages).
18. Decorative base materials such as natural stone, cultured stone, or brick extending at least
36 inches above adjacent finished grade occupying a minimum of 10 % of the overall
primary street facing façade.
19. A front facing garage projecting out from the longest street facing facade not more than
six (6) feet. A front facing garage that is recessed or flush with the longest street facing
façade may count as two of the required design elements.
20. Other items meeting the intent of this section as determined by the Director.
G. Dwellings within Designated Villages Adjacent to an Arterial or Collector Street:
The building elevation(s) of dwellings adjacent to an arterial or collector street within a
designated Village (as identified on the City of Sandy Comprehensive Plan Map) shall
comply with the requirements of this section and include all of the following:
1. A primary building entrance and covered porch oriented toward the arterial or collector
street.
2. A sidewalk connecting directly between the arterial or collector street and the covered
porch.
3. A building with frontage on more than one arterial or collector street shall provide a front
entrance oriented to one street or to a corner where two streets intersect.
17.90.160 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS - MULTI-FAMILY DEVELOPMENTS
Multi-family residential developments shall comply with the requirements of this chapter as
listed above and the following additional requirements:
A. Roofs. Roofs shall meet the following additional requirements:
1. Roofs shall be gabled or hip type roofs (minimum pitch 3:12) with at least a 30-inch
overhang and using shingles or similar roofing materials. Alternatives may be approved
where the developer can demonstrate that abutting structures or the majority of structures
within 300 feet have roofs similar to what is proposed.
2. Offsets or breaks in roof elevation shall be at least 3 or more feet in height.
B. Entries.
1. Entries shall be sheltered with an overhang, portico or recessed entry or otherwise
articulated with an architecturally detailed entry.
2. Primary dwelling entries shall face a public street or designated pedestrian way and be
visible from the street whenever feasible.
17.90- 48
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
3. Multiple units: Ground floor units shall face a public street or designated pedestrian way and
be visible from the street whenever feasible and shall avoid out-of-direction travel. Upper
story units may share entries.
4. Secondary entries may face parking lots or loading areas.
C. Building facades shall be articulated with windows, entries, balconies and/or bays. Towers or
other special vertical elements may be used in a limited fashion to focus views to the area from
surrounding streets.
D. Along the vertical face of a structure, when facing a public street, pedestrian way or an abutting
residential use, offsets shall occur at a minimum of every 20 feet by providing any two of the
following:
1. Recesses (decks, patios, entrances, floor area, etc.) of a minimum depth of 8 feet.
2. Extensions (decks, patios, entrances, floor area, etc.) at a minimum depth of 8 feet, with
maximum length of an overhang not to exceed 25 feet.
3. If a partially enclosed covered porch is proposed, this can meet one of the offset
requirements provided the porch is 8 feet deep and at least 125 sq. ft. in area.
E. Private Outdoor Areas.
1. A separate outdoor area of not less than 48 square feet shall be attached to each ground
level dwelling unit. These areas shall be separated from common outdoor areas in a
manner, which enables the resident to control access from separate to common areas with
elements such as walls, fences or shrubs.
2. A separate outdoor area of not less than forty-eight (48) square feet in the form of
balconies, terraces or porches shall be provided for each dwelling unit located above the
ground level.
17.90- 49
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
F. Parking Lots. Parking lots in multi-family developments shall not occupy more than 50% of
the frontage of any public street abutting the lot or building.
G. Individual Storage Areas. Enclosed storage areas shall be required and may be attached to the
exterior of each dwelling unit to accommodate garden equipment, patio furniture, barbecues,
bicycles, etc. Storage areas may be provided within garages if the required storage area is in
addition to the required parking area required.
Size of Dwelling Minimum Square Feet Minimum Height
Studio 24 6
1 Bedroom 24 6
2 Bedroom 36 6
3+ Bedroom 48 6
H. Carports and Garages. If carport and garages are provided, the form, materials, color and
construction shall be compatible with the complex they serve.
I. Shared Outdoor Recreation Areas. Multi-family residential development shall provide usable
recreation areas for developments containing more than 5 dwelling units at the rate of 200
square feet per dwelling unit. Such areas shall be counted as part of the required landscaping.
Examples include, but are not limited to, playgrounds, exercise trails, swimming pools, etc.
Usable recreation area may also include slopes, wetlands, FSH setback areas, and other
natural site features, however, at least 50% of the recreation area must located outside the
boundaries of such areas and slopes may not exceed 15% in the 50% usable recreation area.
Gazebos and other outdoor covered spaces are encouraged and qualify as 1.25 square feet for
every one square foot of required shared recreation area. The shared outdoor recreation area
shall be located and designed in a manner which:
1. Provides approximately the same accessibility to the maximum number of dwelling units
possible.
2. Windows shall be located to encourage watching over entry areas, shared recreational
areas, laundry areas, walkways and parking areas from windows in at least two adjacent
dwelling units. These windows must be located in kitchen, living room, dining room or
other activity rooms (bedrooms or bathrooms are not included).
3. Provides a separation from parking and driveway areas with a landscaped transition area
measuring a minimum of ten feet wide;
4. Controls access to shared outdoor areas from off-site as well as from on-site parking and
entrance areas with features such as fencing, walls and landscaping;
5. Provides a usable surface material such as lawn, decks, wood chips, sand and hard
surface materials (concrete/asphalt).
J. Safety and Security.
1. Provide an outdoor lighting system which facilitates police observation and resident
observation through strategic location, orientation and brightness without being obtrusive
by shining into residential units or adjacent residential developments.
2. Establish a directory for apartment complexes of four or more units, which clearly orients
visitors and emergency service providers as to the location of residential units. Where
possible, this system should be evident from the primary vehicle entryway.
17.90- 50
Revised by Ordinance 2013-04 effective 07/03/13
K. Service, Delivery and Screening.
1. Locate postal delivery areas in a convenient location efficiently designed for residents
and mail delivery personnel and in accordance with U.S. Postal Service requirements.
2. Provide pedestrian access from unit entries to postal delivery areas, garbage and
recycling collection areas, shared activity areas and parking areas. Elements such as, but
not limited to, concrete paths, striped walkways or raised walkways through vehicular
areas or gravel trails will meet this requirement.
3. Provide garbage collection and recycling areas in convenient locations for the service
provider and residents.
4. Garbage collection areas shall have a concrete floor surface and shall have a gate on the
truck-loading side and a separate pedestrian access.
5. Outdoor storage areas, garbage containers and recycling bins shall be screened from view
in one of the following manners:
a. A solid sight obscuring wall or fence not less than six feet in height and constructed
of durable materials compatible with the primary structure(s) shall surround these
areas.
b. Evergreen plant materials which will retain their screening ability and will reach the
height of six feet within three years from time of planting. An overlap of three inches
is required of the evergreen plant screening. The material shall completely screen the
area from the public view.
L. Electrical and Mechanical Equipment. On- and above-grade electrical and mechanical
equipment such as transformers, heat pumps and central air conditioner units shall be
screened with sight obscuring fences, walls or landscaping.
17.90.170 MAINTENANCE
A. All approved on-site improvements shall be the on-going responsibility of the property owner
or occupant. The owner, occupant or agent shall be jointly and severally responsible for the
maintenance of all landscaping which shall be maintained in good condition so as to present
a healthy, neat and orderly appearance and shall be kept free of refuse and debris. All on-site
improvements shall be controlled by maintaining, pruning, trimming or otherwise, so that:
1. It will not interfere with the maintenance or repair of any public facility;
2. It will not restrict pedestrian or vehicular access; and
3. It will not constitute a traffic hazard because of reduced visibility.
17.90.180 COMPLIANCE
A. The development site shall be checked by staff to ensure compliance with final approved
plans prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy.
B. The development must be completed as per the approved final plans including landscaping
and recreation areas before the certificate is issued.
C. It shall be the duty of the Director to enforce these regulations and to assure that conditions
of final development approval are carried out.
17.92 - 1
CHAPTER 17.92 - LANDSCAPING & SCREENING
GENERAL STANDARDS - ALL ZONES
17.92.00 INTENT
The City of Sandy recognizes the aesthetic and economic value of landscaping and encourages
its use to establish a pleasant community character, unify developments, and buffer or screen
unsightly features; to soften and buffer large scale structures and parking lots; and to aid in
energy conservation by providing shade from the sun and shelter from the wind. The community
desires and intends all properties to be landscaped and maintained.
This chapter prescribes standards for landscaping, buffering, and screening. While this chapter
provides standards for frequently encountered development situations, detailed planting plans
and irrigation system designs, when required, shall be reviewed by the City with this purposes
clause as the guiding principle.
17.92.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. Where landscaping is required by this Code, detailed planting plans shall be submitted for
review with development applications. No development may commence until the Director or
Planning Commission has determined the plans comply with the purposes clause and specific
standards in this chapter. All required landscaping and related improvements shall be
completed or financially guaranteed prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy.
B. Appropriate care and maintenance of landscaping on-site and landscaping in the adjacent
public right-of-way is the right and responsibility of the property owner, unless City
ordinances specify otherwise for general public and safety reasons. If street trees or other
plant materials do not survive or are removed, materials shall be replaced in kind within 6
months.
C. Significant plant and tree specimens should be preserved to the greatest extent practicable
and integrated into the design of a development. Trees of 25-inches or greater circumference
measured at a height of 4-½ ft. above grade are considered significant. Plants to be saved and
methods of protection shall be indicated on the detailed planting plan submitted for approval.
Existing trees may be considered preserved if no cutting, filling, or compaction of the soil
takes place between the trunk of the tree and the area 5-ft. outside the tree’s drip line. Trees
to be retained shall be protected from damage during construction by a construction fence
located 5 ft. outside the dripline.
D. Planter and boundary areas used for required plantings shall have a minimum diameter of 5-
ft. (2-½ ft. radius, inside dimensions). Where the curb or the edge of these areas are used as a
tire stop for parking, the planter or boundary plantings shall be a minimum width of 7-½ ft.
E. In no case shall shrubs, conifer trees, or other screening be permitted within vision clearance
areas of street, alley, or driveway intersections, or where the City Engineer otherwise deems
such plantings would endanger pedestrians and vehicles.
F. Landscaped planters and other landscaping features shall be used to define, soften or screen
the appearance of off-street parking areas and other activity from the public street. Up to 35
percent of the total required landscaped area may be developed into pedestrian amenities,
17.92 - 2
including, but not limited to sidewalk cafes, seating, water features, and plazas, as approved
by the Director or Planning Commission.
G. Required landscaping/open space shall be designed and arranged to offer the maximum
benefits to the occupants of the development as well as provide visual appeal and building
separation.
H. Balconies required for entrances and exits shall not be considered as open space except
where such exits and entrances are for the sole use of the unit.
I. Roofed structures shall not be included as open space except for open unenclosed public
patios, balconies, gazebos, or other similar structures or spaces.
J. Driveways and parking areas shall not be included as open space.
K. All areas not occupied by paved roadways, walkways, patios, or buildings shall be
landscaped.
L. All landscaping shall be continually maintained, including necessary watering, weeding,
pruning and replacing.
17.92.20 MINIMUM IMPROVEMENTS - LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING
The minimum landscaping area of a site to be retained in landscaping shall be as follows:
ZONING DISTRICT OR USE PERCENTAGE
R-3 25%
Manufactured Home Park 20%
C -1 Central Business District 10%
C - 2 General Commercial 20%
C - 3 Village Commercial 10%
I - 1 Industrial Park 20%
I - 2 Light Industrial 15%
I - 3 Heavy Industrial 10%
17.92.30 REQUIRED TREE PLANTINGS
Planting of trees is required for all parking lots with 4 or more parking spaces, public street
frontages, and along private drives more than 150 feet long. Trees shall be planted outside the
street right-of-way except where there is a designated planting strip or City adopted street tree
plan.
The City maintains a list of appropriate trees for street tree and parking lot planting situations.
Selection of species should be made from the city-approved list. Alternate selections may be
approved by the Director following written request. The type of tree used shall determine
frequency of trees in planting areas. Trees in parking areas shall be dispersed throughout the lot
to provide a canopy for shade and visual relief.
17.92 - 3
Area/Type of Planting Canopy Spacing
Street Tree Medium 30 ft. on center
Street Tree Large 50 ft. on center
Parking Lot Tree Medium 1 per 8 cars
Parking Lot Tree Large 1 per 12 cars
Trees may not be planted:
• Within 5 ft. of permanent hard surface paving or walkways, unless specific species, special
planting techniques and specifications approved by the Director are used.
• Unless approved otherwise by the City Engineer:
? Within 10 ft. of fire hydrants and utility poles
? Within 20 ft. of street light standards
? Within 5 ft. from an existing curb face
? Within 10 ft. of a public sanitary sewer, storm drainage or water line
• Where the Director determines the trees may be a hazard to the public interest or general
welfare.
• Trees shall be pruned to provide a minimum clearance of 8 ft. above sidewalks and 12 ft.
above street and roadway surfaces.
17.92.40 IRRIGATION
Landscaping shall be irrigated, either with a manual or automatic system, to sustain viable plant
life.
17.92.50 TYPES AND SIZES OF PLANT MATERIALS
A. At least 75% of the required landscaping area shall be planted with a suitable combination of
trees, shrubs, or evergreen ground cover except as otherwise authorized by Chapter 17.92.10
F.
B. Plant Materials. Use of native plant materials or plants acclimatized to the Pacific Northwest
is encouraged where possible.
C. Trees shall be species having an average mature spread of crown greater than 15 feet and
having trunks which can be maintained in a clear condition with over 5 feet of clear wood
(without branches). Trees having a mature spread of crown less than 15 feet may be
substituted by grouping the same so as to create the equivalent of a 15-foot crown spread.
D. Deciduous trees shall be balled and burlapped, be a minimum of 7 feet in overall height or 1
½ inches in caliper measured 6 inches above the ground, immediately after planting. Bare
root trees will be acceptable to plant during their dormant season.
E. Coniferous trees shall be a minimum five feet in height above ground at time of planting.
F. Shrubs shall be a minimum of 1 gallon in size or 2 feet in height when measured immediately
after planting.
17.92 - 4
G. Hedges, where required to screen and buffer off-street parking from adjoining properties
shall be planted with an evergreen species maintained so as to form a continuous, solid visual
screen within 2 years after planting.
H. Vines for screening purposes shall be a minimum of 1 gallon in size or 30 inches in height
immediate after planting and may be used in conjunction with fences, screens, or walls to
meet physical barrier requirements as specified.
I. Groundcovers shall be fully rooted and shall be well branched or leafed. If used in lieu of turf
in whole or in part, ground covers shall be planted in such a manner as to provide complete
coverage in one year.
J. Turf areas shall be planted in species normally grown as permanent lawns in western Oregon.
Either sod or seed are acceptable. Acceptable varieties include improved perennial ryes and
fescues used within the local landscape industry.
K. Landscaped areas may include architectural features or artificial ground covers such as
sculptures, benches, masonry or stone walls, fences, rock groupings, bark dust, decorative
hard paving and gravel areas, interspersed with planted areas. The exposed area developed
with such features shall not exceed 25% of the required landscaped area. Artificial plants are
prohibited in any required landscape area.
17.92.60 REVEGETATION IN UNLANDSCAPED OR NATURAL LANDSCAPED
AREAS
A. Areas where natural vegetation has been removed or damaged through grading or
construction activity in areas not affected by the landscaping requirements and that are not to
be occupied by structures or other improvements shall be replanted.
B. Plant material shall be watered at intervals sufficient to assure survival and growth.
C. The use of native plant materials or plants acclimatized to the Pacific Northwest is
encouraged to reduce irrigation and maintenance demands.
17.92.70 LANDSCAPING BETWEEN PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY AND PROPERTY
LINES
Except for portions allowed for parking, loading, or traffic maneuvering, a required setback area
abutting a public street and open area between the property line and the roadway in the public
street shall be landscaped. That portion of the landscaping within the street right-of-way shall not
count as part of the lot area percentage to be landscaped.
17.92.80 BUFFER PLANTING - PARKING, LOADING AND MANUEVERING AREAS
Buffer plantings are used to reduce building scale, provide transition between contrasting
architectural styles, and generally mitigate incompatible or undesirable views. They are used to
soften rather than block viewing. Where required, a mix of plant materials shall be used to
achieve the desired buffering effect.
17.92 - 5
Buffering is required in conjunction with issuance of construction permits for parking areas
containing 4 or more spaces, loading areas, and vehicle maneuvering areas. Boundary plantings
shall be used to buffer these uses from adjacent properties and the public right-of-way. On-site
plantings shall be used between parking bays, as well as between parking bays and vehicle
maneuvering areas. A balance of low-lying ground cover and shrubs, and vertical shrubs and
trees shall be used to buffer the view of these facilities. Decorative walls and fences may be used
in conjunction with plantings, but may not be used by themselves to comply with buffering
requirements. Exception: truck parking lots are exempt from parking bay buffer planting
requirements.
17.92.90 SCREENING (HEDGES, FENCES, WALLS, BERMS)
Screening is uses where unsightly views or visual conflicts must be obscured or blocked and
where privacy and security are desired. Fences and walls used for screening may be constructed
of wood, concrete, stone, brick, and wrought iron, or other commonly used fencing/wall
materials. Acoustically designed fences and walls are also used where noise pollution requires
mitigation.
A. Height and Opacity. Where landscaping is used for required screening, it shall be at least 6 ft.
in height and at least 80 percent opaque, as seen from a perpendicular line of sight, within 2
years following establishment of the primary use of the site.
B. Chain Link Fencing. A chain link fence with slats shall qualify for screening only if a
landscape buffer is also provided in compliance with Section 17.92.00 above.
C. Height Measurement. The height of hedges, fences, walls, and berm shall be measured from
the lowest adjoining finished grade, except where used to comply with screening
requirements for parking, loading, storage, and similar areas. In these cases, height shall be
measured from the finished grade of such improvements. Screening is not permitted within
vision clearance areas.
17.92 - 6
D. Berms. Earthen berms up to 6 ft. in height may be used to comply with screening
requirements. Slope of berms may not exceed 2:1 and both faces of the slope shall be planted
with ground cover, shrubs, and trees.
A. Long expanses of fences and walls shall be designed to prevent visual monotony through use
of offsets, changes of materials and textures, or landscaping.
17.92.100 SCREENING OF SERVICE FACILITIES
Site-obscuring shrubbery or a berm, wall or fence shall be placed along a property line between
residential and commercial and industrial zones and around unsightly areas such as trash and
recycling areas, gas meters, ground level air conditioning units, disc antennas exceeding 36
inches in diameter and equipment storage or an industrial or commercial use with outside storage
of equipment or materials.
17.92 - 7
17.92.110 OUTDOOR STORAGE
All outdoor storage areas for commercial, industrial, public and semi-public uses are to be
entirely screened by a sight obscuring fence, vegetative materials, or other alternative deemed
appropriate by the Director. Exceptions to the preceding requirements include: new or used cars,
cycles and trucks (but not including car parts or damaged vehicles); new or used boat sales;
recreational vehicle sales; new or used large equipment sales or rentals; manufactured home
sales; florists and plants nurseries.
17.92.130 PERFORMANCE BOND
If weather conditions or other circumstances beyond the control of the developer or owner make
completion of the landscaping impossible prior to desired occupancy, an extension of up to 6
months may be applied for by posting “security” equal to 120% of the cost of the landscaping,
assuring installation within 6 months. “Security” may consist of a performance bond payable to
the city, cash, certified check, time certificates of deposit, assignment of a saving account, letter
of credit, or other such assurance of access to funds necessary for completion as shall meet the
approval of the City Attorney. Upon acceptance of the security, the developer or owner may be
allowed occupancy for a period of up to 180 days. If the installation of the landscaping
improvement is not completed within 180 days, the City shall have access to the security to
complete the installation and/or revoke occupancy. Upon completion of the installation by the
city, any portion of the remaining security minus administrative charges of 30% shall be returned
to the owner. Costs in excess of the posted security shall be assessed against the property and the
City shall thereupon have a valid lien against the property, which will come due, and payable.
17.92.140 GUARANTEE
All landscape materials and workmanship shall be guaranteed by the installer and/or developer
for a period of time not to exceed two years. This guarantee shall insure that all plant materials
survive in good condition and shall guarantee replacement of dead or dying plant materials.
17.94 - 1
CHAPTER 17.94 - DRIVE-UP USES
17.94.00 INTENT
These provisions are established to ensure safe, functional drive-up uses while not impeding flow
of traffic. For purposes of this section, a vehicle shall be considered no less than twenty feet in
length.
The width and turning radius of drive-up aisles shall be approved through the Type I design
review process.
17.94.10 APPLICABLILITY
These regulations govern all drive-up uses in all zoning districts.
17.94.20 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS
A. Parking maneuvers shall not occur in the stacking area. The stacking area shall not interfere
with safe and efficient access to other parking areas on the site or adjacent properties.
B. Drive-up aisles and windows must be located a minimum of fifty feet from residential zones
to avoid adverse impacts.
C. All restaurant facilities, except short term food service, providing drive-up service shall
provide at least two designated parking spaces immediately beyond the service window or
provide other satisfactory methods to allow customers requiring excessive waiting time to
receive service while parked.
D. The grade of the stacking area to the drive-up shall not exceed a slope of twelve percent.
E. The drive-up shall be designed to provide as much natural ventilation as possible to eliminate
the buildup of exhaust gasses.
F. The sound level of communications systems shall not exceed fifty-five decibels at the
property line and shall otherwise comply with provisions of the Sandy Municipal Code
regarding sound levels.
17.94.30 STACKING DISTANCE
Drive-up window uses shall provide a minimum stacking area clear of the public right-of-way
and parking lot aisles from the window serving the vehicles as follows:
A. Banks. Each lane shall provide a minimum capacity for 5 vehicles.
B. Restaurants. Each lane shall provide a minimum capacity for 8 vehicles.
C. Short-Term Food Service. Each lane shall provide a minimum capacity for 3 vehicles. Short
Term Food Service is defined as a facility serving espresso, ice cream, or other single-service
product. A maximum of one designated parking space located at the end of the stacking area
may be substituted for one required stacking space for small convenience food stops only.
17.94 - 2
D. Other Drive-up Uses:
1. Automotive Fueling Stations. Each lane shall provide a minimum capacity for 4 vehicles.
2. Other Uses. Each lane shall provide a minimum capacity for 2 to 8 vehicles, as
determined through the design review process.
17.96 - 1
CHAPTER 17.96 - MANUFACTURED DWELLING PARK STANDARDS
17.96.00 INTENT
These provisions are established to ensure a safe and healthful living environment for residents
of manufactured dwelling parks and to ensure that a manufactured dwelling park can provide
affordable quality housing compatible with adjacent land uses. In addition, these provisions are
intended to ensure compliance with State regulations governing review of manufactured
dwelling park development.
17.96.10 AREA REQUIREMENTS
A. Minimum Size for Manufactured Dwelling Park = 1 acre.
B. Minimum Size for Manufactured Home Space = 2,000 sq. ft.
Note: ORS 446.100(x) requires that the space be at least 30 ft. wide and 40 ft. long.
17.96.20 PERMITTED STRUCTURES
A. Manufactured Homes and Mobile Homes (as defined in Chapter 17.10-Definitions)
B. Accessory Structures. Structures customarily incidental to the primary use in accordance with
Chapter 17.74.
17.96.30 SETBACK AND SEPARATION FOR THE PARK PERIMETER
A. Setback Between Park Structures and Abutting Properties. Between abutting property and
any dwelling or accessory park structure or a park road there shall be a minimum setback
equal to the rear yard setback specified by the district of the abutting property but in no case
shall the setback be less than 5 ft.
B. Setback Between Park Structures and a Public Street Right-of-Way Between the public rightof-
way and any dwelling or accessory structure there shall be an average setback along the
public street of 20 feet with a minimum setback equal to the front yard setback of the district.
17.96.40 PARK PERIMETER TREATMENT
A. Perimeter Treatment. An applicant can choose one of two options for perimeter treatment.
1. Option I - Abutting Public Streets. On lands adjacent to public streets a 6-ft. high siteobscuring
screen shall be provided through the use of fencing and vegetation and/or earth
sculpting and vegetation.
a. Fencing. Any fence shall have an average 15-ft. setback from the public right-of-way
and shall meet vision clearance requirements. Fencing closer than 15 ft. to the public
right-of-way shall be subject to the district’s restrictions on front yard fencing. Long
expanses of fence or wall along public streets shall be designed to prevent visual
monotony through the use of offsets, landscaping, and change in materials.
b. Earth Sculpting. Any earth sculpting shall be used in conjunction with plant materials
and when combined the screen will be a height of 6 ft. in 2 years. This combination is
subject to the following standards:
17.96 - 2
1) The earth sculpting, as a minimum, shall include a berm whose form does not
have a slope over 40 percent (1:2.5) on the side away from the area screened from
view. The slope for the other side (screened area) may vary.
2) At least one row of deciduous and/or evergreen shrubs spaced not more than 5 ft.
apart shall be placed on this berm.
3) Lawn, low growing evergreen shrubs, and evergreen ground cover shall cover the
balance of the setback area.
2. Option II - Perimeters Abutting other Zoning Districts:
a. A manufactured home space that abuts the perimeter setback shall be a minimum of
4,000 sq. ft.
b. Manufactured homes abutting a public street shall have staggered setbacks and a
variety of living unit orientations such as indicated below. The required offsets
between adjacent dwellings shall be at least 8 ft. as measured perpendicular from the
street, or
c. An alternative to the above is to utilize a uniform setback but provide a substantial
acute or obtuse angle from the street, such as indicated below, or
d. A third alternative is to establish an 8-ft. minimum building offset by utilizing
attached garages or triple wide expansions.
B. Driveway access on local public streets may occur at the maximum frequency of one access
for every two dwellings. Access from individual dwellings shall not be permitted on arterial
streets. Access to collector streets shall be subject to review and approval of the City
Engineer.
17.96.50 SETBACK AND SEPARATION FOR STRUCTURES WITHIN THE PARK
Setbacks and separation for structures within a manufactured home park shall comply with
applicable ORS statutes.
17.96 - 3
17.96.60 SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
A. Parking and Accessways
1. Parking. Off-street parking facilities shall be provided on-site in accordance with Chapter
17.98.
2. Street Widths. The minimum width for manufactured home park streets shall be 20 ft.
Streets serving more than 12 dwelling spaces shall be a minimum of 24 ft. in width.
Streets serving more than 30 dwelling spaces shall be a minimum of 28 ft. in width. If onstreet
parking is permitted, ORS 446.095(1) requires a minimum width of 30 feet.
3. Private Street Standards. Streets shall be paved to standards adopted by the City
Engineer.
4. Dead End Streets. Cul-de-sacs over 400 ft. in length shall have a standard cul-de-sac bulb
with a 38-ft. curbside radius. Shorter dead end streets shall have a turn-around approved
by the City Engineer.
5. Walks. Paved walks, at least 5 ft. wide and accessible to wheelchairs, shall be provided to
connect park buildings to a park street or public street. In addition, a street sidewalk (or
an equivalent pedestrian walking system) shall be provided to connect areas having more
than 25 living units with the public sidewalk system.
6. Lighting. Private park roadways shall be lighted at intersections and pedestrian crossings.
Fixtures shall not produce direct glare on adjacent properties.
7. Street Signs. Street identification signs shall be provided according to applicable City
requirements.
8. Fire Access. Access for fire protection services shall permit fire apparatus to approach
within 100 ft. of each dwelling. In addition, each manufactured dwelling space shall have
direct access to a street to permit emergency escape. This access shall be an unobstructed
area not less than 14 ft. wide.
B. Siting of Dwellings Within the Park
1. Dwellings shall have staggered setbacks and a variety of living unit orientations such as
indicated below. The required offsets between adjacent dwellings shall be at least 8 ft. as
measured perpendicular from the street.
2. An alternative to the above is to utilize a uniform setback but provide a substantial
(greater than 30 degrees) acute or obtuse angle from the park street.
17.96 - 4
3. Each dwelling should include, at a minimum, 2 of the following design features:
a. Dormers
b. Gables
c. Recessed entries
d. Covered porch entries
e. Pillars or posts
f. Bay or bow windows
g. Eaves of 12 inches or greater
h. Off-set of 16 inches or greater on building face or roof
4. No more than 3 identical units may be placed side by side.
C. Public and Private Facilities
1. Each manufactured dwelling park space shall be provided with water, sanitary sewer,
storm drainage and street facilities, natural gas services and underground electrical
power, telecommunication, and cable television in accordance with the requirements of
Chapter 15.20.
2. Applications for manufactured dwelling parks that would adjoin an open, natural
drainageway or would be located in a floodplain shall be reviewed in accordance with
Chapter 17.60-Flood, Slope and Hazard provisions.
D. Play Areas. Separate play areas shall be provided in all manufactured dwelling parks that
accommodate children under 14 years of age unless each manufactured dwelling space has a
minimum size of 4,000 sq. ft. Any required play area shall not be less than 2,500 sq. ft. in
area with no dimension less than 30 ft. There shall be at least 100-sq. ft. of play area
provided for each manufactured dwelling space occupied by children. In the case of a large
development, two or more play areas may be developed, provided that no individual play
area is less than 2,500 sq. ft.
E. Space Coverage. A dwelling and any other attached or detached structures shall not occupy
more than 60 percent of a manufactured dwelling space used in conjunction with such
dwelling.
17.96 - 5
F. Decks. Each manufactured dwelling stand shall be provided with one or more, at least semiprivate
or private, outdoor living area adjacent to the dwelling, constructed of concrete,
asphalt, flagstone, wood, or other equivalent surface material totaling at least 120 sq. ft. of
area and not less than 8 ft. wide in any dimension.
G. Skirting. Each mobile home or manufactured home located in a manufactured dwelling park
shall have continuous skirting that, in design, color and texture, appears to be an integral part
of the exterior walls or the foundation of the dwelling.
17.96.70 LANDSCAPE PLAN
A landscape plan is required prior to issuance of the building permit for the manufactured home
park. This plan shall be drawn to scale showing the location of existing trees and vegetation
proposed for removal or retention on the site, the location and design of landscaped areas, the
varieties, quantities, and sizes of trees and plant materials to be planted on the site, contour lines
indicating any earth sculpting to be used, and other pertinent landscape information.
A. Plant Coverage and Maintenance. Required landscape areas shall be covered by living plant
material capable of attaining 90 percent ground coverage within 3 years and shall be
continuously maintained and irrigated with permanent facilities sufficient to maintain the
plant material.
B. Plantings in Perimeter Area. In addition to the requirements specified in perimeter treatments
above and in Chapter 17.92-Landscaping and Screening, landscaping shall be used to provide
screening of decks and storage areas from the public roadway. Plant masses shall also be
established between perimeter dwellings in order to reduce negative visual effects of roads
and vehicle storage areas located within the park.
C. Plantings Along Park Street
1. Street Trees. Street trees shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.92-
Landscaping, Buffering, and Screening.
2. Planting Continuity. Similar street trees shall be repeated to provide continuity for street
plantings. Repetition of landscape elements such as lighting fixtures, consistent fencing
styles, or similar carports can complement this street tree pattern.
3. Street Focal Points. The real or apparent end of a street provides a focused view, which
shall be heavily vegetated either with foreground plants or (as below) with background
plants.
4. Planting for Energy Efficiency. Appropriate plant materials shall be utilized to cool
dwellings in the summer and help insulate them in the winter.
17.98 - 1
Revised by Ordinance No. 2020-06 (effective 05/06/2020)
CHAPTER 17.98 - PARKING, LOADING, & ACCESS REQUIREMENTS
17.98.00 INTENT
The intent of these regulations is to provide adequate capacity and appropriate location and
design of parking and loading areas as well as adequate access to such areas. The parking
requirements are intended to provide sufficient parking in close proximity for residents,
guests/visitors, customers, and/or employees of various land uses. These regulations apply to
both motorized vehicles (hereinafter referred to as vehicles) and bicycles.
17.98.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. Provision and Maintenance. The provision of required off-street parking for vehicles and
bicycles and loading facilities for vehicles is a continuous obligation. Building permits or
other permits will only be issued after review and approval of site plans showing location of
permanent access, parking and loading facilities.
B. Unspecified Requirements. Vehicle and bicycle parking requirements for uses not specified
in this chapter shall be determined by the Director based upon the requirements of similar
specified uses.
C. New Structure or Use. When a structure is constructed or a new use of land is commenced,
on-site vehicle and bicycle parking and loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with
Section 17.98.20 below or as otherwise modified through a planned development or specific
area plan.
D. Alteration of Existing Structures. When an existing structure is altered to the extent that the
existing use is intensified, on-site vehicle and bicycle parking shall be provided in the
amount required for such intensification. Alteration of existing structures, increased intensity,
and change in use per Sections 17.98.10 (D.), (E.) and (F.) does not apply to commercial uses
in the Central Business District (C-1).
E. Increased Intensity. When increased intensity requires no more than four (4) vehicle spaces,
no additional parking facilities shall be required. However, the effects of changes, additions,
or enlargements shall be cumulative. When the net effect of one or more changes generates a
need for more than four spaces, the additional required spaces shall be provided. Additional
spaces shall be required for the intensification but not for the original use.
F. Change in Use. When an existing structure or use of land is changed in use from one use to
another use as listed in Section 17.98.20 below and the vehicle and bicycle parking
requirements for each use type are the same; no additional parking shall be required.
However, where a change in use results in an intensification of use in terms of number of
vehicle and bicycle parking spaces required, additional parking space shall be provided in an
amount equal to the difference between the number of spaces required for the existing use
and number of spaces required for the more intensive use.
G. Time of Completion. Required parking spaces and loading areas shall be improved and
available for use prior to issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy and/or final
building inspection or final certificate of occupancy.
17.98 - 2
Revised by Ordinance No. 2020-06 (effective 05/06/2020)
H. Inoperative Motor Vehicles. In all residential zoning districts, all motor vehicles incapable of
movement under their own power or lacking legal registration shall be completely screened
from public view.
I. Truck Parking. In all residential zoning districts, no overnight parking of trucks or other
equipment on wheels or tracks exceeding a 1-ton capacity used in the conduct of a business
activity shall be permitted except vehicles and equipment necessary for farming on the
premises where such use is conducted.
J. Mixed Uses. In the case of mixed uses, the total required vehicle and bicycle parking shall be
the sum of requirements of individual uses computed separately.
K. Conflicting Parking Requirements. When a building or use is planned or constructed in such
a manner that more than one standard is applicable, the use that requires the greater number
of parking spaces shall govern.
L. Availability of Parking Spaces. Required vehicle and bicycle parking spaces shall be
unobstructed, available for parking of vehicles and bicycles of residents, customers, patrons,
and employees only, and shall not be used for storage of vehicles or materials or for parking
of vehicles and bicycles used in conducting the business or use and shall not be used for sale,
repair, or servicing of any vehicle or bicycle.
M. Residential Parking Analysis Plan. A Residential Parking Analysis Plan shall be required for
all new residential planned developments, subdivisions, and partitions to include a site plan
depicting all of the following:
1. Location and dimension of required parking spaces as specified in Section 17.98.200.
2. Location of areas where parking is not permitted as specified in Sections 17.98.200(A)(3)
and (5).
3. Location and design of parking courts (if applicable).
N. Location of Required Parking.
1. Off-street vehicle parking required for single family dwellings (both attached and
detached) and duplexes shall be provided on the development site of the primary
structure. Except where permitted by 17.98.40 below, required parking for all other uses
in other districts shall be provided on the same site as the use or upon abutting property.
2. Bicycle parking required for all uses in all districts shall be provided on the development
site in accordance with Section 17.98.160 below.
O. Unassigned Parking in Residential Districts.
1. Multi-family dwelling units with more than 10 required vehicle parking spaces shall
provide unassigned parking. The unassigned parking shall consist of at least 15 percent of
the total required parking spaces and be located to be available for use by all occupants
and guests of the development.
2. Multi-family dwelling units with more than 10 required bicycle parking spaces may
provide shared outdoor bicycle parking. The shared bicycle parking shall consist of at
least 15 percent of the total required parking spaces and be located such that they are
available for shared use by all occupants and guests of the development.
17.98 - 3
Revised by Ordinance No. 2020-06 (effective 05/06/2020)
P. Fractions. When the sum of the required vehicle and bicycle parking spaces is a fraction of a
space (0.5 or more of a space) a full space shall be required.
Q. Maximum Parking Allowed. Commercial or Industrial zoned properties shall not be
permitted to exceed the minimum off-street vehicle parking required by Section 17.98.20 by
more than 30 percent.
17.98.20 OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
A. Off Street Parking Requirements. Off street parking shall conform to the following
standards:
1. Commercial uses in the Central Business District (C-1) are exempt from off street
parking requirements. Residential uses in the Central Business District (C-1) have to
provide off street parking per this section but may get a reduction per Section 17.98.30
(B.).
2. All square footage measurements are gross square feet of total floor area.
3. 24 lineal inches of bench shall be considered 1 seat.
4. Except as otherwise specified, parking for employees shall be provided based on 1 space
per 2 employees for the largest shift in addition to required parking specified in Sections
8 – 11 below.
5. Where less than 5 parking spaces are required, then only one bicycle space shall be
required except as otherwise modified in Sections 8 – 11 below.
6. In addition to requirements for residential off-street parking, new dwellings shall meet
the on-street parking requirements in Section 17.98.200.
7. Uses that rely on square footage for determining parking requirements may reduce the
overall square footage of the use by deducting bathrooms, mechanical rooms, and other
auxiliary rooms as approved by the Director.
8.
Residential Uses Number of Parking Spaces Number of Bicycle
Spaces
Single Family Detached/Attached 2 per dwelling unit Exempt
Duplexes 2 per dwelling unit Exempt
Manufactured Home Park 2 per dwelling, plus 1 visitor
space for each 10 vehicle spaces
Exempt
Multi-Family Dwellings 1.5 per studio unit or 1-bedroom
unit
2.0 per 2-bedroom unit or greater
1 per dwelling unit
Congregate Housing, Retirement Homes,
Intermediate Care Facilities, Group Care
Facilities, and Halfway Houses
1 per each 3 residents, plus 1 per
2 employees
5% or 2 whichever is
greater
17.98 - 4
Revised by Ordinance No. 2020-06 (effective 05/06/2020)
9.
Community Service, Institutional and
Semi-Public Uses
Number of Parking Spaces Number of Bicycle
Spaces
Administrative Services 1 per 400 sq. ft., plus 1 per 2
employees
5% or 2 whichever is
greater
Community Recreation Buildings,
Library, or Museum
1 per 250 sq. ft., plus 1 per 2
employees
5% or 2 whichever is
greater
Church, Chapel, Auditorium, or Fraternal
Lodge without eating and drinking
facilities
1 per 4 fixed seats or 1 per each
50 sq. ft. of public assembly area
where there are no fixed seats,
plus 1 per 2 employees
5% or 2 whichever is
greater
Hospitals 1 per examine room or bed, and
1 per 4 seats in waiting room or
chapel, plus 1 per 2 employees
5% or 2 whichever is
greater
Commercial Daycare 2 for the facility, plus 1 per
employee on the largest shift
2
School – Preschool/Kindergarten 2 per classroom, plus 1 per 2
employees
2
School – Elementary or Middle
School/Junior High
2 per classroom, plus 1 per 2
employees
5% or 2 whichever is
greater
School – Senior High, Vocational or
College
6 per classroom, plus 1 per
employee on the largest shift
5% or 2 whichever is
greater
10.
Commercial Uses Number of Parking Spaces Number of Bicycle
Spaces
Retail Sales, General or Personal Services,
Professional Offices, Shopping Centers,
Grocery Stores, Convenience Stores
1 per 400 sq. ft., plus 1 per 2
employees
5% or 2 whichever is
greater
Retail Sales of Bulky Merchandise
(examples: furniture or motor vehicles)
1 per 1,000 sq. ft., plus 1 per 2
employees
2
Eating or Drinking Establishments 1 per 250 sq. ft. of gross floor
area or 1 per 4 fixed seats or
stools, plus 1 per 2 employees
5% or 2 whichever is
greater
Funerals and Interment
Services:
Crematory and Undertaking
Interring and Cemeteries are exempt
1 per 4 fixed seats or 1 space for
each 50 sq. ft. of public
assembly area where there are no
fixed seats, plus 1 per 2
employees
2
Fuel Sales (without store) 1 per employee on the largest
shift
2
Medical or Dental Office or Clinic 1 per examine room or bed, and
1 per 4 seats in waiting room,
plus 1 per 2 employees
5% or 2 whichever is
greater
Participant Sports or Recreation:
Indoor or Outdoor; Spectator Sports;
1 per 4 fixed seats or 1 space per
4 participants based on projected
5% or 2 whichever is
greater
17.98 - 5
Revised by Ordinance No. 2020-06 (effective 05/06/2020)
Theater or similar use participant capacity, plus 1 per 2
employees
Campground or RV Park 1 per designated space, plus 1
visitor space for each 8
designated spaces, plus 1 per 2
employees
Exempt
Hotel or Motel 1 per guest room or suite, plus 1
per 2 employees
2
11.
Industrial Uses Number of Parking Spaces Number of Bicycle
Spaces
Sales, Storage, Rental, Services and
Repairs of:
Agricultural and Animals
Automotive/Equipment
Fleet Storage
Light Equipment
Non-operating vehicles, boats and
recreational vehicles
Building Equipment
1 per 1,000 sq. ft., plus 1 per 2
employees
2
Sales, Storage, Rental, and Repairs of:
Heavy Equipment, or Farm Equipment
1 per 1,000 sq. ft., plus 1 per 2
employees
2
Storage, Distribution, Warehousing, or
Manufacturing establishment; trucking
freight terminal
1 per employee on the largest
shift
2
17.98.30 REDUCTION OF PARKING REQUIREMENTS
A. Transit Amenity Reduction.
1. Any existing or proposed use in the C-2, C-3, or I-1 Zoning Districts subject to minimum
parking requirements and located within 400 feet of an existing transit route may reduce
the number of required parking spaces by up to 10 percent by providing a transit stop and
related amenities including a public plaza, pedestrian sitting areas, or additional
landscaping provided such landscaping does not exceed 25 percent of the total area
dedicated for transit oriented purposes.
2. Required parking spaces may be reduced at a ratio of 1 parking space for each 100 square
feet of transit amenity space provided above and beyond the minimum requirements.
3. Uses, which are not eligible for these reductions, include truck stops, building materials
and lumber sales, nurseries and similar uses not likely to be visited by pedestrians or
transit customers.
B. Residential uses in the Central Business District and Village Commercial District Reduction.
Required off-street parking for residential uses in the C-1 and C-3 Zoning District may be
reduced by 25 percent.
17.98 - 6
Revised by Ordinance No. 2020-06 (effective 05/06/2020)
17.98.40 SHARED USE OF PARKING FACILITIES
A. Except for single family dwellings (both attached and detached) and duplexes, required
parking facilities may be located on an adjacent parcel of land or separated only by an alley
or local street, provided the adjacent parcel is maintained in the same ownership as the use it
is required to serve or a shared parking agreement that can only be released by the Director is
recorded in the deed records of Clackamas County.
B. In the event that several parcels occupy a single structure or parcel of land, the total
requirements for off-street parking shall be the sum of the requirements for the uses
computed separately.
C. Required parking facilities for two or more uses, structures, or parcels of land may be
satisfied by the same parking facility used jointly, to the extent that it can be shown by the
owners or operators that the needs of the facilities do not materially overlap (e.g., uses
primarily of day time versus night time uses) and provided that such right of joint use is
evidenced by a deed, lease, contract or similar written instrument recorded in the deed
records of Clackamas County establishing such joint use.
17.98.50 SETBACKS
A. Parking areas, which abut a residential zoning district, shall meet the setback of the most
restrictive adjoining residential zoning district.
B. Required parking shall not be located in a required front or side yard setback area abutting a
public street except in industrial districts. For single family and duplexes, required off-street
parking may be located in a driveway.
C. Parking areas shall be setback from a lot line adjoining a street the same distance as the
required building setbacks. Regardless of other provisions, a minimum setback of 5 feet shall
be provided along the property fronting on a public street. The setback area shall be
landscaped as provided in this code.
17.98.60 DESIGN, SIZE AND ACCESS
All off-street parking facilities, vehicular maneuvering areas, driveways, loading facilities,
accessways, and private streets shall conform to the standards set forth in this section.
A. Parking Lot Design. All areas for required parking and maneuvering of vehicles shall have a
durable hard surface such as concrete or asphalt.
B. Size of Space.
1. A standard parking space shall be 9 feet by 18 feet.
2. A compact parking space shall be 8 feet by 16 feet.
3. Accessible parking spaces shall be 9 feet by 18 feet and include an adjacent access aisle
meeting ORS 447.233. Access aisles may be shared by adjacent spaces. Accessible
parking shall be provided for all uses in compliance with the requirements of the State of
Oregon (ORS 447.233) and the Americans with Disabilities Act.
4. Parallel parking spaces shall be a length of 22 feet.
17.98 - 7
Revised by Ordinance No. 2020-06 (effective 05/06/2020)
5. No more than 40 percent of the parking stalls shall be compact spaces.
C. Aisle Width.
Parking
Aisle
Single Sided
One-Way
Single Sided
Two-Way
Double Sided
One-Way
Double Sided
Two-Way
90 degree 20 feet 22 feet 25 feet 25 feet
60 degree 20 feet 20 feet 20 feet 20 feet
45 degree 20 feet 20 feet 20 feet 20 feet
Parallel 12 feet 12 feet 16 feet 16 feet
17.98.70 ON-SITE CIRCULATION
A. Groups of more than three (3) parking spaces shall be permanently striped. Accessible
parking spaces and accompanying access aisles shall be striped regardless of the number of
parking spaces.
B. Backing and Maneuvering. Except for a single family dwelling, duplex, or accessory
dwelling unit, groups of more than 3 parking spaces shall be provided with adequate aisles or
turnaround areas so that all vehicles enter the right-of-way (except for alleys) in a forward
manner. Parking spaces shall not have backing or maneuvering movements for any of the
parking spaces occurring across public sidewalks or within any public street, except as
approved by the City Engineer. Evaluations of requests for exceptions shall consider
constraints due to lot patterns and impacts to the safety and capacity of the adjacent public
street, bicycle and pedestrian facilities.
17.98.80 ACCESS TO ARTERIAL AND COLLECTOR STREETS
A. Location and design of all accesses to and/or from arterials and collectors (as designated in
the Transportation System Plan) are subject to review and approval by the City Engineer.
Where practical, access from a lower functional order street may be required. Accesses to
17.98 - 8
Revised by Ordinance No. 2020-06 (effective 05/06/2020)
arterials or collectors shall be located a minimum of 150 ft. from any other access or street
intersection. Exceptions may be granted by the City Engineer. Evaluations of exceptions
shall consider posted speed of the street on which access is proposed, constraints due to lot
patterns, and effects on safety and capacity of the adjacent public street, bicycle and
pedestrian facilities.
B. No development site shall be allowed more than one access point to any arterial or collector
street (as designated in the Transportation System Plan) except as approved by the City
Engineer. Evaluations of exceptions shall be based on a traffic impact analysis and parking
and circulation plan and consider posted speed of street on which access is proposed,
constraints due to lot patterns, and effects on safety and capacity of the adjacent public street,
bicycle and pedestrian facilities.
C. When developed property is to be expanded or altered in a manner that significantly affects
on-site parking or circulation, both existing and proposed accesses shall be reviewed under
the standards in A and B above. As a part of an expansion or alteration approval, the City
may require relocation and/or reconstruction of existing accesses not meeting those
standards.
17.98.90 ACCESS TO UNIMPROVED STREETS
Access to Unimproved Streets. At the Director’s discretion development may occur without
access to a City standard street when that development constitutes infill on an existing
substandard public street. A condition of development shall be that the property owner signs an
irrevocable petition for street improvements and/or a declaration of deed restrictions agreeing to
future completion of street improvements. The form shall be provided by the City and recorded
with the property through the Clackamas County Recorder’s Office. This shall be required with
approval of any of the following applications:
• Land partitions
• Conditional uses
• Building permits for new non-residential construction or structural additions to nonresidential
structures (except accessory development)
• Building permits for new residential units
17.98.100 DRIVEWAYS
A. A driveway to an off-street parking area shall be improved from the public right-of-way to
the parking area a minimum width of 20 feet for a two-way drive or 12 feet for a one-way
drive, but in either case not less than the full width of the standard approach for the first 20
feet of the driveway.
B. A driveway for a single-family dwelling shall have a minimum width of 10 feet. The
driveway approach within the public right-of-way shall not exceed 24 feet in width measured
at the bottom of the curb transition. A driveway approach shall be constructed in accordance
with applicable city standards and the entire driveway shall be paved with asphalt or
concrete. Shared driveway approaches may be required for adjacent lots in cul-de-sacs in
order to maximize room for street trees and minimize conflicts with utility facilities (power
and telecom pedestals, fire hydrants, streetlights, meter boxes, etc.)
17.98 - 9
Revised by Ordinance No. 2020-06 (effective 05/06/2020)
C. A driveway for a two-family dwelling shall have a minimum width of 20 feet. The driveway
approach in the public right-of-way shall not exceed 24 feet in width as measured in section
B above. A driveway approach shall be constructed in accordance with applicable city
standards and the entire driveway shall be paved with asphalt or concrete.
D. Driveways, aisles, turnaround areas and ramps shall have a minimum vertical clearance of
twelve feet for their entire length and width, but such clearance may be reduced in parking
structures as approved by the Director.
E. No driveway shall exceed a grade of 15 percent at any point along the driveway length,
measured from the right-of-way line to the face of garage or furthest extent of the driveway.
F. The nearest edge of a driveway approach shall be located a minimum of 15 feet from the
point of curvature or tangency of the curb return on any street.
G. The sum of the width of all driveway approaches within the bulb of a cul-de-sac as measured
in section B above shall not exceed fifty percent of the circumference of the cul-de-sac bulb.
The cul-de-sac bulb circumference shall be measured at the curb line and shall not include
the width of the stem street. The nearest edge of driveway approaches in cul-de-sacs shall not
be located within 15 feet of the point of curvature, point of tangency or point of reverse
curvature of the curb return on the stem street.
Acronyms on the next page:
PT = point of tangency
PC = point of curvature
PRC = point of reverse curvature
H. The location and design of any driveway approach shall provide for unobstructed sight per
the vision clearance requirements in section 17.74.30. Requests for exceptions to these
requirements will be evaluated by the City Engineer considering the physical limitations of
the lot and safety impacts to vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian traffic.
I. Driveways shall taper to match the driveway approach width to prevent stormwater sheet
flow from traversing sidewalks.
17.98 - 10
Revised by Ordinance No. 2020-06 (effective 05/06/2020)
CUL-DE-SAC EXHIBIT
DRIVEWAY LOCATION EXHIBIT
17.98 - 11
Revised by Ordinance No. 2020-06 (effective 05/06/2020)
17.98.110 VISION CLEARANCE
A. Except within the Central Business District, vision clearance areas shall be provided at
intersections of all streets and at intersections of driveways and alleys with streets to promote
pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular safety. The extent of vision clearance to be provided shall
be determined from standards in Chapter 17.74 and taking into account functional
classification of the streets involved, type of traffic control present at the intersection, and
designated speed for the streets.
B. Traffic control devices, streetlights, and utility installations meeting approval by the City
Engineer are permitted within vision clearance areas.
17.98.120 LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING
A. Screening of all parking areas containing 4 or more spaces and all parking areas in
conjunction with an off-street loading facility shall be required in accordance with zoning
district requirements and Chapter 17.98. Where not otherwise specified by district
requirement, screening along a public right-of-way shall include a minimum 5 feet depth of
buffer plantings adjacent to the right-of-way.
B. When parking in a commercial or industrial district adjoins a residential zoning district, a
sight-obscuring screen that is at least 80 percent opaque when viewed horizontally from
between 2 and 8 feet above the average ground level shall be required. The screening shall be
composed of materials that are an adequate size so as to achieve the required degree of
screening within 3 years after installation.
C. Except for a residential development which has landscaped yards, parking facilities shall
include landscaping to cover not less than 10 percent of the area devoted to parking facilities.
The landscaping shall be uniformly distributed throughout the parking area and may consist
of trees, shrubs, and ground covers.
D. Parking areas shall be divided into bays of not more than 20 spaces in parking areas with 20
or more spaces. Between, and at the end of each parking bay, there shall be planters that have
a minimum width of 5 feet and a minimum length of 17 feet for a single depth bay and 34
feet for a double bay. Each planter shall contain one major structural tree and ground cover.
Truck parking and loading areas are exempt from this requirement.
E. Parking area setbacks shall be landscaped with major trees, shrubs, and ground cover as
specified in Chapter 17.92.
F. Wheel stops, bumper guards, or other methods to protect landscaped areas and pedestrian
walkways shall be provided. No vehicle may project over a property line or into a public
right-of-way. Parking may project over an internal sidewalk, but a minimum clearance of 5
feet for pedestrian circulation is required.
17.98 - 12
Revised by Ordinance No. 2020-06 (effective 05/06/2020)
17.98.130 PAVING
A. Parking areas, driveways, aisles and turnarounds shall be paved with concrete, asphalt or
comparable surfacing, constructed to City standards for off-street vehicle areas.
B. Gravel surfacing shall be permitted only for areas designated for non-motorized trailer or
equipment storage, propane or electrically powered vehicles, or storage of tracked vehicles.
17.98.140 DRAINAGE
Parking areas, aisles and turnarounds shall have adequate provisions made for the on-site
collection of drainage waters to eliminate sheet flow of such waters onto sidewalks, public
rights-of-way and abutting private property.
17.98.150 LIGHTING
The Dark Sky Ordinance in Chapter 15 of the municipal code applies to all lighting. Artificial
lighting shall be provided in all required off-street parking areas. Lighting shall be directed into
the site and shall be arranged to not produce direct glare on adjacent properties. Light elements
shall be shielded and shall not be visible from abutting residential properties. Lighting shall be
provided in all bicycle parking areas so that all facilities are thoroughly illuminated and visible
from adjacent sidewalks or vehicle parking lots during all hours of use.
17.98.160 BICYCLE PARKING FACILITIES
Multi-family developments, industrial, commercial and community service uses, transit transfer
stations, and park and ride lots shall meet the following standards for bicycle parking facilities.
The intent of this section is to provide secure bicycle parking that is visible from a building’s
primary entrance and convenient to bicyclists.
A. Location.
1. Bicycle parking shall be located on-site, convenient to primary building entrances, and
have direct access to both the public right-of-way and to the main entrance of the
primary structure.
2. Bicycle parking areas shall be visible from building interiors where possible.
3. For facilities with multiple buildings or parking lots, bicycle parking shall be located in
areas of greatest use and convenience to bicyclists.
4. If the bicycle parking area is located within the vehicle parking area, the bicycle facilities
shall be separated from vehicular maneuvering areas by curbing or other barrier to
prevent damage to parked bicycles.
5. Curb cuts shall be installed to provide safe, convenient access to bicycle parking areas.
B. Bicycle Parking Space Dimensions.
1. Each required bicycle parking space shall be at least 2 ½ feet by 6 feet. If bicycle parking
is covered, vertical clearance of 7 feet shall be provided.
2. An access aisle of at least 5 feet wide shall be provided and maintained beside or between
each row of bicycle parking. Vertical or upright bicycle storage structures are exempted
from the parking space length.
17.98 - 13
Revised by Ordinance No. 2020-06 (effective 05/06/2020)
C. Security.
1. Bicycle parking facilities shall offer security in the form of either a lockable enclosure in
which the bicycle can be stored or a stationary object (i.e., a “rack”) upon which the
bicycle can be located.
2. Racks requiring user-supplied locks shall accommodate both cable and U-shaped locks.
3. Bicycle racks shall be securely anchored to the ground or a structure and shall be
designed to hold bicycles securely.
4. All outdoor bicycle parking facilities shall provide adequate shelter from precipitation
where possible.
D. Signing. Where bicycle facilities are not directly visible from the public right-of-way,
primary structure entry, or civic space then directional signs shall be provided to direct
bicyclists to the bicycle parking facility.
E. Exemptions. Temporary uses and other uses identified in Section 17.98.20 as not requiring
bicycle parking are exempt from Section 17.98.160.
17.98.170 CARPOOL AND VANPOOL PARKING
New industrial, commercial, and community service uses with more than 100 employees shall
meet the following minimum requirements for carpool and vanpool parking.
A. Number and Marking. At least 10 percent of the employee parking spaces shall be marked
and signed for use as a carpool/vanpool space. The carpool/vanpool spaces shall be clearly
marked “Reserved - Carpool/Vanpool Only”.
B. Location. Designated carpool/vanpool parking spaces shall be the closest employee parking
spaces to the building entrance normally used by employees except for any handicapped
spaces provided.
17.98.180 SCHOOL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
A driveway designed for continuous forward flow of passenger vehicles for the purpose of
loading and unloading children shall be located on the site of a school having a capacity greater
than 50 students.
17.98.190 OFF-STREET LOADING FACILITIES
B. All commercial and industrial uses that anticipate loading and unloading of
products/materials shall provide an off-street area for loading/unloading of
products/materials.
C. The required loading berth shall be not less than 10 feet in width by 35 feet in length and
shall have an unobstructed height clearance of 14 feet.
D. Loading areas shall be screened from public view from public streets. The loading areas shall
be screened from adjacent properties except in industrial districts and shall require the same
screening as parking lots.
17.98 - 14
Revised by Ordinance No. 2020-06 (effective 05/06/2020)
E. Sufficient space for turning and maneuvering of vehicles shall be provided on the site in
accordance with the standard specifications established by the City Engineer.
17.98.200 RESIDENTIAL ON-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
A. Residential On-Street Parking Requirements. Residential on-street parking shall conform to
the following standards:
1. In addition to required off-street parking, all new residential planned developments,
subdivisions and partitions shall provide one (1) on-street parking space within 300 feet
of each dwelling except as provided in Section 17.98.200(A)(6) below. The 300 feet shall
be measured from the primary entrance of the dwelling.
2. The location of residential on-street parking shall be reviewed for compliance with this
section through submittal of a Residential Parking Analysis Plan as required in Section
17.98.10(M).
3. Residential on-street parking shall not obstruct required clear vision areas and shall not
violate any local or state laws.
4. Parallel residential on-street parking spaces shall be a minimum of 22 feet in length.
5. Residential on-street parking shall be measured along the curb from the outside edge of a
driveway wing or curb cut. Parking spaces shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from
the point of tangency or curvature at an intersection and may not be located within 10 feet
of a fire hydrant.
6. Portions of residential on-street parking required by this section may be provided in
parking courts that are interspersed throughout a development when the following
standards are met:
a. No more than ten (10) parking spaces shall be provided in a parking court, except
parking courts that utilize backing movements into the right-of-way in which case the
parking court shall be limited to two (2) parking spaces;
b. Parking spaces within a parking court shall be nine (9) feet wide and 18 feet in depth.
In no instance shall a vehicle or any appurtenances parked in a parking court protrude
into the public right-of-way;
c. Notwithstanding Section 17.98.70, vehicles parked in a parking court on a local street
as defined in the Transportation System Plan are permitted to back onto the public
right-of-way from the parking court so long as the parking court is limited to two (2)
parking spaces;
d. A parking court shall be located within 300 feet of the dwellings requiring parking in
accordance with the requirements of Section 17.98.10(M);
e. No more than two (2) parking courts shall be provided within a block, with only one
(1) parking court provided along a block face;
f. A parking court shall be paved in compliance with the standards of this chapter and
constructed to the grading and drainage standards in 17.98.140;
g. A parking court adjacent to a public right-of-way, shall be privately owned and
maintained;
17.98 - 15
Revised by Ordinance No. 2020-06 (effective 05/06/2020)
h. If a parking court is adjacent to a private drive, it shall be privately owned and
maintained. For any parking court there shall be a legal recorded document which
includes:
? A legal description of the parking court;
? Ownership of the parking court;
? Use rights; and
? A maintenance agreement and the allocation and/or method of determining
liability for maintenance of the parking court;
i. A parking court shall be used solely for the parking of operable passenger vehicles.
17.100 - 1
Revised by Ordinance No. 2013-04 (effective 07/03/13)
CHAPTER 17.100 - LAND DIVISION
17.100.00 INTENT
The intent of this chapter is to implement the Comprehensive Plan, to provide procedures,
regulations, and design standards for land divisions and associated improvements and to provide
for orderly and efficient land division patterns supported by a connected system of streets, water
supply, sewage and drainage facilities.
The division of land is the initial step in establishing Sandy’s ultimate development pattern. The
framework of streets, blocks and individual lots is implemented through the land division
process. Density, units per gross acre, and dimensional standards are established in zoning
district regulations.
This chapter presents the review procedures, design standards and improvement requirements for
land divisions. Procedures for replats and property line adjustments are also addressed in this
chapter.
17.100.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. No land shall be divided prior to approval of a minor partition, major partition or subdivision
in accordance with this Code.
B. No sale or conveyance of any portion of a lot, for other than a public purpose, shall leave a
structure on the remainder of a lot with less than the minimum lot, yard or setback
requirements of the zoning district.
C. Land division is processed by approval of a tentative plan prior to approval of the final land
division plat or map. Where a Type II or Type III procedure is required for land division
approval, that procedure shall apply to the tentative plan approval. As long as there is
compliance with the approved tentative plan and conditions, the Director shall have the
authority to approval final plats and maps for land divisions through a Type I procedure.
17.100.20 LAND DIVISION CLASSIFICATION - TYPE I, II OR III PROCEDURES
A. Type I Land Division (Property Line Adjustment). Property line adjustments shall be a Type
I procedure if the resulting parcels comply with standards of the Development Code and this
chapter.
B. Type I Land Division (Minor Partition). A minor partition shall be a Type I procedure if the
land division does not create a street and the resulting parcels comply with the standards of
the zoning district and this chapter.
C. Type II Land Division (Major Partition or Subdivision). A major partition or subdivision
shall be a Type II procedure when a street is extended, satisfactory street conditions exist and
the resulting parcels/lots comply with the standards of the zoning district and this chapter.
Satisfactory street conditions exist when the Director determines one of the following:
1. Existing streets are stubbed to the property boundaries and are linked by the land
division.
17.100 - 2
Revised by Ordinance No. 2013-04 (effective 07/03/13)
2. An existing street or a new proposed street need not continue beyond the land division in
order to complete an appropriate street system or to provide access to adjacent property.
3. The proposed street layout is consistent with a street pattern adopted as part of the
Comprehensive Plan or an officially adopted City street plan.
D. Type II Land Division (Minor Revised Plat). A minor replat of an existing platted
subdivision shall be a Type II procedure when the street(s) are existing and no extension or
reconstruction/realignment is necessary, when the replat does not increase the allowable
density, the resulting parcels comply with the standards of the zoning district and this
chapter, and the replat involves no more than six (6) lots.
E. Type III Land Division (Major Partition or Subdivision). A major partition or subdivision
shall be a Type III procedure if unsatisfactory street conditions exist or the resulting
parcels/lots do not comply with the standards of the zoning district and this chapter. The
Director shall determine if unsatisfactory street conditions exist based on one of the
following criteria:
1. The land division does not link streets that are stubbed to the boundaries of the property.
2. An existing street or a new proposed street will be extended beyond the boundaries of the
land division to complete a street system or provide access to adjacent property.
3. The proposed street layout is inconsistent with a street pattern adopted as part of the
Comprehensive Plan or officially adopted City street plan.
F. Type III Land Division (Major Replat). A major replat involves the realignment of property
lines involving more than six lots, even if the subdivision does not increase the allowable
density. All parcels resulting from the replat must comply with the standards of the zoning
district and this chapter. Any replat involving the creation, extension or modification of a
street shall be processed as a major replat.
17.100.30 PROPERTY LINE ADJUSTMENT
Approval of a property line adjustment is required to move a common boundary between two
parcels or lots. A Type I property line adjustment is not considered a development action for
purposes of determining whether floodplain, greenway, or right-of-way dedication or
improvements are required.
A. Application Requirements. Property line adjustment applications shall be made on forms
provided by the city and shall be accompanied by:
1. Eight copies of the property line adjustment map;
2. The required fee;
3. Any data or narrative necessary to explain the application.
B. Map Information. The property line adjustment map and narrative shall include the
following:
1. The names, addresses and phone numbers of the owner(s) of the subject parcels and
authorized representative;
2. Scale of the drawing using an engineer's scale;
3. North arrow and date;
4. Legal description of the property;
5. Dimensions and size of the parcels involved in the property line adjustment;
17.100 - 3
Revised by Ordinance No. 2013-04 (effective 07/03/13)
6. Approximate locations of structures, utilities, rights-of-way and easements;
7. Points of access, existing and proposed;
8. Any natural features such as waterways, drainage area, significant vegetation or rock
outcroppings;
9. Approximate topography, particularly noting any area of steep slope.
C. Approval Criteria. The Director shall approve a request for a property line adjustment if the
following criteria are satisfied:
1. No additional parcels are created.
2. All parcels meet the density requirements and dimensional standards of the base zoning
district.
3. Access, utilities, easements, and proposed future streets will not be adversely affected by
the property line adjustment.
D. Final Approval. Three paper copies of the final map shall be submitted within one year of
approval of the property line adjustment. The final map shall include a boundary survey,
which complies with ORS Chapters 92 and 209. The approved final map, along with required
deeds, must be recorded with Clackamas County.
17.100.40 MINOR AND MAJOR PARTITIONS
Approval of a partition is required for a land division of 3 or fewer parcels in a calendar year.
Partitions, which do not require creation or extension of a street for access, is classified as a Type
I minor partition. Partitions, which require creation or extension of a street for access is classified
as a Type II, major partition.
A. Preapplication Conference. The applicant for a minor or major partition shall participate in a
preapplication conference with city staff to discuss procedures for approval, applicable state
and local requirements, objectives and policies of the Sandy Comprehensive Plan, and the
availability of services. A preapplication conference is required.
B. Application Requirements. Partition applications shall be made on forms provided by the
planning department and shall be accompanied by:
1. Eight copies of the tentative plan for the minor or major partition;
2. The required fee;
3. Any data or narrative necessary to explain the application;
4. List of affected property owners.
C. Tentative Partition Plan. The tentative plan shall be a minimum of 8 1/2 x 11 inches in size
and shall include the following information:
1. The date, north point, engineering scale, and legal description;
2. Name and address of the owner of record and of the person who prepared the partition
plan;
3. Zoning, size and dimensions of the tract to be partitioned;
4. Size, dimensions and identification of proposed parcels (Parcel 1, Parcel 2, Parcel 3);
5. Approximate location of any structures on the tract to be partitioned, including setbacks
to proposed parcel boundaries;
6. Location, names and widths of streets, sidewalks and bikeways within the tract to be
partitioned and extending 400 feet beyond the tract boundaries;
17.100 - 4
Revised by Ordinance No. 2013-04 (effective 07/03/13)
7. Location, width and purpose of existing and proposed easements on the tract to be
partitioned;
8. Location and size of sewer, water and drainage facilities proposed to serve the tract to be
partitioned;
9. Natural features such as waterways, drainage area, significant vegetation or rock
outcroppings;
10. Approximate topography, particularly noting any area of steep slope;
11. A plan for future parcel redivision, if the proposed parcels are large enough to be
redivided under the comprehensive plan or zoning designation.
D. Approval Criteria. The Director or Planning Commission shall review the tentative plan for a
minor or major partition based on the classification procedure (Type I, II or III) and the
following approval criteria:
1. The proposed partition is consistent with the density, setback and dimensional standards
of the base zoning district.
2. The proposed partition is consistent with the design standards set forth in this chapter.
3. Adequate public facilities are available or can be provided to serve the proposed partition.
4. All proposed improvements meet City standards.
5. The plan preserves the potential for future redivision of the parcels, if applicable.
E. Conditions. The Director or Planning Commission may require dedication of land and
easements and may specify such conditions or modifications of the tentative partition plan as
deemed necessary. In no event, however, shall the Director or Planning Commission require
greater dedications or conditions than could be required if the entire tract were subdivided.
F. Approval of Tentative Partition Plan. When a tentative partition plan has been approved, all
copies shall be marked with the date and conditions of approval. One copy shall be returned
to the applicant, one copy shall be sent to the county and one copy shall be retained by the
city.
G. Approval Signatures for Final Partition Map. Following review and approval of a final
partition map, the Director shall:
1. Review Plat for Accuracy. The Director may require field investigations to verify that the
plat survey is accurate. The applicant shall be notified and afforded an opportunity to
make corrections if needed.
2. Sign the plat to certify that the map is approved.
3. Notify the applicant that the partition map and accompanying documents have been
approved and are ready for recording with the Clackamas County Recorder.
4. Deliver the signed original to the applicant who shall deliver the original and two exact
copies to the County Recorder's office. One recorded copy shall be returned to the City of
Sandy immediately after recording is completed.
H. Effective Date for Final Partition Map Approval. The partition shall become final upon
recording of the approved partition map together with any required documents with the
County Recorder. Work specifically authorized following tentative approval may take place
prior to processing of the final partition map. The documents effectuating a partition shall
become null and void if not recorded with the County Recorder within one year following
approval.
17.100 - 5
Revised by Ordinance No. 2013-04 (effective 07/03/13)
I. Improvements. The same improvements shall be installed to serve each parcel of a partition
as required of a subdivision. Improvement standards are set forth in Section 17.90. If the
Director and City Engineer find a need to vary the improvement standards for a partition, the
application shall be processed through a Type III hearing and may except specific
improvements.
J. Exceptions to Improvements. Exceptions to improvements may be approved in transition
areas or other areas as deemed appropriate by the city. In lieu of excepting an improvement,
the Planning Commission may recommend to the city council that the improvement be
installed in the area under special assessment financing or other facility extension policies of
the city.
17.100.50 NONRESIDENTIAL PARTITIONS OR SUBDIVISIONS
This section includes special provisions for partitions or subdivisions of land that is zoned for
commercial or industrial use.
A. Principles and Standards. In addition to the standards established for partitions or
subdivisions, the applicant for a nonresidential partition or subdivision shall demonstrate that
the street, parcel and block pattern proposed is adapted to uses in the vicinity. The following
principles and standards shall be observed:
1. Proposed commercial and industrial parcels shall be suitable in area and dimensions to
the types of development anticipated.
2. Street right-of-way and pavement shall be adequate to accommodate the type and volume
of traffic anticipated.
3. Special requirements may be imposed by the city with respect to street, curb, gutter and
sidewalk design and construction.
4. Special requirements may be imposed by the city with respect to the installation of public
utilities, including but not limited to water, sewer, and stormwater drainage facilities.
5. Efforts shall be made to protect adjacent residential areas from potential nuisance from a
proposed commercial or industrial subdivision. Such efforts may include the provision of
extra depth in parcels backing up on existing or potential residential development and
landscaped buffers.
6. Streets carrying nonresidential traffic, particularly truck traffic, should not normally be
extended through adjacent residential areas.
17.100.60 SUBDIVISIONS
Approval of a subdivision is required for a land division of 4 or more parcels in a calendar year.
A two-step procedure is required for subdivision approval: (1) tentative plat review and
approval; and (2) final plat review and approval.
A. Preapplication Conference. The applicant for a subdivision shall participate in a
preapplication conference with city staff to discuss procedures for approval, applicable state
and local requirements, objectives and policies of the Sandy Comprehensive Plan, and the
availability of services. The preapplication conference provides the opportunity to discuss the
conceptual development of the property in advance of formal submission of the tentative plan
in order to save the applicant unnecessary delay and cost.
17.100 - 6
Revised by Ordinance No. 2013-04 (effective 07/03/13)
B. Application Requirements for a Tentative Plat. Subdivision applications shall be made on
forms provided by the planning department and shall be accompanied by:
1. 20 copies of the tentative plat;
2. Required fee and technical service deposit;
3. 20 copies of all other supplementary material as may be required to indicate the general
program and objectives of the subdivision;
4. Preliminary title search;
5. List of affected property owners.
C. Format. The Tentative Plat shall be drawn on a sheet 18 x 24 inches in size and at a scale of
one inch equals one hundred feet unless an alternative format is approved by the Director at
the preapplication conference. The application shall include one copy of a scaled drawing of
the proposed subdivision, on a sheet 8 1/2 x 11, suitable for reproduction.
D. Data Requirements for Tentative Plat.
1. Scale of drawing, north arrow, and date.
2. Location of the subdivision by section, township and range, and a legal description
sufficient to define the location and boundaries of the proposed tract.
3. A vicinity map, showing adjacent property boundaries and how proposed streets may be
extended to connect to existing streets.
4. Names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the owner(s) of the property, the engineer or
surveyor, and the date of the survey.
5. Streets: location, names, paved widths, alleys, and right-of-way (existing and proposed)
on and within 400 feet of the boundaries of the subdivision tract.
6. Easements: location, widths, purpose of all easements (existing and proposed) on or
serving the tract.
7. Utilities: location of storm drainage, sanitary sewers and water lines (existing and
proposed) on and abutting the tract. If utilities are not on or abutting the tract, indicate the
direction and distance to the nearest locations.
8. Ground elevations shown by contour lines at two-foot vertical intervals for ground slopes
of less than 10 percent and at ten-foot vertical intervals for ground slopes exceeding 10
percent. Ground elevation shall be related to an established benchmark or other datum
approved by the Director.
9. Natural features such as marshes, rock outcroppings, watercourses on and abutting the
property, location of wooded areas.
10. Approximate location of areas subject to periodic inundation or storm sewer overflow,
location of any floodplain or flood hazard district.
11. Location, width, and direction of flow of all water courses.
12. Identification of the top of bank and boundary of mandatory setback for any stream or
water course.
13. Identification of any associated wetland and boundary of mandatory setback.
14. Identification of any wetland and boundary of mandatory setback.
15. Location of at least one temporary bench mark within the tract boundaries.
16. Existing uses of the property, including location and present use of all existing structures
to remain on the property after platting.
17. Lots and Blocks: approximate dimensions of all lots, minimum lot sizes, and proposed lot
and block numbers.
18. Existing zoning and proposed land use.
17.100 - 7
Revised by Ordinance No. 2013-04 (effective 07/03/13)
19. Designation of land intended to be dedicated or reserved for public use, with the purpose,
conditions, or limitations of such reservations clearly indicated.
20. Proposed development phases, if applicable.
21. Any other information determined necessary by the Director at the preapplication
conference, such as a soil report or other engineering study, traffic analysis, floodplain or
wetland delineation, etc.
E. Approval Criteria. The Director or Planning Commission shall review the tentative plat for
the subdivision based on the classification procedure (Type II or III) set forth in Section
17.12 and the following approval criteria:
1. The proposed subdivision is consistent with the density, setback and dimensional
standards of the base zoning district, unless modified by a Planned Development
approval.
2. The proposed subdivision is consistent with the design standards set forth in this chapter.
3. The proposed street pattern is connected and consistent with the Comprehensive Plan or
official street plan for the City of Sandy.
4. Adequate public facilities are available or can be provided to serve the proposed
subdivision.
5. All proposed improvements meet City standards.
6. The phasing plan, if requested, can be carried out in a manner that meets the objectives of
the above criteria and provides necessary public improvements for each phase as it
develops.
F. Conditions. The Director or Planning Commission may require dedication of land and
easements and may specify such conditions or modifications of the tentative plat as deemed
necessary.
G. Improvements. A detailed list of required improvements for the subdivisions shall be set
forth in the approval and conditions for the tentative plat.
H. Tentative Plat Expiration Date. The final plat shall be delivered to the Director for approval
within one year following approval of the tentative plat, and shall incorporate any
modification or condition required by approval of the tentative plat. The Director may, upon
written request of the subdivider, grant an extension of the tentative plat approval for up to
one additional year.
I. Submission of Final Plat. The applicant shall survey the subdivision and prepare a final plat
in conformance with the tentative plat approval and the requirements of ORS Chapter 92.
J. Information on Plat. In addition to information required for the tentative plat or otherwise
specified by state law, the following information shall be shown on the final plat for the
subdivision:
1. Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets and property line with dimensions,
bearings or deflection angles and radii, arcs, points of curvature and tangent bearings. All
bearings and angles shall be shown to the nearest one-second and all dimensions to the
nearest 0.01 foot. If circular curves are proposed in the plat, the following data must be
shown in table form: curve radius, central angles, arc length, and bearing of long chord.
All information shown on the face of the plat shall be mathematically perfect.
17.100 - 8
Revised by Ordinance No. 2013-04 (effective 07/03/13)
2. Easements denoted by fine dotted lines, clearly identified and, if already of record, their
recorded references. If an easement is not definitely located of record, a statement of the
easement shall be given. The width of the easement, its length and bearing, and sufficient
ties to locate the easement with respect to the subdivision shall be shown. If the easement
is being dedicated by the plat, it shall be properly referenced in the owner's certificates of
dedication.
3. Any building setback lines if more restrictive than the city zoning ordinance.
4. Location and purpose for which sites, other than residential lots, are dedicated or
reserved.
5. Easements and any other areas for public use dedicated without any reservation or
restriction.
6. A copy of any deed restrictions written on the face of the plat or prepared to record with
the plat with reference on the face of the plat.
7. The following certificates that may be combined where appropriate:
a) A certificate signed and acknowledged by all parties having any recorded title interest
in the land, consenting to the preparation and recording of the plat.
b) A certificate signed and acknowledged as above, dedicating all land intended for
public use except land which is intended for the exclusive use of the lot owners in the
subdivision, their licensees, visitors, tenants and servants.
c) A certificate with the seal of and signed by the engineer or the surveyor responsible
for the survey and final plat.
d) Other certificates now or hereafter required by law.
8. Supplemental Information with Plat. The following data shall accompany the final plat:
a) A preliminary title report issued by a title insurance company in the name of the
owner of the land, showing all parties whose consent is necessary and their interest in
the tract.
b) Sheets and drawings showing the following:
1) Traverse data including the coordinates of the boundary of the subdivision and
ties to section corners and donation land claim corners, and showing the error of
closure, if any.
2) The computation of distances, angles and courses shown on the plat.
3) Ties to existing monuments, proposed monuments, adjacent subdivisions, street
corners and state highway stationing.
c) A copy of any deed restrictions applicable to the subdivision.
d) A copy of any dedication requiring separate documents.
e) A list of all taxes and assessments on the tract which have become a lien on the tract.
f) A certificate by the engineer that the subdivider has complied with the improvement
requirements.
9. Certification by the city engineer or by the owner of a privately owned domestic water
supply system, that water will be available to the property line of each and every lot
depicted in the final plat.
K. Technical Plat Review. Upon receipt by the city, the plat and supplemental information shall
be reviewed by the city engineer and Director through a Type I procedure. The review shall
focus on conformance of the final plat with the approved tentative plat, conditions of
approval and provisions of city, county or state law applicable to subdivisions.
1. The city engineer may make field checks as needed to verify that the final plat is
sufficiently correct on the ground, and city representatives may enter the subdivision
property for this purpose.
17.100 - 9
Revised by Ordinance No. 2013-04 (effective 07/03/13)
2. If the city engineer or Director determines that full conformance has not been made, he
shall advise the subdivider of the changes or additions that must be made and shall afford
the subdivider an opportunity to make the changes or additions.
3. All costs associated with the technical plat review and recording shall be the
responsibility of the applicant.
L. Approval of Final Plat. The signatures of the Director and the city engineer shall indicate
approval of the final plat. After the plat has been approved by all city and county officials,
two prints of all data (plat face, dedications, certificates, approvals and one copy of recorded
restrictive and protective covenants) shall be returned to the city engineer within 20 working
days of recording.
M. Recording of Final Plat. Approval of the plat by the city shall be conditioned on its prompt
recording. The subdivider shall, without delay, submit the plat to the county assessor and the
county governing body for signatures as required by ORS 92.100. The plat shall be prepared
as provided by ORS 92.080. Approval of the final plat shall be null and void if the plat is not
submitted for recording within thirty days after the date the last required approving signature
has been obtained.
17.100.70 LAND DIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
All land divisions shall be in conformance with the requirements of the applicable base zoning
district and this chapter, as well as with other applicable provisions of this Code. Modifications
to these requirements may be accomplished through a Planned Development. The design
standards in this section shall be used in conjunction with street design standards included in the
City of Sandy Transportation System Plan and standards and construction specifications for
public improvements as set forth in adopted Public Facilities Plans and the Sandy Municipal
Code.
17.100.80 CHARACTER OF THE LAND
Land which the Director or the Planning Commission finds to be unsuitable for development due
to flooding, improper drainage, steep slopes, rock formations, adverse earth formations or
topography, utility easements, or other features which will reasonably be harmful to the safety,
health, and general welfare of the present or future inhabitants of the partition or subdivision and
the surrounding areas, shall not be developed unless adequate methods are formulated by the
subdivider and approved by the Director or the Planning Commission to solve the problems
created by the unsuitable land conditions.
17.100.90 ACCESS CONTROL GUIDELINES AND COORDINATION
A. Notice and coordination with ODOT required. The city will coordinate and notify ODOT
regarding all proposals for new or modified public and private accesses on to Highways 26
and 211.
B. It is the city policy to, over time, reduce noncompliance with the Oregon Highway Plan
Access Management Policy guidelines.
17.100 - 10
Revised by Ordinance No. 2013-04 (effective 07/03/13)
C. Reduction of compliance with the cited State standards means that all reasonable alternatives
to reduce the number of accesses and avoid new non-complying accesses will be explored
during the development review. The methods to be explored include, but are not limited to:
closure, relocation, and consolidation of access; right-in/right-out driveways; crossover
easements; and use of local streets, alleys, and frontage roads.
17.100.100 STREETS GENERALLY
No subdivision or partition shall be approved unless the development has frontage or approved
access to an existing public street. In addition, all streets shall be graded and improved in
conformance with the City's construction standards, approved by the City Engineer, in
accordance with the construction plans.
A. Street Connectivity Principle. The pattern of streets established through land divisions should
be connected to: (a) provide safe and convenient options for cars, bikes and pedestrians; (b)
create a logical, recognizable pattern of circulation; and (c) spread traffic over many streets
so that key streets (particularly U.S. 26) are not overburdened.
B. Transportation Impact Studies. Transportation impact studies may be required by the city
engineer to assist the city to evaluate the impact of development proposals, determine
reasonable and prudent transportation facility improvements and justify modifications to the
design standards. Such studies will be prepared in accordance with the following:
1. A proposal established with the scope of the transportation impact study shall be
coordinated with, and agreed to, by the city engineer. The study requirements shall reflect
the magnitude of the project in accordance with accepted transportation planning and
engineering practices. A professional civil or traffic engineer registered in the State of
Oregon shall prepare such studies.
2. If the study identifies level-of-service conditions less than the minimum standards
established in the Sandy Transportation System Plan, improvements and funding
strategies mitigating the problem shall be considered as part of the land use decision for
the proposal.
C. Topography and Arrangement. All streets shall be properly related to special traffic
generators such as industries, business districts, schools, and shopping centers and to the
pattern of existing and proposed land uses.
D. Street Spacing. Street layout shall generally use a rectangular grid pattern with modifications
as appropriate to adapt to topography or natural conditions.
E. Future Street Plan. Future street plans are conceptual plans, street extensions and connections
on acreage adjacent to land divisions. They assure access for future development and
promote a logical, connected pattern of streets. It is in the interest of the city to promote a
logical, connected pattern of streets. All applications for land divisions shall provide a future
street plan that shows the pattern of existing and proposed future streets within the
boundaries of the proposed land divisions, proposed connections to abutting properties, and
extension of streets to adjacent parcels within a 400 foot radius of the study area where
development may practically occur.
17.100 - 11
Revised by Ordinance No. 2013-04 (effective 07/03/13)
F. Connections. Except as permitted under Exemptions, all streets, alleys and pedestrian
walkways shall connect to other streets within the development and to existing and planned
streets outside the development and to undeveloped properties which have no future street
plan. Streets shall terminate at other streets or at parks, schools or other public land within a
neighborhood.
Where practicable, local roads shall align and connect with other roads when crossing
collectors and arterials.
Proposed streets or street extensions shall be located to provide direct access to existing or
planned transit stops, and existing or planned neighborhood activity centers, such as schools,
shopping areas and parks.
G. Exemptions.
1. A future street plan is not required for partitions of residentially zoned land when none of
the parcels may be redivided under existing minimum density standards.
2. Standards for street connections do not apply to freeways and other highways with full
access control.
3. When street connection standards are inconsistent with an adopted street spacing standard
for arterials or collectors, a right turn in/right turn out only design including median
control may be approved. Where compliance with the standards would result in
unacceptable sight distances, an accessway may be approved in place of a street
connection.
17.100.110 STREET STANDARDS AND CLASSIFICATION
Street standards are illustrated in the figures included at the end of this chapter. Functional
definitions of each street type are described in the Transportation System Plan as summarized
below.
A. Major arterials are designed to carry high volumes of through traffic, mixed with some
unavoidable local traffic, through or around the city. Major arterials should generally be
spaced at 1-mile intervals.
B. Minor arterials are designed to collect and distribute traffic from major and minor arterials to
neighborhood collectors and local streets, or directly to traffic destinations. Minor arterials
should generally be spaced at 1-mile intervals.
C. Residential minor arterials are a hybrid between minor arterial and collector type streets that
allow for moderate to high traffic volumes on streets where over 90% of the fronting lots are
residential.
D. Collector streets are designed to collect and distribute traffic from higher type arterial streets
to local streets or directly to traffic destinations. Collector streets should generally be spaced
at 1/2-mile intervals.
E. Local streets are designed to provide direct access to abutting property and connect to
collector streets. A general spacing of 8-10 local streets per mile is recommended.
17.100 - 12
Revised by Ordinance No. 2013-04 (effective 07/03/13)
F. Cul-de-sacs and dead end streets are discouraged. If deemed necessary, cul-de-sacs shall be
as short as possible and shall not exceed 400 feet in length.
G. Public access lanes are designed to provide primary access to a limited number of dwellings
when the construction of a local street is unnecessary.
H. Alleys are designed to provide access to multiple dwellings in areas where lot frontages are
narrow and driveway spacing requirements cannot be met.
17.100.120 BLOCKS AND ACCESSWAYS
A. Blocks. Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two tiers of lots at appropriate
depths. However, exceptions to the block width shall be allowed for blocks that are adjacent
to arterial streets or natural features.
B. Residential Blocks. Blocks fronting local streets shall not exceed 400 feet in length, unless
topographic, natural resource, or other similar physical conditions justify longer blocks.
Blocks may exceed 400 feet if approved as part of a Planned Development, Specific Area
Plan, adjustment or variance.
C. Commercial Blocks. Blocks located in commercial districts shall not exceed 400 feet in
length.
D. Pedestrian and Bicycle Access Way Requirements. In any block in a residential or
commercial district over 600 feet in length, a pedestrian and bicycle accessway with a
minimum improved surface of 10 feet within a 15-foot right-of-way or tract shall be provided
through the middle of the block. To enhance public convenience and mobility, such
accessways may be required to connect to cul-de-sacs, or between streets and other public or
semipublic lands or through greenway systems.
17.100.130 EASEMENTS
A minimum eight (8) foot public utility easement shall be required along property lines abutting
a right-of-way for all lots within a partition or subdivision. Where a partition or subdivision is
traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream, the land division shall provide a
stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such
watercourse, and such further width as determined needed for water quality and quantity
protection.
17.100.140 PUBLIC ALLEYS
A. Public alleys shall have a minimum width of 20 feet. Structural section and surfacing shall
conform to standards set by the City Engineer.
B. Existing alleys may remain unimproved until redevelopment occurs. When development
occurs, each abutting lot shall be responsible for completion of improvements to that portion
of the alley abutting the property.
17.100 - 13
Revised by Ordinance No. 2013-04 (effective 07/03/13)
C. Parking within the alley right-of-way is prohibited except as provided in Section
17.100.140(D) below.
D. An alley with a minimum width of 28 feet may permit parallel parking on one side of the
alley only.
17.100.150 RESIDENTIAL SHARED PRIVATE DRIVES
A shared private drive is intended to provide access to a maximum of two (2) dwelling units.
A. Criteria for Approval
Shared private drives may be approved by the Director when one or more of the following
conditions exist:
1. Direct access to a local street is not possible due to physical aspects of the site including
size, shape, or natural features.
2. The construction of a local street is determined to be unnecessary.
B. Design
1. A shared private drive constructed to city standards shall not serve more than two (2)
dwelling units.
2. A shared access easement and maintenance agreement shall be established between the
two units served by a shared private drive. The language of the easement and
maintenance agreement shall be subject to approval by the Director.
3. Public utility easements shall be provided where necessary in accordance with Section
17.100.130.
4. Shared private drives shall be fully improved with an all weather surface (e.g. concrete,
asphalt, permeable pavers) in conformance with city standards. The pavement width shall
be 20 feet.
5. Parking shall not be permitted along shared private drives at any time and shall be signed
and identified accordingly.
17.100.160 PUBLIC ACCESS LANES
Public access lanes are designed to provide primary access to a limited number of dwellings
where the construction of a local street is not necessary. Public access lanes are intended to serve
a maximum of six (6) dwelling units.
A. Criteria for Approval
Public access lanes may be approved by the Director when certain conditions exist which
make the construction of a standard local street unnecessary. Approval of public access lanes
shall be based on one or more of the following:
1. Physical conditions such as natural features, unusual lot size, shape, or other unique
features prevent the construction of a local street.
2. It is determined that construction of a local street is not necessary to facilitate orderly
development of a future street system.
3. It is determined that there are no logical extensions of an existing local street to serve the
site.
B. General Provisions
17.100 - 14
Revised by Ordinance No. 2013-04 (effective 07/03/13)
1. A public access lane may serve a maximum of six (6) dwelling units.
2. Public access lanes are subject to spacing requirements of Section 17.100.120.
3. Public utility easements shall be provided where necessary in accordance with Section
17.100.130.
4. If a public access lane is designed as a dead end, a turnaround shall be provided at the
point where the lane terminates. The design of the turnaround shall be subject to approval
by the Director and the Fire Department.
5. Parking shall be prohibited in public access lane turnarounds.
C. Public Access Lane Design
1. Public Access Lane ‘A’ (Figure 17.100 - A)
a) Public access lane ‘A’ is designed to be single loaded and provide access to lots
located on one side of the lane only.
b) Public access lanes shall be constructed to city standards and must meet the required
dimensions as specified in this section.
c) Curbside sidewalks on the side of the lane which abuts lot frontage are along public
access lanes to achieve specified dimensions.
d) Planter strips are not required along public access lanes due to the minimal lots
served. Lots abutting a public access lane are required to have street trees planted in
accordance with Section 17.100.290.
e) Parking is permitted on one side of a public access lane ‘A’ as shown in Figure
17.100 - A. Parking shall be permitted on the side of the lane which abuts lot
frontages only. Signage shall be displayed to indicate the parking regulations along
the lane and in the turnaround.
Figure 17.100 – A: Public Access Lane ‘A’
2. Public Access Lane Option ‘B’ (Figure 17.100 - B).
a) Public access lane ‘B’ is designed to be double loaded and provide access to lots
located on both sides of the lane.
17.100 - 15
Revised by Ordinance No. 2013-04 (effective 07/03/13)
b) Public access lanes shall be constructed to city standards and must meet the required
dimensions as specified in this section.
c) Curbside sidewalks are required along both sides of the access lane to achieve
specified dimensions.
d) Planter strips are not required along public access lanes due to the minimal lots
served. Lots abutting a public access lane are required to have street trees planted in
accordance with Section 17.100.290.
e) Parking is permitted on both sides of a public access lane ‘B’ as shown in Figure
17.100 - B. Signage shall be displayed to indicate the parking regulations along the
lane and in the turnaround.
Figure 17.100 – B: Public Access Lane ‘B’
17.100.170 FLAG LOTS
Flag lots can be created where it can be shown that no other street access is possible to achieve
the requested land division. The flag lot shall have a minimum street frontage of 15 feet for its
accessway. The following dimensional requirements shall apply to flag lots:
A. Setbacks applicable to the underlying zoning district shall apply to the flag lot.
B. The access strip (pole) may not be counted toward the lot size requirements.
C. The accessway shall have a minimum paved width of 10 feet.
17.100.180 INTERSECTIONS
A. Intersections. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. A
proposed intersection of two new streets at an angle of less than 75 degrees shall not be
17.100 - 16
Revised by Ordinance No. 2013-04 (effective 07/03/13)
acceptable. No more than two streets shall intersect at any one point unless specifically
approved by the City Engineer. The city engineer may require left turn lanes, signals, special
crosswalks, curb extensions and other intersection design elements justified by a traffic study
or necessary to comply with the Development Code.
B. Curve Radius. All local and neighborhood collector streets shall have a minimum curve
radius (at intersections of rights-of-way) of 20 feet, unless otherwise approved by the City
Engineer. When a local or neighborhood collector enters on to a collector or arterial street,
the curve radius shall be a minimum of 30 feet, unless otherwise approved by the City
Engineer.
17.100.190 STREET SIGNS
The subdivider shall pay the cost of street signs prior to the issuance of a Certificate of
Substantial Completion. The City shall install all street signs and upon completion will bill the
developer for costs associated with installation. In addition, the subdivider may be required to
pay for any traffic safety devices related to the development. The City Engineer shall specify the
type and location of the street signs and/or traffic safety devices.
17.100.200 STREET SURFACING
Public streets, including alleys, within the development shall be improved in accordance with the
requirements of the City or the standards of the Oregon State Highway Department. An overlay
of asphalt concrete, or material approved by the City Engineer, shall be placed on all streets
within the development. Where required, speed humps shall be constructed in conformance with
the City's standards and specifications.
17.100.210 STREET LIGHTING
A complete lighting system (including, but not limited to: conduits, wiring, bases, poles, arms,
and fixtures) shall be the financial responsibility of the subdivider on all cul-de-sacs, local
streets, and neighborhood collector streets. The subdivider will be responsible for providing the
arterial street lighting system in those cases where the subdivider is required to improve an
arterial street. Standards and specifications for street lighting shall be coordinated with the utility
and any lighting district, as appropriate.
17.100.220 LOT DESIGN
A. The lot arrangement shall be such that there will be no foreseeable difficulties, for reason of
topography or other conditions, in securing building permits to build on all lots in
compliance with the Development Code.
B. The lot dimensions shall comply with the minimum standards of the Development Code.
When lots are more than double the minimum lot size required for the zoning district, the
subdivider may be required to arrange such lots to allow further subdivision and the opening
of future streets to serve such potential lots.
C. The lot or parcel width at the front building line shall meet the requirements of the
Development Code and shall abut a public street other than an alley for a width of at least 20
17.100 - 17
Revised by Ordinance No. 2013-04 (effective 07/03/13)
feet. A street frontage of not less than 15 feet is acceptable in the case of a flag lot division
resulting from the division of an unusually deep land parcel which is of a size to warrant
division into not more than two parcels.
D. Double frontage lots shall be avoided except where necessary to provide separation of
residential developments from arterial streets or to overcome specific disadvantages of
topography or orientation.
E. Lots shall avoid deriving access from major or minor arterials. When driveway access from
major or minor arterials may be necessary for several adjoining lots, the Director or the
Planning Commission may require that such lots be served by a common access drive in
order to limit possible traffic hazards on such streets. Where possible, driveways should be
designed and arranged to avoid requiring vehicles to back into traffic on minor or major
arterials.
17.100.230 WATER FACILITIES
Water lines and fire hydrants serving the subdivision or partition, and connecting the
development to City mains, shall be installed to provide adequate water pressure to serve present
and future consumer demand. The materials, sizes, and locations of water mains, valves, service
laterals, meter boxes and other required appurtenances shall be in accordance with the standards
of the Fire District, the City, and the State.
If the city requires the subdivider to install water lines in excess of eight inches, the city may
participate in the oversizing costs. Any oversizing agreements shall be approved by the city
manager based upon council policy and dependent on budget constraints. If required water mains
will directly serve property outside the subdivision, the city may enter into an agreement with the
subdivider setting forth methods for reimbursement for the proportionate share of the cost.
17.100.240 SANITARY SEWERS
Sanitary sewers shall be installed to serve the subdivision and to connect the subdivision to
existing mains. Design of sanitary sewers shall take into account the capacity and grade to allow
for desirable extension beyond the subdivision.
If required sewer facilities will directly serve property outside the subdivision, the city may enter
into an agreement with the subdivider setting forth methods for reimbursement by
nonparticipating landowners for the proportionate share of the cost of construction.
17.100.250 SURFACE DRAINAGE AND STORM SEWER SYSTEM
A. Drainage facilities shall be provided within the subdivision and to connect with off-site
drainage ways or storm sewers. Capacity, grade and materials shall be by a design approved
by the city engineer. Design of drainage within the subdivision shall take into account the
location, capacity and grade necessary to maintain unrestricted flow from areas draining
through the subdivision and to allow extension of the system to serve such areas.
B. In addition to normal drainage design and construction, provisions shall be taken to handle
any drainage from preexisting subsurface drain tile. It shall be the design engineer's duty to
17.100 - 18
Revised by Ordinance No. 2013-04 (effective 07/03/13)
investigate the location of drain tile and its relation to public improvements and building
construction.
C. The roof and site drainage from each lot shall be discharged to either curb face outlets (if
minor quantity), to a public storm drain or to a natural acceptable drainage way if adjacent to
the lot.
17.100.260 UNDERGROUND UTILITIES
All subdivisions or major partitions shall be required to install underground utilities (including,
but not limited to, electrical and telephone wiring). The utilities shall be installed pursuant to the
requirements of the utility company.
17.100.270 SIDEWALKS
Sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of a public street and in any special pedestrian way
within the subdivision.
17.100.280 BICYCLE ROUTES
If appropriate to the extension of a system of bicycle routes, existing or planned, the Director or
the Planning Commission may require the installation of bicycle lanes within streets. Separate
bicycle access ways may be required to reduce walking or cycling distance when no feasible
street connection is available.
17.100.290 STREET TREES
Where planting strips are provided in the public right-of-way, a master street tree plan shall be
submitted and approved by the Director. The street tree plan shall provide street trees
approximately every 30’ on center for all lots.
17.100.300 EROSION CONTROL
Grass seed planting shall take place prior to September 30th on all lots upon which a dwelling
has not been started but the ground cover has been disturbed. The seeds shall be of an annual rye
grass variety and shall be sown at not less than four pounds to each 1000 square feet of land area.
17.100.310 REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
The following improvements shall be installed at no expense to the city, consistent with the
design standards of Chapter 17.84, except as otherwise provided in relation to oversizing.
A. Drainage facilities
B. Lot, street and perimeter monumentation
C. Mailbox delivery units
D. Sanitary sewers
E. Sidewalks
F. Street lights
G. Street name signs
17.100 - 19
Revised by Ordinance No. 2013-04 (effective 07/03/13)
H. Street trees
I. Streets
J. Traffic signs
K. Underground communication lines, including broadband (fiber), telephone, and cable.
Franchise agreements will dictate whether telephone and cable lines are required.
L. Underground power lines
M. Water distribution lines and fire hydrants
17.100.320 IMPROVEMENT PROCEDURES
Improvements installed by a land divider either as a requirement of these regulations or at his
own option shall conform to the design standards of Chapter 17.84 and improvement standards
and specifications adopted by the city. Improvements shall be installed in accordance with the
following general procedure:
A. Improvement work shall not start until plans have been checked for adequacy and approved
by the city engineer. To the extent necessary for evaluation of the proposal, improvement
plans may be required before approval of the tentative plan of a partition or subdivision.
B. Improvement work shall not start until after the city is notified. If work is discontinued for
any reason it shall not resume until the city is notified.
C. Improvements shall be constructed under the inspection and to the satisfaction of the city
engineer.
D. All improvements installed by the subdivider shall be guaranteed as to workmanship and
material for a period of one year following acceptance by the City Engineer. Such guarantee
shall be secured by cash deposit in the amount of the value of the improvements as set by the
City Engineer.
E. A map showing public improvements as built shall be filed with the city engineer upon
completion of the improvements.
17.100.330 OPTIONS FOR IMPROVEMENTS
Before the signature of the City Engineer is obtained on the final partition or subdivision plat, the
applicant shall install the required improvements, agree to install required improvements, or have
gained approval to form an improvement district for installation of the improvements required
with the tentative plat approval. These procedures are more fully described as follows:
A. Install Improvements. The applicant may install the required improvements for the
subdivision prior to recording the final subdivision plat. If this procedure is to be used, the
subdivision plat shall contain all the required certifications except the County Surveyor and
the Board of County Commissioners. The City shall keep the subdivision plat until the
improvements have been completed and approved by the City Engineer. Upon City
Engineer's approval, the City shall forward the final subdivision plat for certification by the
Board of County Commissioners and then to the County Clerk for recording; or
17.100 - 20
Revised by Ordinance No. 2013-04 (effective 07/03/13)
B. Agree to Install Improvement. The applicant may execute and file with the City an agreement
specifying the period within which required improvements shall be completed. The
agreement shall state that if the work is not completed within the period specified, the City
may complete the work and recover the full cost and expense from the applicant. A
performance guarantee shall be required. The agreement may provide for the construction of
the improvements in increments and for an extension of time under specified conditions; or
C. Form Improvement District. The applicant may have all or part of the public improvements
constructed under an improvement district procedure. Under this procedure the applicant
shall enter into an agreement with the City proposing establishment of the district for
improvements to be constructed, setting forth a schedule for installing improvements, and
specifying the extent of the plat to be improved. The City reserves the right under the
improvement district procedure to limit the extent of improvements in a subdivision during a
construction year and may limit the area of the final subdivision plat to the area to be
improved. A performance guarantee shall be required under the improvement district
procedure. The formation of a LID is entirely within the discretion of the city.
17.100.340 PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE
If the applicant chooses to utilize the opportunities provided under "A" or "B" above, the
applicant shall provide a performance guarantee equal to 110% of the cost of the improvements
to assure full and faithful performance thereof, in one of the following forms:
A. A surety bond executed by a surety company authorized to transact business in the State of
Oregon in a form approved by the City Attorney.
B. In lieu of the surety bond, the applicant may:
1. Deposit with the City cash money to be released only upon authorization of the City
Engineer;
2. Supply certification by a bank or other reputable lending institution that money is being
held to cover the cost of required improvements to be released only upon authorization of
the City Engineer;
3. Supply certification by a bank or other reputable lending institution that a line of credit
has been established to cover the cost of required improvements, to be utilized only upon
authorization of the City Engineer; or
4. Provide bonds in a form approved by the City Attorney.
C. Such assurance of full and faithful performance shall be for a sum determined by the City
Engineer as sufficient to cover the cost of required improvements, including related
engineering and incidental expenses.
D. If the applicant fails to carry out provisions of the agreement and the City has expenses
resulting from such failure, the City shall call on the performance guarantee for
reimbursement. If the amount of the performance guarantee exceeds the expense incurred,
the remainder shall be released. If the amount of the performance guarantee is less than the
expense incurred, the applicant shall be liable to the City for the difference.
Adopted November 18, 2002 Ordinance 2002-10
CHAPTER 17.102 - URBAN FORESTRY
17.102.00 INTENT
A. This chapter is intended to conserve and replenish the ecological, aesthetic and economic
benefits of urban forests, by regulating tree removal on properties greater than one acre
within the Sandy Urban Growth Boundary.
B. This chapter is intended to facilitate planned urban development as prescribed by the Sandy
Comprehensive Plan, through the appropriate location of harvest areas, landing and yarding
areas, roads and drainage facilities.
C. This chapter shall be construed in a manner consistent with Chapter 17.60 Flood and Slope
Hazard Overlay District. In cases of conflict, Chapter 17.60 shall prevail.
17.102.10 DEFINITIONS
Technical terms used in this chapter are defined below. See also Chapter 17.10, Definitions.
Urban Forestry Related Definitions:
• Diameter at Breast Height (DBH): The diameter of a tree inclusive of the bark measured
4½ feet above the ground on the uphill side of a tree.
• Hazard Tree: A tree located within required setback areas or a tree required to be retained
as defined in 17.102.50 that is cracked, split, leaning, or physically damaged to the degree
that it is likely to fall and injure persons or property. Hazard trees include diseased trees,
meaning those trees with a disease of a nature that, without reasonable treatment or pruning,
is likely to spread to adjacent trees and cause such adjacent trees to become diseased or
hazard trees.
• Protected Setback Areas: Setback areas regulated by the Flood and Slope Hazard
Ordinance (FSH), Chapter 17.60 and 70 feet from top of bank of Tickle Creek and 50 feet
from top of bank of other perennial streams outside the city limits, within the urban growth
boundary.
• Tree: For the purposes of this chapter, tree means any living, standing, woody plant having
a trunk 11 inches DBH or greater.
• Tree Protection Area: The area reserved around a tree or group of trees in which no
grading, access, stockpiling or other construction activity shall occur.
• Tree Removal: Tree removal means to cut down a tree, 11 inches DBH or greater, or remove
50 percent or more of the crown, trunk, or root system of a tree; or to damage a tree so as to
cause the tree to decline and/or die. Tree removal includes topping but does not include
normal trimming or pruning of trees.
17.102.20 APPLICABILITY
This chapter applies only to properties within the Sandy Urban Growth Boundary that are greater
than one acre including contiguous parcels under the same ownership.
A. General: No person shall cut, harvest, or remove trees 11 inches DBH or greater without
first obtaining a permit and demonstrating compliance with this chapter.
Adopted November 18, 2002 Ordinance 2002-10
1. As a condition of permit issuance, the applicant shall agree to implement required
provisions of this chapter and to allow all inspections to be conducted.
2. Tree removal is subject to the provisions of Chapter 15.44, Erosion Control, Chapter
17.56, Hillside Development, and Chapter 17.60 Flood and Slope Hazard.
B. Exceptions: The following tree removals are exempt from the requirements of this chapter.
1. Tree removal as required by the city or public utility for the installation or maintenance
or repair of roads, utilities, or other structures.
2. Tree removal to prevent an imminent threat to public health or safety, or prevent
imminent threat to public or private property, or prevent an imminent threat of serious
environmental degradation. In these circumstances, a Type I tree removal permit shall be
applied for within seven days following the date of tree removal.
17.102.30 PROCEDURES AND APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
A person who desires to remove trees shall first apply for and receive one of the following tree
cutting permits before tree removal occurs:
A. Type I Permit. The following applications shall be reviewed under a Type I procedure:
1. Tree removal on sites within the city limits under contiguous ownership where 50 or
fewer trees are requested to be removed.
2. Removal of a hazard tree or trees that presents an immediate danger of collapse and
represents a clear and present danger to persons or property.
3. Removal of up to two trees per year, six inches DBH or greater within the FSH Overlay
District as shown on the City Zoning Map and described in Chapter 17.60.
4. Tree removal on sites outside the city limits and within the urban growth boundary and
outside protected setback areas.
5. Removal of up to two trees per year outside the city limits within the UGB and within
protected setback areas.
B. An application for a Type I Tree Removal permit shall be made upon forms prescribed by the
City to contain the following information:
1. Two copies of a scaled site plan to contain the following information:
a. Dimensions of the property and parcel boundaries.
b. Location and species of trees 11” DBH or greater to be retained.
c. Location and type of tree protection measures to be installed.
2. A brief narrative describing the project.
3. Estimated starting and ending dates.
Adopted November 18, 2002 Ordinance 2002-10
4. A scaled re-planting plan indicating ground cover type, species of trees to be planted, and
general location of re-planting.
5. An application for removal of a hazard tree within a protected setback area or a tree
required to be retained as defined in Chapter 17.102.50 shall also contain a report from a
certified arborist or professional forester indicating that the condition or location of the
tree presents a hazard or danger to persons or property and that such hazard or danger
cannot reasonably be alleviated by treatment or pruning.
C. Type II Permit. The following applications shall be reviewed under a Type II procedure:
1. Tree removal on sites under contiguous ownership where greater than 50 trees are
requested to be removed as further described below:
a. Within City Limits: outside of FSH Restricted Development Areas as defined in
Chapter 17.60.
D. An application for a Type II Permit shall contain the same information as required for a Type
I permit above in addition to the following:
a. A list of property owners on mailing labels within 200 feet of the subject property.
b. A written narrative addressing permit review criteria in 17.102.40.
E. Type III Permit. The following applications shall be reviewed under a Type III procedure:
1. Request for a variance to tree retention requirements as specified in Section 17.102.50
may be permitted subject to the provisions of 17.102.70.
F. An application for a Type III Permit shall contain the same information as required for a
Type I permit in addition to the following:
a. A list of property owners on mailing labels within 300 feet of the subject property.
b. A written narrative addressing applicable code sections 17.102.50, 17.102.60, and
17.102.70.
17.102.40 PERMIT REVIEW
An application for a Type II or III tree removal permit shall demonstrate that the provisions of
Chapter 17.102.50 are satisfied. The Planning Director may require a report from a certified
arborist or professional forester to substantiate the criteria for a permit.
A. The Director shall be responsible for interpreting the provisions of this chapter. The Director
may consult with the Oregon Department of Forestry in interpreting applicable provisions of
the Oregon Forest Practices Act (OAR Chapter 629). Copies of all forestry operation permit
applications will be sent to the Oregon Department of Forestry and Department of Revenue.
The City may request comments from the Oregon Department of Forestry, the Oregon
Department of Fish & Wildlife or other affected state agencies.
Adopted November 18, 2002 Ordinance 2002-10
B. Expiration of Tree Removal Permits. Tree removal permits shall remain valid for a period
of one year from the date of issuance or date of final decision by a hearing body, if
applicable. A 30-day extension shall be automatically granted by the Planning Director if
requested in writing before the expiration of the permit. Permits that have lapsed are void.
17.102.50 TREE RETENTION AND PROTECTION REQUIREMENTS
A. Tree Retention: The landowner is responsible for retention and protection of trees required to
be retained as specified below:
1. At least three trees 11 inches DBH or greater are to be retained for every one-acre of
contiguous ownership.
2. Retained trees can be located anywhere on the site at the landowner's discretion before
the harvest begins. Clusters of trees are encouraged.
3. Trees proposed for retention shall be healthy and likely to grow to maturity, and be
located to minimize the potential for blow-down following the harvest.
4. If possible, at least two of the required trees per acre must be of conifer species.
5. Trees within the required protected setback areas may be counted towards the tree
retention standard if they meet these requirements.
B. Tree Protection Area: Except as otherwise determined by the Planning Director, all tree
protection measures set forth in this section shall be instituted prior to any development
activities and removed only after completion of all construction activity. Tree protection
measures are required for land disturbing activities including but not limited to tree removal,
clearing, grading, excavation, or demolition work.
1. Trees identified for retention shall be marked with yellow flagging tape and protected by
protective barrier fencing placed no less than 10 horizontal feet from the outside edge of
the trunk.
2. Required fencing shall be a minimum of six feet tall supported with metal posts placed no
farther than ten feet apart installed flush with the initial undisturbed grade.
3. No construction activity shall occur within the tree protection zone, including, but not
limited to dumping or storage of materials such as building supplies, soil, waste items,
equipment, or parked vehicles.
C. Inspection. The applicant shall not proceed with any tree removal or construction activity,
except erosion control measures, until the City has inspected and approved the installation of
tree protection measures. Within 15 days of the date of accepting an application for a Type I
permit, the city shall complete an onsite inspection of proposed activities and issue or deny
the permit. Within 15 days of is suing a Type II or Type III permit, the city shall complete an
onsite inspection of proposed activities.
For ongoing forest operations, the permit holder shall notify the city by phone or in writing
24 hours prior to subsequent tree removal. The city may conduct an onsite re-inspection of
permit conditions at this time.
Adopted November 18, 2002 Ordinance 2002-10
17.102.60 TREE REPLANTING REQUIREMENTS
1. All areas with exposed soils resulting from tree removal shall be replanted with a ground
cover of native species within 30 days of harvest during the active growing season, or by
June 1st of the following spring.
2. All areas with exposed soils resulting from tree removal occurring between October 1
and March 31 shall also be covered with straw to minimize erosion.
3. Removal of hazard trees as defined shall be replanted with two native trees of quality
nursery stock for every tree removed.
4. Tree Removal allowed within the FSH Overlay District shall be replanted with two native
trees of quality nursery stock for every tree removed.
5. Tree Removal not associated with a development plan must be replanted following the
provisions of OAR Chapter 629, Division 610, Section 020-060
17.102.70 VARIANCES
Under a Type III review process, the Planning Commission may allow newly-planted trees to
substitute for retained trees if:
1. The substitution is at a ratio of at least two-to-one (i.e., at least two native quality nursery
grown trees will be planted for every protected tree that is removed); and
2. The substitution more nearly meets the intent of this ordinance due to:
a. The location of the existing and proposed new trees, or
b. The physical condition of the existing trees or their compatibility with the existing
soil and climate conditions; or
c. An undue hardship is caused by the requirement for retention of existing trees.
d. Tree removal is necessary to protect a scenic view corridor.
17.102.80 ENFORCEMENT
The provisions of Chapter 17.06, Enforcement, shall apply to tree removal that is not in
conformance with this chapter. Each unauthorized tree removal shall be considered a separate
offense for purposes of assigning penalties under Section 17.06.80. Funds generated as a result
of enforcement of this ordinance shall be dedicated to the Urban Forestry Fund established under
Section 17.102.100 below.
17.102.90 APPLICABILITY OF THE OREGON FOREST PRACTICES ACT
The following provisions of the Oregon Forest Practices Act (OAR Chapter 629) are adopted by
reference for consideration by the City in the review of Forest Operations Plans. Although the
Director may seek advice from the Department of Forestry, the Director shall be responsible for
interpreting the following provisions.
Division 610 - Reforestation Stocking Standards. Where reforestation is required, the provisions
of OAR Chapter 629, Division 610, Section 020-060 shall be considered by the Director, in
addition to the requirements of Section 17.102.60.
Division 615 - Treatment of Slash. Slash shall not be placed within the protected setback areas.
Otherwise, the Director shall consider the provisions of OAR Chapter 629, Division 615 in
determining how to dispose of slash.
Adopted November 18, 2002 Ordinance 2002-10
Division 620 - Chemical and Other Petroleum Products Rules. The storage, transferring, cleaning
of tanks and mixing of chemicals and petroleum products shall occur outside the protected
setback areas. Aerial spraying shall not be permitted within the Urban Growth Boundary.
Otherwise, the provisions of Chapter 629, Division 620 shall apply.
Division 625 - Road Construction and Maintenance. Forest roads, bridges and culverts shall not
be constructed within the protected setback areas, except where permitted within the FSH
overlay area as part of an approved urban development. Otherwise, the Director shall consider
the provisions of OAR Chapter 629, Division 625 in the review of road, bridge and culvert
construction.
Division 630 - Harvesting. Forest harvesting operations, including but not limited to skidding
and yarding practices, construction of landings, construction of drainage systems, treatment of
waste materials, storage and removal of slash, yarding and stream crossings, shall not be
permitted within protected setback areas. Otherwise, the provisions of Chapter 629, Division 630
shall apply.
17.102.100 URBAN FORESTRY FUND CREATED
In order to encourage planting of trees, the City will create a fund or account to be used for tree
planting in rights-of-way, city parks, riparian areas, and other public property. The source of
funds will be donations, grants, and any other funds the City Council may designate.
Adopted November 18, 2002 Ordinance 2002-10
ORDINANCES MODIFYING DEVELOPMENT CODE
Ordinance No. Adoption Date Description
2002-03 02/19/02 Amended Section 17.78 relating to voter-approved
annexations
2002-10 11/19/02 Added Chapter 17.102 regulating tree removal on certain
properties within the UGB
2002-13 09/03/02 Amended Sections 17.34.30, 17.36.30, 17.38.30, 17.40.30,
17.64.30, 17.84.30, 17.100.100 and 17.100.10 related to
neighborhood street standards and block lengths
2002-14 08/19/02 Amended Section 17.74.10.F. related to projecting building
features
2002-15 10/07/02 Added Chapter 17.56 related to development on hillsides
within the City of Sandy
2002-18 10/21/02 Replaced Chapters 17.10 and 17.60 relating to Flood Hazards
and Water Quality within the City of Sandy
2003-05 02/18/03 Repealed Section 17.100.240(B) relating to Stormwater
Detention Requirements and Declaring an Emergency
2003-09 09/15/03 Added Chapter 17.54 providing for conceptual zoning
designations for Specific Area Plans
2003-12 01/20/04 Amended annexation ordinance requiring tree retention
2004-06 12/20/04 Amended Chapter 17.86, Parkland dedication requirements
2005-03 02/22/05 Amended SFR and R-1 Zoning Districts
2006-04 09/05/06 Amended Chapter 17.78 by adding Section 17.78.120,
Annexation Conditions
2006-12 12/04/06 Amended Chapter 17.78 by adding Section 17.78.65,
Annexation Waiver
2007-01 03/19/07 Amended Chapters 17.24 and 17.26
2007-03 04/02/07 Amended Chapter 17.36, related to density ranges
2007-07 06/04/07 Rescinded Ordinance 2005-03 changes related to the
minimum lot sizes in the R-1 zone
2008-03 03/03/08 Amended Chapter 17.10 and 17.90
2008-05 03/03/08 Amended Chapter 17.12-17.48 excluding Chapter 17.16
2008-07 05/19/08 Amended Chapters 17.10 and 17.60 related to flood plain
regulation
2008-04 10/15/08 Amended Chapter 17.46 to allow drive-thru as a conditional
use in the C-3 Zone.
2008-12 02/18/09 Amended Chapters 17.34, 17.36, 17.38, and 17.40 to base
density requirements on net acres. Deleted Chapter 17.32
entirely.
2008-13 02/18/09 Amended Chapter 17.34 to establish a minimum lot size in
the R-1 zoning district.
2011-05 06/20/11 Amended Chapters 17.84 and 17.100 requiring broadband
fiber installation.
2012-01 03/05/12 Added Chapter 17.32, Parks and Open Space (POS) Zoning
District and amended Chapter 17.30 to add the new zoning
district.
2012-05 11/19/12 Amended Chapters 17.10 and Chapter 17.42 – 17.50 related
to permitted and conditional uses in these zones.
Adopted November 18, 2002 Ordinance 2002-10
Ordinance No. Adoption Date Description
2013-03 06/03/13 Amended Section 17.86.40 (2) related to parks fee in lieu
payments.
2013-04 06/03/13 Amended Chapters 17.10 (Definitions), 17.24 (Comp. Plan),
17.30 (Zoning Districts), 17.74 (Accessory Development),
17.90.140 (Manufactured Design Standards), 17.90.150
(Residential Design Standards), 17.98 (Parking), and
17.100.110 through 17.100.340 (Land Division).
2013-11 11/18/13 Amended Chapters 17.12 (Procedures), 17.18 (Processing
Applications), 17.32, 17.34, 17.36, 17.38, 17.40, 17.42, 17.44,
17.46, 17.48, 17.50, 17.52, and 17.68 (Conditional Uses) to
add a minor conditional use permit process.
2014-01 02/18/14 Amended Chapter 17.10 (Definitions) to include a definition
for ‘medical facility’.
2014-05 06/02/14 Added Chapter 17.74.90, Food and Beverage Carts
2015-04 06/15/15 Amended Chapter 17.78 (Annexation) to include annexations
of islands as allowed by state law.
2017-05 08/07/17 Amended Chapter 17.78 (Annexation) to remove voter
annexations, Measure 37 waiver text, and improved tree
retention standards.
2018-029 11/05/18 Amended Chapters 17.22 (Notices), 17.28 (Appeals), 17.80
(Additional Setbacks on Collector and Arterial Streets), and
17.82 (Special Setbacks on Transit Streets)
2019-01 01/07/19 Amended Chapters 17.02, 17.10, and 17.60 to be in
compliance with National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)
requirements and FEMA floodplain requirements
2020-06 05/06/2020 Amended Chapter 17.98 (Parking)
2020-13 07/06/2020 Amended Chapter 17.78 Annexation
Adopted November 18, 2002 Ordinance 2002-10
DESIGN REVIEW APPENDIX A-H
Appendix A Specific Building Exceptions, Joe’s Donut Shop, 39230 Pioneer Blvd.
North Facade West Facade
South Facade East Facade
Appendix A Specific Building Exceptions Tollgate Inn Restaurant and Bakery
38050 and 38100 Highway 26
North Façade Tollgate Inn Mercantile West Façade Bakery
North Façade Tollgate Inn Restaurant and Saloon
Exception Area A - South side of Pioneer Boulevard between Bruns Avenue and Meinig
Avenue.
Exception Area B - South side of Pioneer Boulevard between Scales Avenue and
PIONEER BLVD
PROCTOR BLVD
TUPPER RD
HWY 211
BRUNS AVE
MEINIG AVE
STRAUSS AVE
SCALES AVE
SHELLEY AVE
ALT AVE
SMITH AVE
MEINIG AVE
Appendix B
Downtown Exception Areas
Appendix C
Building Color Palette
Per Chapter 17.90, the City of Sandy requires the exterior of commercial and industrial buildings to be
painted warm earth tone colors (tans, browns, reds, grays, and greens) conforming to the approved
color palette. The City has adopted Miller Paint Company’s Historic Colour Collection as the
approved Building Color Palette, except for those colors listed below. The palette can by viewed by
clicking here.
The following colors listed on the Miller Historic Colour Collection are not permitted:
Clementine
Lady Banksia
Goldenrod
York Bisque
Lyman Camellia
Emily
Robin’s Egg
Glacier Bay
Biloxi Blue
Bowen Blue
Coral Springs
Veranda Blue
Blue Winged Teal
Phillips Green
Brattle Spruce
Winter Balsam
Sayward Pine
Proposed paint colors are required to match colors on the approved palette but do not need to be
Miller brand. The Director will review all proposed exterior paint colors to ensure compliance with the
approved palette.
Appendix D
Metal Roof Color Palette
Per Chapter 17.90, the City of Sandy requires only specific colors of metal roofing to be used on
commercial and industrial buildings. The City has adopted Metallion Industries metal roof colors as
the approved Metal Roof Color Palette, except for those colors listed below. The palette can by
viewed by clicking here.
The following colors listed on the Metallion Industries palette are not permitted for 29 & 26
gauge:
White
Ivory
Black
Copper Penny
Galvalume
The following colors listed on the Metallion Industries palette are not permitted for 24 gauge:
Regal White
Matte Black
Proposed metal roof colors are required to match colors on the palette but do not need to be
Metallion Industries brand. The Director will review all proposed roof colors to ensure compliance
with the approved palette.
Appendix E-1
Design Elements Consistent with the Sandy Style
Lakeview Village Foundation Mortgage (West Linn, OR) (Lake Oswego, OR)
Whole Foods
(Clampham Jct, London)
Starbucks (Bend, OR) Sandy Historical Museum (Sandy, OR)
First Addition Mixed Use Building
(Lake Oswego, OR)
Forest Heights Village (Portland, OR) Forest Heights Village (Portland, OR)
Safeway (Bend, OR)
Appendix E-2
Design Elements Inconsistent with the Sandy Style
New Seasons (Lake Oswego, OR)
Whole Foods (Omaha, NE) Market of Choice (West Linn, OR) Whole Foods (Denver, CO)
Sandy Marketplace (Sandy, OR)
Typical 2-ramp Bulb-out Surfacing Detail
Typical Single Ramp Bulb-out Surfacing Detail
Appendix F
Streetscape Design Details
Sidewalk Tree Grate Detail
(Grate design under copyright)
Typical Mid-block Surfacing Detail
Streetlight Detail
Techtra Decorative ‘Shepard's Crook’ (green)
Appendix G-1
Landscape Management Area West
New Deciduous Trees
New Coniferous Trees
Existing Canopy
Real Urban Graphics, January 2007
New Deciduous Trees
New Coniferous Trees
Existing Canopy
Real Urban Graphics, January 2007
Appendix G-2
Landscape Management Area East
Wooden Plank
Split-faced Running
Bond Block
Ashlar Stone
Split cedar shingle
(from Spec Formliners)
Ship Lap
Appendix H
Concrete Form Examples
(all examples from Fitzgerald Formliners except as shown)
Wooden Plank
1
TITLE 18
ARTS COMMISSION
Chapter 18.01 COMMISSION ESTABLISHED - MEMBERSHIP ..................... 1
Chapter 18.01
COMMISSION ESTABLISHED - MEMBERSHIP
(Ord. 07, 2017)
18.02 Commission established – Membership.
A. The Sandy Arts Commission, consisting of seven members appointed
by the mayor and confirmed by a vote of a majority of the members of
the City Council, is hereby established. The term of office shall be four
years and until a successor is appointed and confirmed, provided that
three of the initial seven members of the Commission shall serve for
two years and until their successors are appointed and confirmed, in
order to achieve staggered terms of office. All subsequent
appointments shall be for four years, or for the duration of an
unexpired term in the case of an appointment to a vacancy. No
member shall serve more than two consecutive full terms of office,
unless there are no identified incumbents.
B. Commission members shall be appointed upon the basis of
demonstrated interest in, and knowledge and support of the arts.
Members shall serve without salary or other compensation, provided
that members shall be reimbursed for necessary expenses actually
incurred. All Commissioners shall reside within the City limits or within
the Oregon Trail or Sandy Library District Areas at the time of
appointment and throughout their terms of office.(Ord.2018-23)
18.02 Rules of Procedure
A. The Commission shall adopt procedural rules governing the
transaction of its business. The Rules shall include provisions for the
date, time and place of regular meetings of the Commission.
Provisions shall be made for maintaining minutes of the Commission
meetings and records of all Commission reports, conclusions and
recommendations. The Rules of Procedure shall provide for election
of Commission Officers, which shall include a chairperson and vice
chairperson who shall serve for at least one year. The Rules of the
Commission shall provide that all Commission meetings shall be open
to the public and that a notice of meetings shall comply with Oregon
2
Open Public Meetings laws, to the extent proceedings of the
Commission are governed by such laws. The procedures shall
address receipt and processing of citizen proposals and requests.
18.03 Authority of Commission.
A. The Arts Commission is authorized to take the following actions:
a. On behalf of the City, to encourage, conduct, sponsor or
cosponsor public programs to further the development and
public awareness of, and interest in the fine and performing
arts;
b. To provide recommendations to the Mayor and City Council
in connection with cultural and artistic endeavors and
projects in which the City becomes involved and to act as a
representative of the community in such matters;
c. To encourage donations, grants and other support to further
expand the arts and cultural services and programs
available to citizens of Sandy and members of the Sandy
community;
d. To take such other actions as the City Council may direct
form time to time.
18.04 Meetings and Staff Services.
A. The Arts Commission shall meet at a date, time and place to be
established by the Commission and as necessary given agenda items
needing action. Commission meetings shall be open to the public and
written meeting minutes shall be maintained and made available to the
public upon approval of the minutes by the Commission. (Ord 2018-07,
5.21.18)
B. The City Manager shall be responsible for providing administrative and
staff services for the Commission and may assign staff members to
provide services to the Commission.
C. The Commission shall make a report to the City Council at least
annually.
18.05 Budget
A. Arts Commission programs and operating expenses shall be funded
from the City of Sandy general fund, grants, donations and admission
charges. The City Manager shall be responsible for submitting the
annual operating budget to the Mayor and Council.
18.06 Severability
A. If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance should be
held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the
validity or constitutionality of any other section, sentence, clause or
phrase of this ordinance.
3
18.07 Effective Date
A. This ordinance shall take effect thirty (30) days after ratification by the
council.