


CHARTER

PREAMBLE

We, the voters of the City of St. Helens, Oregon, exercise our power to the fullest extent possible under the Oregon Constitution and laws of the state, and enact this Home Rule Charter. (Approved by voters in general election held November 6, 2012)


CHAPTER I Names and Boundaries


Section 1. Title.

This charter shall be referred to as the 2012 City of St. Helens Charter. (Approved by voters in general election held November 6, 2012)


Section 2. Name.

The City of St. Helens, Oregon, continues as a municipal corporation with the name City of St. Helens. (Approved by voters in general election held November 6, 2012)


Section 3. Boundaries.

The corporate limits of the City shall include all territory encompassed by its boundaries as they now exist or hereafter are modified by a majority of the voters. Unless mandated by State Law, annexation, delayed or otherwise, to the City of St. Helens, may only be approved by a prior majority vote among the electorate. The city custodian of records shall keep in the recorder’s office at the city hall at least two copies of this charter in each of which the custodian of records shall maintain an accurate, up-to-date description of the boundaries. The copies and descriptions shall be available for public inspection at any time during regular office hours of the recorder. (Approved by voters in general election held November 6, 2012)


CHAPTER II Powers


Section 4. Powers.

The city has all powers which the constitutions, statutes, and common laws of the United States and of Oregon expressly or impliedly grant or allow the City, as fully as though this charter specifically enumerated each of those powers. (Approved by voters in general election held November 6, 2012)


Section 5. Construction.

The charter will be liberally construed so that the city may exercise fully all powers possible under this charter and under the United States and Oregon law. (Approved by voters in general election held November 6, 2012)


Section 6. Distribution.

The Oregon Constitution reserves initiative and referendum powers as to all municipal legislation to city voters. This charter vests all other city powers in the council except as the charter otherwise provides. The council has legislative, administrative and quasi-judicial authority. The council exercises legislative authority by ordinance, administrative authority by resolution, and quasi-judicial authority by order. The council may not delegate its authority to adopt ordinances. (Approved by voters in general election held November 6, 2012)


CHAPTER III Form of Government


Section 7. Where Powers Vested.

Except as this charter provides otherwise, all powers of the city shall be vested in the council. (Approved by voters in general election held November 6, 2012)


Section 8. Council.

The council shall be composed of a mayor and four councilors elected from the city at large. (Approved by voters in general election held November 6, 2012)


Section 9. Councilors.

The councilors in office at the time this charter is adopted shall continue in office, each until the end of their term of office as fixed by the charter of the city in effect at the time this charter is adopted. At each biennial general election after this charter takes effect, two councilors shall be elected, each for a term of four years. (Approved by voters in general election held November 6, 2012)


Section 10. Mayor.

The mayor presides over and facilitates council meetings, preserves order, enforces council rules, and determines the order of business under the council rules. The mayor is a voting member of the council and has no veto authority. With the consent of the council, and following the procedures of the council, the mayor appoints members of commissions and committees established by ordinance or resolution. The mayor must sign all records of council decisions. The mayor serves as the political head of the city government.

At each biennial general election, a mayor shall be elected for a term of two years. (Approved by voters in general election held November 6, 2012)


Section 11. Council President.

At its first meeting after this charter takes effect and thereafter at its first meeting of each odd-numbered year, the council by written ballot shall elect a president from its membership. In the mayor’s absence from a council meeting, the president shall preside over it. Whenever the mayor is unable to perform the functions of this office, the president shall act as mayor. (Approved by voters in general election held November 6, 2012)


Section 12. Qualification of Officers.

No person shall be eligible for an elective office of the city unless at the time of his election he is a qualified elector within the meaning of the state constitution and has resided in the city during the 12 months immediately preceding the election. The council shall be final judge of the qualifications and election of its own members. (Approved by voters in general election held November 6, 2012)


Section 13. Rules.

The council must by resolution adopt rules to govern its meetings. (Approved by voters in general election held November 6, 2012)


Section 14. Meetings.

The council must meet at least once each month at a time and place designated by its rules, and may meet at other times in accordance with the rules. (Approved by voters in general election held November 6, 2012)


Section 15. Quorum.

A majority of the council members is a quorum to conduct business, but a smaller number may meet and compel attendance of absent members as prescribed by council rules. (Approved by voters in general election held November 6, 2012)


Section 16. Vote Required.

The express approval of a majority of the Council members, present at any meeting requiring a quorum, is necessary for any Council decision, except when this charter requires approval by a majority of the members of the Council. (Approved by voters in general election held November 6, 2012)


Section 17. Record.

A record of council meetings must be kept in a manner prescribed by the council rules. (Approved by voters in general election held November 6, 2012)


CHAPTER IV Legislative Authority


Section 18. Ordinances.

The council will exercise its legislative authority by adopting ordinances. The enacting clause for all ordinances must state “The City of St. Helens ordains as follows:”. (Approved by voters in general election held November 6, 2012)


Section 19. Ordinance Adoption.

(a) Except as authorized by subsection (b), adoption of an ordinance requires a reading of the ordinance by title at two meetings at least two weeks apart and approval by a majority of the members of the Council.

(b) The Council may adopt an ordinance after one reading at a single meeting by the unanimous approval of the council, a quorum being present, provided the proposed ordinance is available in writing to the public at least one week before the meeting.

(c) After adoption of an ordinance, the vote of each member must be entered into the council minutes.

(d) After adoption of an ordinance, the city custodian of records must endorse it with the date of adoption and the custodian’s name and title. (Approved by voters in general election held November 6, 2012)


Section 20. Effective Date of Ordinances.

Ordinances normally take effect on the 30th day after adoption, or on a later day provided in the ordinance. An ordinance may take effect as soon as adopted or other date less than 30 days after adoption if an emergency is declared to exist. (Approved by voters in general election held November 6, 2012)


CHAPTER V Administrative Authority


Section 21. Resolutions.

The council will normally exercise its administrative authority by approving resolutions. The approving clause for resolutions shall state “The City of St. Helens resolves as follows:”. (Approved by voters in general election held November 6, 2012)


Section 22. Resolution Approval.

(a) Approval of a resolution or any other council administrative decision requires approval of the council at one meeting.

(b) Any substantive amendment to a resolution must be read aloud or made available in writing to the public before the council adopts the resolution at that meeting.

(c) After approval of a resolution or other administrative decision, the vote of each member must be entered into the council minutes.

(d) After approval of a resolution, the city custodian of records must endorse it with the date of approval and the custodian’s name and title. (Approved by voters in general election held November 6, 2012)


Section 23. Effective Date of Resolutions.

Resolutions and other administrative decisions take effect on the date of approval, or on a later day provided in the resolution. (Approved by voters in general election held November 6, 2012)


CHAPTER VI Elections


Section 24. Councilors.

The term of a councilor in office when this charter is adopted is the term for which the councilor was elected. At each general election after the adoption, two councilors will be elected for four-year terms. (Approved by voters in general election held November 6, 2012)


Section 25. Mayor.

The term of the mayor in office when this charter is adopted continues until the beginning of the first odd-numbered year after adoption. At every general election after adoption, a mayor will be elected for a two-year term. (Approved by voters in general election held November 6, 2012)


Section 26. State Law.

City elections must conform to state law except as this charter or ordinances provide otherwise. All elections for city offices must be nonpartisan. (Approved by voters in general election held November 6, 2012)


Section 27. Qualifications.

(a) The mayor and each councilor must be a qualified elector under state law, and reside within the city for at least one year immediately before election or appointment to office.

(b) No person may be a candidate at a single election for more than one city office.

(c) Neither the mayor nor a councilor may be employed by the city.

(d) The council is the final judge of election and qualifications of its members. (Approved by voters in general election held November 6, 2012)


Section 28. Nominations.

The council may adopt an ordinance prescribing the manner for a person to be nominated to run for mayor or a city councilor position. If no ordinance is adopted, state election law applies. (Approved by voters in general election held November 6, 2012)


Section 29. Terms. 

The term of an officer elected at a general election begins at the first council meeting of the following year immediately after the election and continues until the successor qualifies and assumes the office. (Approved by voters in general election held November 6, 2012)


Section 30. Oath. 

The mayor and each councilor must swear or affirm to faithfully perform the duties of the office and support the constitutions and laws of the United States and Oregon. (Approved by voters in general election held November 6, 2012)


Section 31. Vacancies. 

The mayor or a council office becomes vacant:

(a) Upon the incumbent’s:

i. Death,

ii. Adjudicated incompetence, or

iii. Recall from the office.

(b) Upon declaration by the council after the incumbent’s:

i. Failure to qualify for the office within 10 days of the time the term of office is to begin,

ii. Absence from the city for 30 days without the mayor or council consent, or from all council meetings within a 60-day period,

iii. Ceasing to reside in the city,

iv. Ceasing to be a qualified elector under state law,

v. Conviction of a public offense punishable by loss of liberty,

vi. Resignation from the office. (Approved by voters in general election held November 6, 2012)


Section 32. Filling Vacancies.

(a) A vacancy in the position of mayor shall be assumed by the council president until the mayor’s term of office expires. Once the council president assumes the position of mayor, the council president’s council position shall be deemed vacant and the council shall elect a new council president.

(b) When a vacancy in the position of councilor occurs, the city council, at the next regularly scheduled council meeting, shall begin the process of filling the vacancy as follows:

i. If two years or more remain on the term of a council position when such position is declared vacant, the council may appoint, by majority vote of the remaining councilors and mayor, a qualified elector to serve until the next scheduled election that is at least sixty days after the appointment is made. Any qualified elector under this charter may make the proper nominating procedures as outlined in Section 28, Nominations, and seek election for the remaining term of the council position that was declared vacant at that scheduled election.

ii. If there is less than two years remaining in a council position declared vacant, the remaining councilors and mayor shall appoint a qualified elector to serve the remaining term of the vacant council position.

iii. In either case, if the council appoints a qualified elector to a vacant council position, the council shall hold a public meeting to interview potential candidates. The council may use whatever methods it determines are necessary to obtain qualified electors to serve on the council. (Approved by voters in general election held November 6, 2012)


CHAPTER VII Appointive Officers


Section 33. Other Officers.

The council has authority to appoint officers as they deem necessary. Each of these officers shall be appointed and may be removed by the mayor with the consent of the council. The council may combine any two or more appointive city offices. The council may designate any appointive officer to supervise any other appointive officer except the municipal judge in the exercise of his judicial functions. (Approved by voters in general election held November 6, 2012)


Section 34. City Attorney.

The office of city attorney is established as the chief legal officer of the city government. A majority of the council must appoint and may remove the attorney. The attorney must appoint, supervise and may remove any City Attorney office employees. (Approved by voters in general election held November 6, 2012)


Section 35. Municipal Court and Judge.

(a) Subject to any applicable municipal code, a majority of the council may appoint and remove a municipal judge. A municipal judge will hold court in the city at such place as the council directs. The court will be known as the St. Helens Municipal Court.

(b) All proceedings of this court will conform to the state laws governing municipal courts.

(c) All areas within the city and areas outside the city as permitted by state law are within the territorial jurisdiction of the court.

(d) The municipal court has original jurisdiction over every offense created by city ordinance. The court may enforce forfeitures and other penalties created by such ordinances. The court also has jurisdiction over state laws unless limited by city ordinances.

(e) The municipal judge may:

i. Render judgments and impose sanctions on persons and property;

ii. Order the arrest of anyone accused of an offense against the city;

iii. Commit to jail or admit to bail anyone accused of a city offense;

iv. Issue and compel obedience to subpoenas;

v. Compel witnesses to appear and testify and jurors to serve for trials before the court;

vi. Penalize contempt of court;

vii. Issue processes necessary to enforce judgments and orders of the court;

viii. Issue search warrants;

ix. Perform other judicial and quasi-judicial functions assigned by ordinances and/or state statutes;

x. When not governed by this charter or city ordinances, all proceedings in the municipal court for the violation of a city ordinance shall be governed by the applicable general laws of the state governing state courts.

xi. The municipal court judge shall have the jurisdiction and authority of a state court judge within the limits of the City of St. Helens, in both civil and criminal matters; and when exercising such jurisdiction and authority, shall be subject to all of the general laws of the state prescribing the duties of a judge and the mode of performing same.

(f) The council may appoint and may remove municipal court judges pro tem.

(g) The council may transfer some or all of the functions of the municipal court to an appropriate state court. (Approved by voters in general election held November 6, 2012)


CHAPTER VIII Personnel


Section 36. Compensation. 

The council must authorize the compensation of city elected and appointed officers and employees as part of its approval of the annual budget. (Approved by voters in general election held November 6, 2012)


Section 37. Merit Systems. 

The council by resolution will determine the rules governing recruitment, selection, promotion, transfer, demotion, suspension, layoff, and dismissal of city employees based on merit and fitness. (Approved by voters in general election held November 6, 2012)


CHAPTER IX Public Improvements


Section 38. Improvements.

The procedures for making, altering, vacating, or abandoning a public improvement shall be governed by general ordinance or the applicable general laws of the state. Action on any proposed public improvement, except a sidewalk or except an improvement unanimously declared by the council to be needed at once because of an emergency, shall be suspended for six months upon a remonstrance by two-thirds of the owners of real property to be specially assessed. In this section, “owner” shall mean the record holder of legal title, or, where land is being purchased under a land sales contract recorded or verified to the recorder in writing, the contract purchaser shall be deemed the “owner.” (Approved by voters in general election held November 6, 2012)


Section 39. Special Assessments.

The procedure for levying, collecting, and enforcing special assessments for public improvements or other services to be charged against real property will be governed by ordinance. (Approved by voters in general election held November 6, 2012)


CHAPTER X Environmental and Health Provisions


Section 40. Garbage Burners.

It is prohibited in the City of St. Helens to construct or operate an incinerator that burns garbage within three miles of a public school, hospital or retirement home. (Approved by voters in general election held November 6, 2012)


CHAPTER XI Miscellaneous Provisions


Section 41. Debt.

City indebtedness may not exceed debt limits imposed by state law. A charter amendment is not required to authorize city indebtedness. (Approved by voters in general election held November 6, 2012)


Section 42. Ordinance Continuation.

All ordinances consistent with this charter in force when it takes effect remain in effect until amended or repealed. (Approved by voters in general election held November 6, 2012)


Section 43. Repeal.

All charter provisions adopted before this charter takes effect are hereby repealed. (Approved by voters in general election held November 6, 2012)


Section 44. Severability.

The terms of this charter are severable. If any provision is held invalid by a court, the invalidity does not affect any other part of the charter. (Approved by voters in general election held November 6, 2012)


Section 45. Time of Effect.

This charter shall take effect January 1, 2013. (Approved by voters in general election held November 6, 2012)


Section 46. Keeping Groceries Tax Free In St. Helens.

(a) The City of St. Helens or any political subdivision or public corporation created by the City of St. Helens may not adopt, collect, enact, or impose a tax, fee, or other assessment upon the sale of groceries or for the privilege of selling groceries.

DEFINITIONS

(b) As used in this section:

(i) “Groceries” means any raw or processed food or beverage intended for human consumption except alcoholic beverages, marijuana products, and tobacco products.

(ii) “Sale of groceries” means any transaction for the sale or purchase of groceries with any individual or entity that:

(A) Is licensed, registered, or inspected under the Food Safety Modernization Act, U.S. Food and Drug Administration, U.S. Department of Agriculture Federal Grain Inspection Service, or any successor agency or program that provides for the safety of groceries; or

(B) Is licensed and inspected by the State Department of Agriculture’s Food Safety Program or Commodity Inspection Program or any successor agency or program that provides for the safety of groceries; or

(C) Operates as a farm stand, farmers market, or food bank.

(D) Is appointed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission under ORS 471.750.

(iii) “Tax, fee, or other assessment” includes, but is not limited to, a sales tax, gross receipts tax, commercial activity tax, value-added tax, excise tax, privilege tax, and any other similar tax on the sale of groceries.

(iv) “Alcoholic beverage” means any liquid or solid containing more than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume and capable of being consumed by a human being.

(v) “Marijuana product” means a product made from any part of the plant Cannabis family Cannabaceae or the seeds of the plant Cannabis family Cannabaceae.

(vi) “Tobacco products” means cigars, cigarettes, cheroots, stogies, periques, granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed, and other smoking tobacco, snuff, snuff flour, moist snuff, cavendish, plug and twist tobacco, fine-cut and other chewing tobaccos, shorts, refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings and sweepings of tobacco, and other kinds and forms of tobacco, prepared in such manner as to be suitable for chewing or smoking in a pipe or otherwise, or both for chewing and smoking.

IMPLEMENTATION

(c) The prohibition on the imposition and collection of a tax, fee, or other assessment on the sale of groceries by subsection (a) of this section applies to taxes adopted, approved, collected, or imposed on or after September 1, 2017.

(d) It is the intent of the people that all parts of this amendment are independent and that if any part of this amendment is held unconstitutional, all remaining parts shall remain in force. (Approved by voters in primary election held May 15, 2018)


Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Chapters:

1.01    Code Adoption

1.04    General Provisions

1.06    Code Enforcement Procedures


Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION

Sections:

1.01.010    Title.

1.01.020    Reservation of prosecutions.

1.01.030    Acceptance.

1.01.040    Amendments.

1.01.050    Jurisdiction.

1.01.060    Copies on file.

1.01.070    Ordinances passed prior to code adoption.

1.01.080    Severability.

1.01.090    Editing the code.


1.01.010 Title.

The St. Helens Municipal Code is hereby adopted as the official city code of the city of St. Helens. The code shall be cited as the “St. Helens Municipal Code.” It consists of the ordinances of the city that have ongoing effect and which have not expired according to their terms. The St. Helens Municipal Code is published under general authority of the city council and shall be maintained as provided in this chapter by the city recorder. (Ord. 3037 § 1, 2007)


1.01.020 Reservation of prosecutions.

The adoption of this code shall not affect any prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date of the adoption of the municipal code, nor shall the adoption of the municipal code be construed as a waiver of any license, fee, or penalty due and owing at the effective date of the code adoption, nor shall adoption affect the validity of any bond or cash deposited with the city pursuant to the terms of any ordinance, upon its codification; but rather, all rights and obligations pertaining under ordinances in effect prior to codification shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 3037 § 1, 2007)


1.01.030 Acceptance.

The St. Helens code shall be received without further proof in all courts and administrative tribunals of the city of St. Helens and the state of Oregon as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect. (Ord. 3037 § 1, 2007)


1.01.040 Amendments.

Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and section number of the section or sections amended. The code will be updated at least annually by insertion of replacement pages in each copy maintained by the city. (Ord. 3037 § 1, 2007)


1.01.050 Jurisdiction.

Unless otherwise provided in this code, the code applies to acts performed within the corporate limits of the city of St. Helens. Provisions of the code also apply to acts performed outside the corporate limits of the city where state or other law grants the city power to regulate particular acts outside the corporate limits. (Ord. 3037 § 1, 2007)


1.01.060 Copies on file.

Copies of this code will be maintained in all city departments, and copies available for public inspection will be maintained at the St. Helens Public Library and office of the city administrator in City Hall. (Ord. 3037 § 1, 2007)


1.01.070 Ordinances passed prior to code adoption.

The last ordinance included in the original code is Ordinance No. 3030 passed February 7, 2007. The following ordinances, passed subsequent to Ordinance No. 3030 but prior to adoption of this code, are adopted and made part of this code: Ordinance Nos. 3031 and 3035. (Ord. 3037 § 1, 2007)


1.01.080 Severability.

If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. (Ord. 3037 § 1, 2007)


1.01.090 Editing the code.

In preparing adopted ordinances for codification and distribution, the city recorder shall not alter the sense, meaning, effect or substance of any ordinance, but, with such limitations, may correct manifest clerical or typographical errors. (Ord. 3037 § 1, 2007)


Chapter 1.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:

1.04.010    Definitions.

1.04.020    Title of office.

1.04.030    Interpretation of language.

1.04.040    Grammatical interpretation.

1.04.050    Acts by agents.

1.04.060    Prohibited acts include causing and permitting.

1.04.070    Computation of time.

1.04.080    Construction.

1.04.090    Repeal shall not revive any ordinances.


1.04.010 Definitions.

The following words and phrases, whenever used in the ordinances of the city, shall be construed as defined in this section unless from the context a different meaning is intended or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words and phrases:

(1) “City” and “town” each mean the city of St. Helens, Oregon, or the area within the territorial limits of the city, and such territory outside St. Helens over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provisions.

(2) “Council” means the city council of the city. “All its members” or “all councilors” means the total number of councilors holding office.

(3) “County” means the county of Columbia.

(4) “Day” means a calendar day.

(5) “Law” denotes applicable federal law, the Constitution and statutes of the state of Oregon, the ordinances of the city of St. Helens, and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder.

(6) “May” is permissive.

(7) “Month” means a calendar month.

(8) “Must” and “shall” are each mandatory.

(9) “Oath” includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the words “affirm” and “affirmed.”

(10) “Owner,” applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenants, or tenant by the entirety of the whole or a part of such building or land.

(11) “Person” includes a natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them.

(12) “Personal property” includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt.

(13) “Preceding” and “following” means next before and next after, respectively.

(14) “Property” means and includes real and personal property.

(15) “Real property” includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.

(16) “Sidewalk” means that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.

(17) “State” means the state of Oregon.

(18) “Street” means a public or private way that is created to provide ingress or egress for vehicles to one or more lots, parcels, areas, or tracts of land, and includes the terms “road,” “highway,” “lane,” “avenue,” “alley,” “place,” “court,” “way,” “circle,” “drive,” “parkway,” or other designations.

(19) “Tenant” and “occupant,” applied to a building or land, include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.

(20) “Written” means and includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed, multigraphed, or otherwise reproduced in permanent visible form.

(21) “Year” means a calendar year. (Ord. 3145 § 1, 2011; Ord. 3037 § 2, 2007)


1.04.020 Title of office.

Use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the city. (Ord. 3037 § 2, 2007)


1.04.030 Interpretation of language.

All words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. (Ord. 3037 § 2, 2007)


1.04.040 Grammatical interpretation.

The following grammatical rules shall apply in the ordinances of the city, unless it is apparent from the context that a different construction is intended:

(1) Gender. Each gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter genders.

(2) Singular and Plural. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular.

(3) Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and the future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. (Ord. 3037 § 2, 2007)


1.04.050 Acts by agents.

When an act is required by an ordinance, the same being such that it may be done as well as by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent. (Ord. 3037 § 2, 2007)


1.04.060 Prohibited acts include causing and permitting.

Whenever in the ordinances of the city any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission. (Ord. 3037 § 2, 2007)


1.04.070 Computation of time.

Except when otherwise provided, the time within which an act is required to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, in which case it shall also be excluded, in which event the period runs until the end of the next day which is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. (Ord. 3037 § 2, 2007)


1.04.080 Construction.

The provisions of the ordinances of the city and all proceedings under them are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote justice. (Ord. 3037 § 2, 2007)


1.04.090 Repeal shall not revive any ordinances.

The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. (Ord. 3037 § 2, 2007)


Chapter 1.06 CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES

Sections:

1.06.010    Title.

1.06.020    Purpose.

1.06.030    Definitions.

1.06.040    Remedial action by city – Costs.

1.06.050    Warning methods.

1.06.060    Uniform violation summons and citation – Service – Failure to receive – Default.

1.06.070    Use of citation.

1.06.080    Contents.

1.06.090    Summons issuance – Required information.

1.06.100    Alleged violation – Required information.

1.06.110    Appearance of defendant in court.

1.06.120    Hearing request or waiver – Payment of bail.

1.06.130    Civil penalty – General penalty – Assessment of fees.

1.06.140    Default judgment.

1.06.150    Enforcement – Rules and regulations.

1.06.160    Failure to comply – Failure to appear – Penalty.

1.06.170    Lien filing and docketing, collection.


1.06.010 Title.

The provisions of this chapter may be cited as the St. Helens “short-form complaint and citation and code enforcement procedure code.” (Ord. 3037 § 3, 2007)


1.06.020 Purpose.

(1) This chapter authorizes the use of a short-form uniform complaint and citation in certain cases by certain city employees and describes the content of the form.

(2) This chapter describes the procedures for use of complainant, court or defendant.

(3) The procedures prescribed by this chapter are not the exclusive procedures for imposing civil penalties. This section shall not be read to prohibit in any way alternative remedies set out in the St. Helens Municipal Code which are intended to abate or alleviate code violations, nor shall the city be prevented from recovering, in any manner prescribed by law, any expense incurred by it in abating or removing ordinance violations pursuant to any code provision. The penalties and civil remedies for violations of this chapter shall be in addition to, not in lieu of, other penalties or remedies established by city ordinance or state or federal law. (Ord. 3037 § 3, 2007)


1.06.030 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

(1) “Code enforcement officer” means any individual or individuals specifically authorized by the city administrator to issue citations for the commission of violations, as specified at SHMC 1.06.070.

(2) “Defendant” means a person charged with a code violation.

(3) “Violation” means a violation of the provisions of the St. Helens Municipal Code and the St. Helens Community Development Code. (Ord. 3037 § 3, 2007)


1.06.040 Remedial action by city – Costs.

(1) In the event that there is an imminent danger to the public health, safety or welfare caused by a violation, the city may, without notice, remedy the violation and charge the remedial costs back to the defendant.

(2) The code enforcement officer shall have the right at reasonable times to enter into or upon property in accordance with law to investigate or to remedy the violation.

(3) The finance director shall keep an accurate record of the costs incurred by the city in remedying the violation. The finance director shall notify the defendant by certified mail, return receipt requested, of these costs and advise the defendant that the costs will be assessed to and become a lien against the defendant’s property, if not paid within 30 days of the notice, and shall further notify the defendant that the defendant is entitled to a hearing to contest the amount of the costs to be assessed.

(4) The defendant shall be entitled to request that the code enforcement officer schedule a hearing to consider the amount of the costs assessed to remedy the alleged violation. That hearing shall be conducted pursuant to the procedures established in SHMC 1.06.110 through 1.06.160.

(5) If the remedial costs are not paid, the finance director shall follow the procedures set forth for lien filing and docketing as contained in SHMC 1.06.170. (Ord. 3037 § 3, 2007)


1.06.050 Warning methods.

(1) A warning of the alleged violation may be given to the defendant in person by the code enforcement officer.

(2) Warning of the alleged violation may be by a telephone call to the defendant. If a warning is given in this manner, the defendant shall also be provided with a warning of violation by first class mail sent to his last known address as soon as possible after the initial notice by telephone.

(3) A warning of the alleged violation may be given by mailing to the defendant at his last known address a warning of violation by registered mail, return receipt requested. 

(4) Nothing in this section shall be construed to require a warning notice be given to any defendant prior to issuing a citation or taking any other enforcement or abatement procedure. (Ord. 3037 § 3, 2007)


1.06.060 Uniform violation summons and citation – Service – Failure to receive – Default.

(1) Service of the uniform summons and citation may be by personal service on the defendant or an agent of the defendant authorized to receive process; by substitute service at the defendant’s dwelling or office; or by registered mail, return receipt requested, to the defendant at his last known address. In the event of substitute service at the defendant’s dwelling, the person served must be at least 14 years of age and residing in the defendant’s place of abode. Service at the defendant’s office must be made during regular business hours to the person who is apparently in charge. If substitute service is used, a true copy of the summons and complaint, together with a statement of the date, time and place at which service was made, must be mailed to the defendant at the defendant’s last known address. Service will be considered complete upon such a mailing. Service by any other method reasonably calculated, under all the circumstances, to apprise the defendant of the existence and pendency of the violation and to afford a reasonable opportunity to respond shall be acceptable.

(2) Service on particular defendants, such as minors, incapacitated persons, corporations, limited partnerships, the state of Oregon, other public bodies and general partnerships, shall be the same as prescribed for the service of a civil summons and complaint by the Oregon Rules of Civil Procedure.

(3) No default shall be entered against any defendant without proof that the defendant had notice of the uniform violation summons and complaint. Either a sworn affidavit of the code enforcement officer outlining the method of service, including the date, time and place of service, a return receipt of registered mailing which indicates delivery of the summons and complaint to defendant’s last known address, or a registered letter returned as “unclaimed” which indicates attempt of the same, shall create a rebuttable presumption that the defendant had such notice. (Ord. 3037 § 3, 2007)


1.06.070 Use of citation.

A citation conforming to the requirements of this chapter may be used by code enforcement officers to initiate enforcement action for violations of city ordinances. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the use of a complaint charging a violation of ordinance in a form or manner otherwise prescribed by law for criminal complaints; further, as provided by law, two or more persons may be charged jointly on such a complaint.

Further, nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the filing of a complaint complying in all other respects with the provisions of this chapter and charging a violation of city code occurring in the presence of a citizen. (Ord. 3037 § 3, 2007)


1.06.080 Contents.

(1) Citation used may consist of at least three parts: the complaint, the record and the summons. Additional parts may be inserted for administrative purposes by departments charged with the enforcement of the ordinances. The form may contain the following information or may be blank when such information is not readily available to the code enforcement officer:

(a) The name of the court and the court’s docket or file number;

(b) The name of the person or persons cited;

(c) The offense charged, the time and place, the date on which the citation was issued, the name of the complainant, and, in the case of zoning violations, the designation of the zone in which the violation occurred;

(d) The hour and date when the person cited is to appear in court;

(e) The bail, if any, fixed for the offense.

(2) The form may also contain such identifying and additional information as may be necessary or appropriate for administrative departments of the city. In the case of an appropriate violation, it may include an indication of whether a written warning was previously issued to the defendant for the same violation if it is a continuing one.

(3) The complaint shall contain a form of verification by the complainant to the effect that the complainant swears or affirms that he/she has reasonable grounds to believe, and does believe, that the person named committed the offense contrary to ordinance. (Ord. 3037 § 3, 2007)


1.06.090 Summons issuance – Required information.

A summons issued pursuant to this chapter is sufficient if it contains the following information:

(1) The name of the court, the name of the person or persons cited, the date on which the citation was issued, the name of the complainant, the time at which the person cited is to appear in court;

(2) A statement or designation of the offense in such manner as can be readily understood by a person making a reasonable effort to do so and the date and place of offense alleged to have occurred;

(3) The amount of bail, if any, fixed for the offense. (Ord. 3037 § 3, 2007)


1.06.100 Alleged violation – Required information.

A complaint of an alleged violation or an offense under this chapter is sufficient if it contains the following:

(1) The name of the court, the name of the city in whose name action is brought and the name of the defendant or defendants;

(2) A statement or designation of offense in such manner as can be readily understood by a person making a reasonable effort to do so and the date and a place of the alleged offense. (Ord. 3037 § 3, 2007)


1.06.110 Appearance of defendant in court.

The defendant shall either appear in court at the time indicated in the summons, or, prior to such time, deliver to the court the summons, together with the bail amount set forth in the summons, enclosing therewith a request for a hearing, or statement of matters and explanation or mitigation of the offense, or an executed appearance, waiver of hearing, and plea of “guilty” appearing on the summons. (Ord. 3037 § 3, 2007)


1.06.120 Hearing request or waiver – Payment of bail.

(1) If the defendant has submitted to the court a written statement with his bail, as provided in this chapter, it constitutes a waiver of hearing and a consent to judgment by court declaring a forfeiture of bail on the basis of such statement and any testimony or written statement of the arresting officer, or other witness, or city employee, as provided in this chapter, which may be presented to the court. If the defendant requests a hearing, or, if the court directs that hearing be had, the court shall fix the date and time of the hearing and, unless notice is waived, mail to the defendant notice of the date and time so set at least five days prior to the trial date.

(2) In any case, the court may direct that a hearing be held; otherwise, the court may enter the appropriate judgment, impose a fine, direct that the fine be paid out of the bail deposited by the defendant, and remit to the defendant any amount by which the bail exceeds the fine. No fine may be imposed in excess of the bail deposited by the defendant, unless a hearing is held. (Ord. 3037 § 3, 2007)


1.06.130 Civil penalty – General penalty – Assessment of fees.

(1) Upon a finding that the violation was committed by the defendant, the court:

(a) Shall assess a penalty pursuant to the applicable code penalty section;

(b) May assess hearing costs and witness fees, if any;

(c) Shall order the defendant to abate the code violation; and

(d) May order the defendant to appear at a subsequent hearing for the presentation of evidence of abatement.

(2) Any person adjudged to have violated any of the provisions or to have failed to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of any ordinance of the city, except in cases where a different punishment is prescribed by any ordinance of the city, shall pay a penalty of not less than $150.00 nor more than $500.00, unless superseded by state law.

(3) Each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of an ordinance is committed, continued or permitted by any person shall constitute a separate violation.

(4) The penalty or fine for a third or any subsequent separate judgment of violation of the same offense by the same person shall be no less than $1,000, unless superseded by state law.

(5) Any penalty and costs assessed shall be paid no later than 30 days after the final order. Such period may be extended upon order of the court.

(6) Any penalty and costs assessed shall be a judgment against defendant in favor of the city. (Ord. 3037 § 3, 2007)


1.06.140 Default judgment.

Subject to the limitations set forth in SHMC 1.06.060(3), a default judgment shall be entered for the maximum civil penalty applicable to the charged violation if the defendant fails to appear at the scheduled hearing. If the defendant fails to appear for the hearing, any security fees posted shall be forfeited to the city. (Ord. 3037 § 3, 2007)


1.06.150 Enforcement – Rules and regulations.

The municipal court judge is authorized to promulgate any procedural rules he/she considers necessary to enforce this chapter and to punish for contempt of court. (Ord. 3037 § 3, 2007)


1.06.160 Failure to comply – Failure to appear – Penalty.

(1) The failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter constitutes a violation.

(2) If any person knowingly fails to comply with an order of the court, the person is in contempt of court.

(3) If any person knowingly fails to appear before the municipal court pursuant to a citation issued and served under authority of this chapter or pursuant to an order of the court, the person is in contempt of court.

(4) Contempt of court shall be punishable in the same manner prescribed by law for the circuit courts of this state, and all relevant provisions of ORS 33.015 through 33.155 are incorporated herein by this reference. (Ord. 3037 § 3, 2007)


1.06.170 Lien filing and docketing, collection.

(1) When a judgment is rendered by the municipal court judge in favor of the city for the sum of $10.00 or more, exclusive of costs and disbursements, the code enforcement officer shall, at any time thereafter while the judgment is enforceable, file with the finance director a certified transcript of all those entries made in the docket of the hearings officer with respect to the action in which the judgment was entered.

(2) Upon receipt of this transcript, the finance director shall enter the judgment of the hearings officer on the city’s lien docket.

(3) From the time of entry of the judgment on the city’s lien docket, the judgment shall be a lien upon the real property of the person against whom the judgment was entered in the trial. Except as provided in subsection (4) of this section, entry of the judgment in the city’s lien docket shall not thereby extend the lien of the judgment more than 10 years from the original entry of the judgment at the hearing.

(4) Whenever a judgment of the municipal court judge which has been entered pursuant to this subsection is renewed by the judge, the lien established by subsection (3) of this section is automatically extended 10 years from the date of the renewal order.

(5) The finance director shall file the transcript of the judgment with the Columbia County clerk for entry in the judgment docket of the circuit court. All costs associated with the filing of the transcript shall be added to the amount of the judgment.

(6) Judgments may, in addition to any other method, be collected or enforced pursuant to ORS 30.310. (Ord. 3037 § 3, 2007)


Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL

Chapters:

2.04    Public Contracting Code

2.08    Planning Commission

2.12    City Administrator

2.16    Repealed

2.18    Municipal Court

2.20    Municipal Judges

2.24    Juries and Jury Trials

2.28    City Library and Library Board

2.32    Nominating Procedures for City Officers

2.36    Arts and Cultural Commission

2.40    Signing of Checks and Warrants

2.44    Records Retention and Disposal

2.48    Emergency Operations

2.52    Repealed

2.56    Repealed

2.60    Repealed

2.64    Repealed

2.68    Urban Renewal Agency

2.70    Youth Council

2.72    Criminal History Record Check Policies

2.74    Parks and Trails Commission


Chapter 2.04 PUBLIC CONTRACTING CODE*

Sections:

2.04.010    Short title.

2.04.020    Purpose.

2.04.030    St. Helens public contracting code.

2.04.040    Interpretation of public contracting code.

2.04.050    Code not applicable to the following public contracts.

2.04.060    Model Rules.

2.04.070    Local contract review board.

2.04.080    Contracting agency.

2.04.090    Delegation of authority to city administrator.

2.04.100    Public contracts – Additional definitions.

2.04.110    Public contracts – Process for approval of special solicitation methods and exemptions.

2.04.120    Approved solicitation methods for classes of contracts.

2.04.130    Public contracts – Informal solicitation procedures.

2.04.140    Public contracts – Use of brand name specifications for public improvements.

2.04.150    Public contracts – Bid, performance and payment bonds.

2.04.160    Public contracts – Electronic advertisement of public improvement contracts.

2.04.170    Appeal of debarment or prequalification decision.

*    Prior legislation: Ords. 2113, 2471 and 2821.


2.04.010 Short title.

The provisions of this chapter and all rules adopted under this chapter may be cited as the St. Helens public contracting code. (Ord. 2942 § 3, 2005)


2.04.020 Purpose.

The purpose of the St. Helens public contracting code is to utilize public contracting practices and methods that maximize the efficient use of public resources and the purchasing power of public funds by:

(1) Promoting impartial and open competition;

(2) Using solicitation materials that are complete and contain a clear statement of contract specifications and requirements; and

(3) Taking full advantage of evolving procurement methods that suit the contracting needs of the city as they emerge within various industries. (Ord. 2942 § 4, 2005)


2.04.030 St. Helens public contracting code.

The following rules are adopted as the city’s public contracting rules. As provided by ORS 279A.065(5)(a), the Model Rules adopted by the Attorney General under ORS Chapters 279A, 279B, and 279C (“the Model Rules”) do not apply, unless otherwise provided for herein or as adopted by ordinance or resolution by the city of St. Helens local contract review board. (Ord. 2942 § 5, 2005)


2.04.040 Interpretation of public contracting code.

In furtherance of the purpose of the objectives set forth herein, it is the intent of the city of St. Helens that the St. Helens public contracting code be interpreted to authorize the full use of all contracting powers and authorities described in ORS Chapters 279A, 279B and 279C. (Ord. 2942 § 6, 2005)


2.04.050 Code not applicable to the following public contracts.

In accordance with ORS 279A.025, the St. Helens public contracting code and the Oregon Public Contracting Code do not apply to the following classes of contracts:

(1) Agreements between Governments. Intergovernmental agreements and contracts between the city of St. Helens and a public body or agency of the state of Oregon or its political subdivisions, or between the city of St. Helens and an agency of the federal government.

(2) Grants. Except as provided below for public improvements and public works, a grant contract is an agreement under which the city of St. Helens is either a grantee or a grantor of moneys, property or other assistance, including loans, loan guarantees, credit enhancements, gifts, bequests, commodities or other assets, for the purpose of supporting or stimulating a program or activity of the grantee and in which no substantial involvement by the grantor is anticipated in the program or activity other than involvement associated with monitoring compliance with the grant conditions. While the making or receiving of a grant is not a public contract subject to the Oregon Public Contracting Code, any grant made by the city of St. Helens for the purpose of constructing a public improvement or public works project shall impose conditions on the grantee that ensure that expenditures of the grant to design or construct the public improvement or public works project are made in accordance with the Oregon Public Contracting Code and this code.

(3) Legal Witnesses and Consultants. Contracts for professional or expert witnesses or consultants to provide services or testimony relating to existing or potential litigation or legal matters in which the city of St. Helens is or may become interested.

(4) Real Property. Acquisitions or disposals of real property or interests in real property.

(5) Textbooks. Contracts for the procurement or distribution of textbooks.

(6) Oregon Corrections Enterprises. Procurements from an Oregon corrections enterprises program.

(7) Finance. Contracts, agreements or other documents entered into, issued or established in connection with:

(a) The incurring of debt by the city of St. Helens, including any associated contracts, agreements or other documents, regardless of whether the obligations that the contracts, agreements or other documents establish are general, special or limited;

(b) The making of program loans and similar extensions or advances of funds, aid or assistance by the city of St. Helens to a public or private person for the purpose of carrying out, promoting or sustaining activities or programs authorized by law, other than for the construction of public works or public improvements;

(c) The investment of funds by the city of St. Helens as authorized by law; or

(d) Banking, money management or other predominantly financial transactions of the city of St. Helens that, by their character, cannot practically be established under the competitive contractor selection procedures, based upon the findings of the finance director.

(8) Employee Benefits. Contracts for employee benefit plans as provided in ORS 243.105(1), 243.125(4), 243.221, 243.275, 243.291, 243.303 and 243.565.

(9) Exempt Under State Laws. Any other public contracting specifically exempted from the Oregon Public Contracting Code by another provision of law.

(10) Federal Law. Except as otherwise expressly provided in ORS 279C.800 through 279C.870, applicable federal statutes and regulations govern when federal funds are involved and the federal statutes or regulations conflict with any provision of the Oregon Public Contracting Code or this code, or require additional conditions in public contracts not authorized by the Oregon Public Contracting Code or this code. (Ord. 2942 § 7, 2005)


2.04.060 Model Rules.

Except as specifically provided herein, or by subsequent ordinance or resolution, the Model Rules, Divisions 46, 47, and 49, adopted by the Attorney General under ORS Chapters 279A, 279B, and 279C, as they now exist, and as they may be amended in the future, and in the adopted ordinances of the city of St. Helens, are hereby adopted as the city of St. Helens public contracting rules. Words and phrases used in these rules that are defined in ORS Chapter 279A, 279B or 279C and in the Model Rules shall have the same meaning as in those statutes and rules. In the event that the rules adopted by the local contract review board do not address a particular situation, the Model Rules apply. (Ord. 2942 § 8, 2005)


2.04.070 Local contract review board.

The city council of the city of St. Helens is designated as the local contract review board under the state of Oregon Public Contracting Code and this code. No special procedure shall be necessary for the city council, otherwise meeting properly at any regular or special meeting for the transaction of city business, to exercise the powers of the local contract review board. Except as expressly delegated under these regulations, the city council of the city of St. Helens reserves to itself the exercise of all of the duties and authority of a local contract review board under state and local law, including, but not limited to, the power and authority to:

(1) Solicitation Methods Applicable to Contracts. Approve the use of contracting methods and exemptions from contracting methods for a specific contract or certain classes of contracts.

(2) Brand Name Specifications. Exempt the use of brand name specifications for public improvement contracts.

(3) Waiver of Performance and Payment Bonds. Approve the partial or complete waiver of the requirement for the delivery of a performance or payment bond for construction of a public improvement, other than in cases of emergencies.

(4) Electronic Advertisement of Public Improvement Contracts. Authorize the use of electronic advertisements for public improvement contracts in lieu of publication in a newspaper of general circulation.

(5) Appeals of Debarment and Prequalification Decisions. Hear properly filed appeals of the city administrator’s determination of debarment or concerning prequalification. 

(6) Rulemaking. Adopt contracting rules under ORS 279A.065 and 279A.070 including, without limitation, rules for the procurement, management, disposal and control of goods, services, personal services, and public improvements.

(7) Award. Award all contracts.

(8) Delegation. Delegate to any employee or agent of the city of St. Helens any of the duties or authority of a contracting agency. (Ord. 2942 § 9, 2005)


2.04.080 Contracting agency.

The city council of the city of St. Helens is designated as the contracting agency under the state of Oregon Public Contracting Code and this code. Except as expressly delegated under these regulations, the city council of the city of St. Helens reserves to itself the exercise of all of the duties and authority of a contracting agency under state and local law. The contracting agency may, from time to time, delegate its powers and responsibilities by board order, resolution or ordinance consistent with the Oregon Public Contracting Code, the Model Rules, and ordinances of the city of St. Helens. (Ord. 2942 § 10, 2005)


2.04.090 Delegation of authority to city administrator.

(1) General Authority. The city administrator shall be the purchasing manager for the city of St. Helens and is hereby authorized to issue all solicitations and to award all city of St. Helens contracts for which the contract price does not exceed $75,000. Subject to the provisions of this chapter, the city administrator may adopt and amend all solicitation materials, contracts and forms required or permitted to be adopted by contracting agencies under the Oregon Public Contracting Code, this code or otherwise convenient for the city of St. Helens’s contracting needs. The city administrator shall hear all solicitation and award protests.

(2) Solicitation Preferences. When possible, the city administrator shall use solicitation documents and evaluation criteria that:

(a) Give preference to goods that are fabricated or processed, or services that are performed entirely within the state of Oregon if the cost of the goods or services does not exceed 110 percent of the cost of the goods or services not fabricated or processed or performed entirely within the state of Oregon and, if more than one bidder or proposer qualifies for this preference, the city may give an additional five percent preference to a qualifying bidder or proposer that resides in or is headquartered in the state of Oregon; and

(b) Give preference to goods that are certified to be made from recycled products when such goods are available, can be substituted for nonrecycled products without a loss in quality, and the cost of goods made from recycled products is not significantly more than the cost of goods made from nonrecycled products.

(3) Delegation of City Administrator’s Authority. The following delegations are authorized and approved by the contracting agency:

(a) Any of the responsibilities or authorities of the city administrator under this chapter may be delegated and subdelegated by written directive or order.

(b) Without such order, the city finance director, in the absence of the city administrator, shall serve as purchasing manager with all the powers, responsibilities and authorities of the administrator. 

(c) Without such order, the city engineering manager, in the absence of the city administrator, shall serve as purchasing manager with all the powers, responsibilities and authorities of the administrator, as regards public improvements and public works contracts. 

(d) Without such order, the following city department heads are delegated contract and purchasing authority, up to $5,000: city attorney, finance director, engineering administrator, chief of police, planning administrator, building official, library director, and wastewater treatment superintendent. Amounts between $5,000 and $25,000 require approval of the designated department councilor.

(e) Without such order, each city department head is authorized to delegate contract and purchasing authority to another employee serving as “acting” in capacity in the department head’s absence. 

(f) Without such order, city department heads may enter into contracts authorized under the city ordinances or by the appropriate approval authority (e.g., planning commission) when such contracts do not expend city funds, on behalf of their respective departments and the city, provided the contract contains the concurrence and signatures of the city administrator and city attorney and provided the department head provides notice of such contract by placing it on the council’s agenda for acceptance at the next available city council meeting. 

(g) Without such order, the city attorney together with any applicable city department head may enter into compliance agreements and/or settlement agreements (e.g., nuisance abatement compliance agreements) in avoidance of administrative proceedings or litigation, when such agreements do not exceed $25,000, on behalf of their respective departments and the city, provided the agreement contains the concurrence and signatures of the department head, city administrator and city attorney and provided the department head provides notice of such agreement by placing it on the council’s agenda for acceptance at the next available city council meeting. 

(h) Without such order the city finance director or his/her designee, with the concurrence of the city administrator and the applicable department head, are authorized to pay any bills not to exceed $10,000 without action of the full city council provided the finance director provides notice of all such bills by placing them on the council’s agenda for acceptance at the next available city council meeting. 

(i) The following safeguards and requirements set forth below for contracts, purchases, payments, and approval of exemptions shall be observed by the city purchasing manager and all department heads: 

(i) Whenever a contract officer is authorized to contract or purchase, the contract officer’s authority is expressly contingent on documented compliance with public contracting regulations adopted by the city. Every contract officer is specifically authorized and required to take such actions and grant such orders and exemptions, with supporting documentation, as are necessary to achieve strict compliance with city contracting laws and procedures.

(ii) With approval of the designated department councilor, department heads are authorized to enter into contracts and make purchases and approve contract exemptions between $5,000 and not to exceed $25,000 in public funds, provided the contract or purchase is authorized in the current city budget, and available funds are verified by the signature of either the finance director or city administrator on the contract/purchase order and the exemption order. Said contract or purchase must be made on contract forms and exemption forms approved and executed by the city attorney. 

(iii) Contracts and purchases not to exceed $5,000 may be executed or made by the city department head, and no exemption record is required to be made; provided, however, the department head shall verify available budgeted funds. The city attorney’s signature is not required if standard contract forms are used. The city administrator or city finance director’s signatures are not required to verify budgeted funds. Department heads are solely responsible to keep track of such purchases and contracts and are encouraged to make a record of such purchases consistent with city policy for larger contracts. 

(iv) Notwithstanding the delegation in this chapter, department heads are encouraged to keep their city council liaison informally advised of the substance of any contract or purchase. The city council, acting at a regular or special meeting, reserves to itself the power and authority to approve any contract, purchase, exemption order or authorize payment. 

(4) Mandatory Review of Rules. Whenever the Oregon State Legislative Assembly enacts laws that cause the Attorney General to modify its Model Rules, the city administrator shall review the public contracting regulations, other than the Model Rules, and recommend to the city council of the city of St. Helens any modifications required to ensure compliance with statutory changes. (Ord. 3158 § 1, 2012; Ord. 3066 §§ 1, 2, 2007; Ord. 2942 § 11, 2005)


2.04.100 Public contracts – Additional definitions.

The following terms used in these regulations shall have the meanings set forth below:

“Award” means the selection of a person to provide goods, services or public improvements under a public contract. The award of a contract is not binding on the city of St. Helens until the contract is executed and delivered by city of St. Helens.

“Bid” means a binding, sealed, written offer to provide goods, services or public improvements for a specified price or prices.

“Concession agreement” means a contract that authorizes and requires a private entity or individual to promote or sell, for its own business purposes, specified types of goods or services from real property owned or managed by the city of St. Helens, and under which the concessionaire makes payments to the city of St. Helens based, at least in part, on the concessionaire’s revenues or sales. The term “concession agreement” does not include a mere rental agreement, license or lease for the use of premises.

“Contract price” means the total amount paid or to be paid under a contract, including any approved alternates, and any fully executed change orders or amendments.

“Contract review board” or “local contract review board” means the city council of the city of St. Helens.

“Cooperative procurement” means a procurement conducted by or on behalf of one or more contracting agencies.

“Debarment” means a declaration by the city council or city administrator under ORS 279B.130 or 279C.440 that prohibits a potential contractor from competing for the city of St. Helens public contracts for a prescribed period of time.

“Disposal” means any arrangement for the transfer of property by the city of St. Helens under which the city of St. Helens relinquishes ownership.

“Emergency” means circumstances that create a substantial risk of loss, damage or interruption of services or a substantial threat to property, public health, welfare or safety; and require prompt execution of a contract to remedy the condition.

“Energy savings performance contract” means a contract with a qualified energy service company for the identification, evaluation, recommendation, design and construction of energy conservation measures that guarantee energy savings or performance. 

“Findings” are the statements of fact that provide justification for a determination. Findings may include, but are not limited to, information regarding operation, budget and financial data; public benefits; cost savings; competition in public contracts; quality and aesthetic considerations; value engineering; specialized expertise needed; public safety; market conditions; technical complexity; availability; performance and funding sources.

“Goods” means any item or combination of supplies, equipment, materials or other personal property, including any tangible, intangible and intellectual property and rights and licenses in relation thereto.

“Informal solicitation” means a solicitation made in accordance with the city of St. Helens public contracting code to a limited number of potential contractors, in which the solicitation agent attempts to obtain at least three written quotes or proposals.

“Invitation to bid” means a publicly advertised request for competitive sealed bids.

“Model Rules” means the public contracting rules adopted by the Attorney General under ORS 279A.065.

“Offeror” means a person who submits a bid, quote or proposal to enter into a public contract with the city of St. Helens.

“Oregon Public Contracting Code” means ORS Chapters 279A, 279B and 279C.

“Person” means a natural person or any other private or city of St. Helens entity having the legal capacity to enter into a binding contract.

“Personal services contract” means a contract with an independent contractor predominantly for services that require special training or certification, skill, technical, creative, professional or communication skills or talents, unique and specialized knowledge, or the exercise of judgment skills, and for which the quality of the service depends on attributes that are unique to the service provider. Such services include, but are not limited to, the services of architects, engineers, land surveyors, photogrammetrists, transportation planners, attorneys, auditors and other licensed professionals, artists, designers, computer programmers, performers, consultants and property managers. The city administrator shall have discretion to determine whether additional types of services not specifically mentioned in this paragraph fit within the definition of personal services.

“Proposal” means a binding offer to provide goods, services or public improvements with the understanding that acceptance will depend on the evaluation of factors other than, or in addition to, price. A proposal may be made in response to a request for proposals or under an informal solicitation.

“Public contract” means a sale or other disposal, or a purchase, lease, rental or other acquisition, by the city of St. Helens of personal property, services, including personal services, public improvements, public works, minor alterations, or ordinary repair or maintenance necessary to preserve a public improvement.

“Public improvement” means a project for construction, reconstruction or major renovation on real property by or for the city of St. Helens. “Public improvement” does not include:

(1) Projects for which no funds of the city of St. Helens are directly or indirectly used, except for participation that is incidental or related primarily to project design or inspection; or

(2) Emergency work, minor alteration, ordinary repair or maintenance necessary to preserve a public improvement.

“Purchasing manager” means the city administrator or designee. 

“Qualified pool” means a pool of vendors who are prequalified to compete for the award of contracts for certain types of contracts or to provide certain types of services.

“Quote” means a price offer made in response to an informal or qualified pool solicitation to provide goods, services or public improvements.

“Request for proposals” means a publicly advertised request for sealed competitive proposals.

“Services” means and includes all types of services (including construction labor) other than personal services.

“Solicitation” means an invitation to one or more potential contractors to submit a bid, proposal, quote, statement of qualifications or letter of interest to the city of St. Helens with respect to a proposed project, procurement or other contracting opportunity. The word “solicitation” also refers to the process by which the city of St. Helens requests, receives and evaluates potential contractors and awards public contracts.

“Solicitation agent” means, with respect to a particular solicitation, the department head or person designated by the department head to conduct the solicitation and make an award.

“Solicitation documents” means all informational materials issued by the city of St. Helens for a solicitation, including, but not limited to, advertisements, instructions, submission requirements and schedules, award criteria, contract terms and specifications, and all laws, regulations and documents incorporated by reference.

“Standards of responsibility” means the qualifications of eligibility for award of a public contract. An offeror meets the standards of responsibility if the offeror has:

(1) Available the appropriate financial, material, equipment, facility and personnel resources and expertise, or ability to obtain the resources and expertise, necessary to indicate the capability of the offeror to meet all contractual responsibilities;

(2) A satisfactory record of performance. The solicitation agent shall document the record of performance of an offeror if the solicitation agent finds the offeror to be not responsible under this definition;

(3) A satisfactory record of integrity. The solicitation agent shall document the record of integrity of an offeror if the solicitation agent finds the offeror to be not responsible under this definition;

(4) Qualified legally to contract with the city of St. Helens;

(5) Supplied all necessary information in connection with the inquiry concerning responsibility. If an offeror fails to promptly supply information requested by the solicitation agent concerning responsibility, the solicitation agent shall base the determination of responsibility upon any available information or may find the offeror nonresponsible; and

(6) Not been debarred by the city of St. Helens, and, in the case of public improvement contracts, has not been listed by the Construction Contractors Board as a contractor who is not qualified to hold a public improvement contract.

“Surplus property” means personal property owned by the city of St. Helens which is no longer needed for use by the department to which such property has been assigned. (Ord. 3158 § 2, 2012; Ord. 2942 § 12, 2005)


2.04.110 Public contracts – Process for approval of special solicitation methods and exemptions.

(1) Authority of City of St. Helens City Council. In its capacity as contract review board for the city of St. Helens, the city council, upon its own initiative or upon request of the city administrator, may create special selection, evaluation and award procedures for, or may exempt from competition, the award of a specific contract or class of contracts as provided in this section.

(2) Basis for Approval. The approval of a special solicitation method or exemption from competition must be based upon a record before the local contract review board that contains the following:

(a) The nature of the contract or class of contracts for which the special solicitation or exemption is requested;

(b) The estimated contract price or cost of the project, if relevant;

(c) Findings to support the substantial cost savings, enhancement in quality or performance or other public benefit anticipated by the proposed selection method or exemption from competitive solicitation;

(d) Findings to support the reason that approval of the request would be unlikely to encourage favoritism or diminish competition for the public contract or class of public contracts, or would otherwise substantially promote the public interest in a manner that could not practicably be realized by complying with the solicitation requirements that would otherwise be applicable under these regulations; and

(e) A description of the proposed alternative contracting methods to be employed.

In making a determination regarding a special selection method, the local contract review board may consider the type, cost, amount of the contract or class of contracts, number of persons available to make offers, and such other factors as it may deem appropriate.

(3)(a) The local contract review board may approve the special solicitation or exemption after having received a written request that describes the contracting procedure, the goods or services or the class of goods or services that are the subject of the special procurement and the circumstances that justify the use of a special procurement under the standards set forth in subsection (2) of this section.

(b) The local contract review board may approve a special procurement if the board finds that the request submitted under subsection (2) of this section demonstrates that the use of a special procurement as described in the request:

(i) Is unlikely to encourage favoritism in the awarding of public contracts or to substantially diminish competition for public contracts; and 

(ii) Is reasonably expected to result in substantial cost savings to the city or the public or otherwise substantially promotes the public interest in a manner that could not be practicably realized by complying with the requirements of the local contract review board rules without using an exemption.

(4) Notification of the approval of an exemption to the local contract review board rules shall be published at least once in at least one newspaper of general circulation in the St. Helens area and in as many additional issues and publications as the city may determine.

(5) Any affected person may protest the approval of a special exemption in accordance with ORS 279B.400 and OAR 137-047-0700, by filing such protest within seven days from the date of publication of notice of the approval.

(6) Commencement of Solicitation Prior to Approval. A solicitation may be issued prior to the approval of a special exemption under this section; provided, that the closing of the solicitation may not be earlier than five days after the date of the hearing at which the LCRB approves the exemption. If the LCRB fails to approve a requested exemption or requires the use of a solicitation procedure other than the procedures described in the issued solicitation documents, the issued solicitation may either be modified by addendum, or cancelled. (Ord. 3201 § 1, 2015; Ord. 2942 § 13, 2005)


2.04.120 Approved solicitation methods for classes of contracts.

Having performed a public hearing in accordance with Oregon law, the following classes of public contracts and the method(s) that are approved for the award of each of the classes are hereby established by the city of St. Helens.

(1) Purchases from Nonprofit Agencies for Disabled Individuals. The city of St. Helens shall give a preference to goods, services and public improvements available from qualified nonprofit agencies for disabled individuals in accordance with the provisions of ORS 279.835 through 279.850.

(2) Public Improvement Contracts.

(a) Any Public Improvement. Unless otherwise provided in the code, or state law, or approved for a special exemption, public improvement contracts in any amount may be issued only under an invitation to bid.

(b) Nontransportation Public Improvements Up to $100,000. Public improvement contracts other than contracts for a highway, bridge or other transportation project for which the estimated contract price does not exceed $100,000 may be awarded using an informal solicitation for quotes.

(c) Transportation Public Improvements Up to $50,000. Contracts for which the estimated contract price does not exceed $50,000 for highways, bridges or other transportation projects may be awarded using an informal solicitation for quotes.

(d) Privately Constructed Public Improvements. The city of St. Helens may contribute funding to a privately constructed public improvement project without subjecting the project to competitive solicitation requirements if all of the following conditions are met with respect to the entire public improvement project:

(i) The city of St. Helens’s contribution to the project may not exceed 25 percent of the total cost of the project;

(ii) The city of St. Helens must comply with all applicable laws concerning the reporting of the project to the Bureau of Labor and Industries as a public works project;

(iii) The general contractor for the project must agree in writing to comply with all applicable laws concerning reporting and payment of prevailing wages for the project;

(iv) The funds contributed to the project may not provide a pecuniary benefit to the owner of the development for which the project is being constructed, other than benefits that are shared by all members of the community;

(v) The performance of the general contractor and the payment of labor for the project must be secured by performance and payment bonds or other cash-equivalent security that is acceptable to the city administrator to protect the city of St. Helens against defective performance and claims for payment; and

(vi) The contract for construction of the project must be amended, as necessary, to require the general contractor to maintain adequate workers’ compensation and liability insurance and to protect and provide indemnification to the city of St. Helens for all claims for payment, injury or property damage arising from or related to the construction of the project.

(3) Personal Services Contracts.

(a) Contracts for Architects, Engineers, Land Surveyors, Photogrammetrists, Transportation Planners and Related Services.

(i) Personal services contracts with the above-enumerated professionals where the estimated cost of the contract does not exceed $100,000, or in the case of an emergency, may be awarded in any manner which the solicitation agent deems appropriate to the city of St. Helens’ needs, including by direct appointment or purchase.

(ii) Personal services contracts with the above-enumerated professionals where the estimated cost of the contract is greater than $100,000 but does not exceed $250,000 shall be awarded following a qualifications based selection procedure outlined in subsection (3)(a)(iii) of this section, except that the city may adjust the procedure to accommodate the city’s scope, schedule or objectives for the particular project.

(iii) Personal services contracts with the above-enumerated professionals where the estimated cost of the contract is greater than $250,000 shall be awarded following a qualifications based selection procedure focusing on the consultant’s qualifications for the type of professional service required, taking into account the candidate’s specialized experience, capabilities and technical competence; resources; record of past performance, including but not limited to price and cost data from previous projects, quality of work, ability to meet schedules, cost control and contract administration; ownership status and employment practices regarding minority, women and emerging small businesses or historically under utilized businesses; availability to the project locale; familiarity with the project locale; and proposed project management techniques. The city may not solicit or use pricing policies and proposals or other pricing information, including the number of hours proposed for the service required, expenses, hourly rates and overhead, to determine consultant compensation until after the city has selected a qualified professional. If the city and the professional are unable to negotiate a reasonable and fair amount of compensation, as determined solely by the city, the city shall, either orally or in writing, formally terminate negotiations with the selected candidate and may then negotiate with the next most qualified candidate. The negotiation process may continue in this manner through successive candidates until an agreement is reached or the contracting agency terminates the consultant contracting process.

(b) Contracts for Services Other than Those with Architects, Engineers, Land Surveyors, Photogrammetrists, Transportation Planners and Related Services. Personal services contracts for services other than those with architects, engineers, land surveyors, photogrammetrists, transportation planners and related professionals in any amount may be awarded under a publicly advertised request for competitive sealed proposals.

(c) Personal Service Contracts for Other Services Not Exceeding $150,000. Contracts for personal services other than those with architects, engineers, land surveyors, photogrammetrists, transportation planners and related professionals for which the estimated contract price does not exceed $150,000 may be awarded using an informal solicitation for proposals.

(d) Seventy-Five-Thousand-Dollar Award from Qualified Pool. Contracts for personal services other than those with architects, engineers, land surveyors, photogrammetrists, transportation planners and related professionals for which the estimated contract price does not exceed $75,000 may be awarded by direct appointment without competition from a qualified pool.

(e) Personal Service Contracts Not Exceeding $20,000 per Year. Contracts other than those with architects, engineers, land surveyors, photogrammetrists, transportation planners and related professionals for which the solicitation agent estimates that payments will not exceed $20,000 in any fiscal year or $150,000 over the full term, including optional renewals, may be awarded under any method deemed in the city of St. Helens’ best interest by the solicitation agent, including by direct appointment.

(f) Personal Service Contracts for Continuation of Work. Contracts other than those with architects, engineers, land surveyors, photogrammetrists, transportation planners and related professionals of not more than $150,000 for the continuation of work by a contractor who performed preliminary studies, analysis or planning for the work under a prior contract may be awarded without competition if the prior contract was awarded under a competitive process and the solicitation agent determines that use of the original contractor will significantly reduce the costs of, or risks associated with, the work.

(4) Hybrid Contracts. The following classes of contracts include elements of construction of public improvements as well as personal services and may be awarded under a request for proposals, unless exempt from competitive solicitation.

(a) Design/Build and CM/GC Contracts. Contracts for the construction of public improvements using a design/build or construction manager/general contractor construction method shall be awarded under a request for proposals. The determination to construct a project using a design/build or construction manager/general contractor construction method must be approved by the city council or designee, upon application of the solicitation agent, in which the solicitation agent submits facts that support a finding that the construction of the improvement under the proposed method is likely to result in cost savings, higher quality, reduced errors, or other benefits to the city of St. Helens.

(b) Energy Savings Performance Contracts. Unless the contract qualifies for award under another classification in this section, contractors for energy savings performance contracts shall be selected under a request for proposals in accordance with the city of St. Helens’s public contracting regulations.

(5) Contracts for Goods and Services.

(a) Any Procurement. The procurement of goods or services, or goods and services, in any amount may be made under either an invitation to bid or a request for proposals.

(b) Procurements Up to $150,000. The procurement of goods or services, or goods and services, for which the estimated contract price does not exceed $150,000 may be made under an informal solicitation for either quotes or proposals.

(6) Contracts Subject to Award at Solicitation Agent’s Discretion. The following classes of contracts may be awarded in any manner which the solicitation agent deems appropriate to the city of St. Helens’s needs, including by direct appointment or purchase. Except where otherwise provided, the solicitation agent shall make a record of the method of award.

(a) Advertising. Contracts for the placing of notice or advertisements in any medium.

(b) Amendments. Contract amendments shall not be considered to be separate contracts if made in accordance with the public contracting regulations.

(c) Animals. Contracts for the purchase of animals (e.g., specifically to include police dogs).

(d) Contracts Up to $5,000. Contracts of any type for which the contract price does not exceed $5,000 without a record of the method of award.

(e) Copyrighted Materials – Library Materials. Contracts for the acquisition of materials entitled to copyright, including, but not limited to, works of art and design, literature and music, or materials even if not entitled to copyright, purchased for use as library lending materials.

(f) Equipment Repair. Contracts for equipment repair or overhauling, provided the service or parts required are unknown and the cost cannot be determined without extensive preliminary dismantling or testing.

(g) Governmentally Regulated Items. Contracts for the purchase of items for which prices or selection of suppliers are regulated by a governmental authority.

(h) Insurance. Insurance and service contracts as provided for under ORS 414.115, 414.125, 414.135 and 414.145.

(i) Nonowned Property. Contracts or arrangements for the sale or other disposal of abandoned property or other personal property not owned by the city of St. Helens.

(j) Sole Source Contracts. Contracts for goods or services which are available from a single source may be awarded without competition.

(k) Specialty Goods for Resale. Contracts for the purchase of specialty goods by city of St. Helens for resale to consumers.

(l) Sponsor Agreements. Sponsorship agreements, under which the city of St. Helens receives a gift or donation in exchange for recognition of the donor.

(m) Structures. Contracts for the disposal of structures located on property owned by the city of St. Helens.

(n) Renewals. Contracts that are being renewed in accordance with their terms are not considered to be newly issued contracts and are not subject to competitive procurement procedures.

(o) Temporary Extensions or Renewals. Contracts for a single period of one year or less, for the temporary extension or renewal of an expiring and nonrenewable or recently expired contract, other than a contract for public improvements.

(p) Temporary Use of Property Owned by the City of St. Helens. The city of St. Helens may negotiate and enter into a license, permit or other contract for the temporary use of property owned by the city of St. Helens without using a competitive selection process if:

(i) The contract results from an unsolicited proposal to the city of St. Helens based on the unique attributes of the property or the unique needs of the proposer;

(ii) The proposed use of the property is consistent with the city of St. Helens’s use of the property and the public interest; and 

(iii) The city of St. Helens reserves the right to terminate the contract without penalty, in the event that the city of St. Helens determines that the contract is no longer consistent with the city of St. Helens’s present or planned use of the property or the public interest.

(q) Used Property. A solicitation agent, for procurements up to $20,000, and the city administrator, for procurements in excess of $20,000, may contract for the purchase of used property by negotiation if such property is suitable for the city of St. Helens’s needs and can be purchased for a lower cost than substantially similar new property. For this purpose the cost of used property shall be based upon the life-cycle cost of the property over the period for which the property will be used by the city of St. Helens. The city administrator shall record the findings that support the purchase over $20,000.

(r) Utilities. Contracts for the purchase of steam, power, heat, water, telecommunications services, and other utilities.

(7) Contracts Required by Emergency Circumstances.

(a) In General. When an official with authority to enter into a contract on behalf of the city of St. Helens determines that immediate execution of a contract within the official’s authority is necessary to prevent substantial damage or injury to persons or property, the official may execute the contract without competitive selection and award or city council or city administrator approval, but, where time permits, the official shall attempt to use competitive price and quality evaluation before selecting an emergency contractor.

(b) Reporting. An official who enters into an emergency contract shall, as soon as possible, in light of the emergency circumstances, (i) document the nature of the emergency, the method used for selection of the particular contractor and the reason why the selection method was deemed in the best interest of the city of St. Helens and the public, and (ii) notify the city administrator and city council of the facts and circumstances surrounding the emergency execution of the contract.

(c) Emergency Public Improvement Contracts. A public improvement contract may only be awarded under emergency circumstances if the city, pursuant to city ordinance, has made a written declaration of emergency. Any public improvement contract awarded under emergency conditions must be awarded within 60 days following the declaration of an emergency unless the city council grants an extension of the emergency period. Where the time delay needed to obtain a payment or performance bond for the contract could result in injury or substantial property damage, the city administrator may waive the requirement for all or a portion of required performance and payment bonds.

(8) Federal Purchasing Programs. Goods and services may be purchased without competitive procedures under a local purchasing program administered by the United States General Services Administration (“GSA”) as provided in this subsection.

(a) The procurement must be made in accordance with procedures established by GSA for procurements by local government, and under purchase orders or contracts submitted to and approved by the city administrator. The solicitation agent shall provide the city administrator with a copy of the letter, memorandum or other documentation from GSA establishing permission to the city of St. Helens to purchase under the federal program.

(b) The price of the goods or services must be established under price agreements between the federally approved vendor and GSA.

(c) The price of the goods or services must be less than the price at which such goods or services are available under state or local cooperative purchasing programs that are available to the city of St. Helens.

(d) If a single purchase of goods or services exceeds $150,000, the solicitation agent must obtain informal written quotes or proposals from at least two additional vendors (if reasonably available) and find, in writing, that the goods or services offered by GSA represent the best value for the city of St. Helens. This subsection does not apply to the purchase of equipment manufactured or sold solely for military or law enforcement purposes.

(9) Cooperative Procurement Contracts. Cooperative procurements may be made without competitive solicitation as provided in the Oregon Public Contracting Code.

(10) Surplus Property.

(a) General Methods. Surplus property may be disposed of by any of the following methods upon a determination by the solicitation agent that the method of disposal is in the best interest of the city of St. Helens. Factors that may be considered by the solicitation agent include costs of sale, administrative costs, and public benefits to the city of St. Helens. The solicitation agent shall maintain a record of the reason for the disposal method selected and the manner of disposal, including the name of the person to whom the surplus property was transferred.

(i) Other Governments. Without competition, by transfer or sale to another governmental entity.

(ii) Auction. By publicly advertised auction to the highest bidder.

(iii) Bids. By publicly advertised invitation to bid.

(iv) Liquidation Sale. By liquidation sale using a commercially recognized third-party liquidator selected in accordance with rules for the award of personal services contracts.

(v) Fixed Price Sale. The solicitation agent may establish a selling price based upon an independent appraisal or published schedule of values generally accepted by the insurance industry, schedule and advertise a sale date, and sell to the first buyer meeting the sales terms.

(vi) Trade-In. By trade-in, in conjunction with acquisition of other price-based items under a competitive solicitation. The solicitation shall require the offer to state the total value assigned to the surplus property to be traded.

(vii) Donation. By donation to any organization operating within or providing a service to residents of the city of St. Helens which is recognized by the Internal Revenue Service as an organization described in Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.

(b) Disposal of Property with Minimal Value. Surplus property which has a value of less than $500.00, or for which the costs of sale are likely to exceed sale proceeds may be disposed of by any means determined to be cost-effective, including by disposal as waste. The official making the disposal shall make a record of the value of the item and the manner of disposal.

(c) Personal-Use Items. An item (or indivisible set) of specialized and personal use, other than police officer’s handguns, with a current value of less than $100.00 may be sold to the employee or retired or terminated employee for whose use it was purchased. These items may be sold for fair market value without bid and by a process deemed most efficient by the city administrator.

(d) Police Officers’ Handguns. Upon honorable retirement from service with the city of St. Helens, a police officer may purchase the handgun that she or he was using at the time of retirement. The purchase price shall be the fair market value of the handgun as determined by an independent appraisal performed by a qualified weapons appraiser. An officer electing to exercise this option shall notify the city of St. Helens at least 30 days prior to his or her expected retirement date and request an appraisal of the handgun. Upon receipt of the appraisal fee from the officer the city of St. Helens shall arrange for the appraisal. A copy of the completed appraisal shall be provided to the officer, who shall have up to 30 days from the date of retirement to purchase the handgun for the appraised fair market value.

(e) Restriction on Sale to City of St. Helens Employees. City of St. Helens employees shall not be restricted from competing, as members of the public, for the purchase of publicly sold surplus property, but shall not be permitted to offer to purchase property to be sold to the first qualifying bidder until at least three days after the first date on which notice of the sale is first publicly advertised.

(f) Conveyance to Purchaser. Upon the consummation of a sale of surplus personal property, the city of St. Helens shall make, execute and deliver a bill of sale signed on behalf of the city of St. Helens, conveying the property in question to the purchaser and delivering possession, or the right to take possession, of the property to the purchaser.

(11) Concession Agreements.

(a) General. No part of a concession agreement shall contain or constitute a waiver of any generally applicable rules, code provisions or requirements of the city of St. Helens concerning regulation, registration, licensing, inspection, or permit requirements for any construction, rental or business activity.

(b) Classes of Contracts Eligible for Award without Competition. The following concession agreements may be awarded by any method deemed appropriate by the solicitation agent, including, without limitation, by direct appointment, private negotiation, from a qualified pool, or using a competitive process.

(i) Contracts Under $5,000. Contracts under which the solicitation agent estimates that receipts by the city of St. Helens will not exceed $5,000 in any fiscal year and $50,000 in the aggregate.

(ii) Single Event Concessions. Concessions to sell or promote food, beverages, merchandise or services at a single public event shall be awarded based on any method determined by the city administrator to provide a fair opportunity to all persons desiring to operate a concession, but in which the promotion of the public interest and success of the event shall be of predominant importance.

(c) Competitive Award. Concession agreements solicited by the city of St. Helens for the use of designated public premises for a term greater than a single event shall be awarded as follows:

(i) Small Concessions. For concession agreements for which the concessionaire’s projected annual gross revenues are estimated to be $500,000 or less, the city administrator has discretion to use either an informal solicitation or formal request for proposals process applicable to contracts for personal services. If the proposals received indicate a probability that the concessionaire’s annual gross revenues will exceed $500,000, the solicitation agent may, but shall not be required to, reissue the solicitation as a request for proposals.

(ii) Major Concessions. Concession agreements for which the concessionaire’s projected annual gross revenues under the contract are estimated to exceed $500,000 annually shall be awarded using a request for proposals. (Ord. 3158 § 3, 2012; Ord. 2942 § 14, 2005)


2.04.130 Public contracts – Informal solicitation procedures.

The city of St. Helens may use the following procedure for informal solicitations in lieu of the procedures set forth in the Model Rules.

(1) Informally Solicited Quotes and Proposals.

(a) Solicitation of Offers. When authorized by these regulations, an informal solicitation may be made by general or limited advertisement to a certain group of vendors, by direct inquiry to persons selected by the solicitation agent, or in any other manner which the solicitation agent deems suitable for obtaining competitive quotes or proposals. The solicitation agent shall deliver or otherwise make available to potential offerors a written scope of work, a description of how quotes or proposals are to be submitted and description of the criteria for award.

(b) Award. The solicitation agent shall attempt to obtain a minimum of three written quotes or proposals before making an award. If the award is made solely on the basis of price, the solicitation agent shall award the contract to the responsible offeror that submits the lowest responsive quote. If the award is based on criteria other than, or in addition to, price, the solicitation agent shall award the contract to the responsible offeror that will best serve the interest of the city of St. Helens, based on the criteria for award.

(c) Records. A written record of all persons solicited and offers received shall be maintained. If three offers cannot be obtained, a lesser number will suffice, provided that a written record is made of the effort to obtain the quotes.

(2) Qualified Pools.

(a) General. To create a qualified pool, the city administrator shall invite prospective contractors to submit their qualifications to the city of St. Helens for inclusion as participants in a pool of contractors qualified to provide certain types of goods, services, or projects including personal services, and public improvements.

(b) Advertisement. The invitation to participate in a qualified pool shall be advertised in the manner provided for advertisements of invitations to bid and requests for proposals by publication in at least one newspaper of general statewide circulation. If qualification will be for a term that exceeds one year or allows open entry on a continuous basis, the invitation to participate in the pool must be republished at least once per year and shall be posted at the city of St. Helens’s main office and on its website. 

(c) Contents of Solicitation. Requests for participation in a qualified pool shall describe the scope of goods or services or projects for which the pool will be maintained and the minimum qualifications for participation in the pool, which may include, but shall not be limited to, qualifications related to financial stability, contracts with manufacturers or distributors, certification as an emerging small business, insurance, licensure, education, training, experience and demonstrated skills of key personnel, access to equipment, and other relevant qualifications that are important to the contracting needs of the city of St. Helens.

(d) Contract. The operation of each qualified pool may be governed by the provisions of a pool contract to which the city of St. Helens and all pool participants are parties. The contract shall contain all terms required by the city of St. Helens, including, without limitation, terms related to price, performance, business registration or licensure, continuing education, insurance, and requirements for the submission, on an annual or other periodic basis, of evidence of continuing qualification. The qualified pool contract shall describe the selection procedures that the city of St. Helens may use to issue contract job orders. The selection procedures shall be objective and open to all pool participants and afford all participants the opportunity to compete for or receive job awards. Unless expressly provided in the contract, participation in a qualified pool will not entitle a participant to the award of any city of St. Helens contract.

(e) Use of Qualified Pools. Subject to the provisions of these regulations concerning methods of solicitation for classes of contracts, the solicitation agent shall award all contracts for goods or services of the type for which a qualified pool is created from among the pool’s participants, unless the solicitation agent determines that the best interests of the city of St. Helens require solicitation by public advertisement, in which case, pool participants shall be notified of the solicitation and invited to submit competitive proposals.

(f) Amendment and Termination. The city administrator may discontinue a qualified pool at any time, or may change the requirements for eligibility as a participant in the pool at any time, by giving notice to all participants in the qualified pool.

(g) Protest of Failure to Qualify. The city administrator shall notify any applicant who fails to qualify for participation in a pool that it may appeal a qualified pool decision to the city council in the manner described in this code. (Ord. 2942 § 15, 2005)


2.04.140 Public contracts – Use of brand name specifications for public improvements.

(1) In General. Specifications for contracts shall not expressly or implicitly require any product by one brand name or mark, nor the product of one particular manufacturer or seller, except for the following reasons:

(a) It is unlikely that such exemption will encourage favoritism in the awarding of public improvement contracts or substantially diminish competition for public improvement contracts; or

(b) The specification of a product by brand name or mark, or the product of a particular manufacturer or seller, would result in substantial cost savings to the city of St. Helens; or

(c) There is only one manufacturer or seller of the product of the quality required; or

(d) Efficient utilization of existing equipment, systems or supplies requires the acquisition of compatible equipment or supplies.

(2) Authority of City Administrator. The city administrator shall have authority to determine whether an exemption for the use of a specific brand name specification should be granted by recording findings that support the exemption based on the provisions of subsection (1) of this section.

(3) Brand Name or Equivalent. Nothing in this section prohibits the city of St. Helens from using a “brand name or equivalent” specification, from specifying one or more comparable products as examples of the quality, performance, functionality or other characteristics of the product needed by the city of St. Helens, or from establishing a qualified product list. (Ord. 2942 § 16, 2005)


2.04.150 Public contracts – Bid, performance and payment bonds.

(1) Solicitation Agent May Require Bonds. The solicitation agent may require bid security and a good and sufficient performance and payment bond even though the contract is of a class that is exempt from the requirement.

(2) Bid Security. Except as otherwise exempted, the solicitations for all contracts that include the construction of a public improvement and for which the estimated contract price will exceed $75,000 shall require bid security. Bid security for a request for proposal may be based on the city of St. Helens’s estimated contract price.

(3) Performance Bonds.

(a) General. Except as provided in these regulations, all public contracts are exempt from the requirement for the furnishing of a performance bond.

(b) Contracts Involving Public Improvements. Prior to executing a contract for more than $50,000 that includes the construction of a public improvement, the contractor must deliver a performance bond in an amount equal to the full contract price conditioned on the faithful performance of the contract in accordance with the plans, specifications and conditions of the contract. The performance bond must be solely for the protection of the city of St. Helens and any public agency that is providing funding for the project for which the contract was awarded.

(c) Cash-in-Lieu. The city administrator may permit the successful offeror to submit a cashier’s check or certified check in lieu of all or a portion of the required performance bond.

(4) Payment Bonds.

(a) General. Except as provided in these regulations, all public contracts are exempt from the requirement for the furnishing of a payment bond.

(b) Contracts Involving Public Improvements. Prior to executing a contract for more than $50,000 that includes the construction of a public improvement, the contractor must deliver a payment bond equal to the full contract price, solely for the protection of claimants under ORS 279C.600.

(5) Design/Build Contracts. If the public improvement contract is with a single person to provide both design and construction of a public improvement, the obligation of the performance bond for the faithful performance of the contract must also be for the preparation and completion of the design and related services covered under the contract. Notwithstanding when a cause of action, claim or demand accrues or arises, the surety is not liable after final completion of the contract, or longer if provided for in the contract, for damages of any nature, economic or otherwise and including corrective work, attributable to the design aspect of a design-build project, or for the costs of design revisions needed to implement corrective work.

(6) Construction Manager/General Contractor Contracts. If the public improvement contract is with a single person to provide construction manager and general contractor services, in which a guaranteed maximum price may be established by an amendment authorizing construction period services following preconstruction period services, the contractor shall provide the bonds required by subsection (1) of this section upon execution of an amendment establishing the guaranteed maximum price. The city of St. Helens shall also require the contractor to provide bonds equal to the value of construction services authorized by any early work amendment in advance of the guaranteed maximum price amendment. Such bonds must be provided before construction starts.

(7) Surety – Obligation. Each performance bond and each payment bond must be executed solely by a surety company or companies holding a certificate of authority to transact surety business in Oregon. The bonds may not constitute the surety obligation of an individual or individuals. The performance and payment bonds must be payable to the city of St. Helens or to the public agency or agencies for whose benefit the bond is issued, as specified in the solicitation documents, and shall be in a form approved by the city administrator.

(8) Emergencies. In cases of emergency, or when the interest or property of the city of St. Helens probably would suffer material injury by delay or other cause, the requirement of furnishing a good and sufficient performance bond and a good and sufficient payment bond for the faithful performance of any public improvement contract may be excused, if a declaration of such emergency is made in accordance with the provisions of SHMC 2.04.120(7), unless the city council requires otherwise. (Ord. 2942 § 17, 2005)


2.04.160 Public contracts – Electronic advertisement of public improvement contracts.

In lieu of publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city of St. Helens metropolitan area, the advertisement for an invitation to bid or request for proposals for a contract involving a public improvement may be published electronically by posting on the city of St. Helens’s website; provided, that the following conditions are met:

(1) The placement of the advertisement is on a location within the website that is maintained on a regular basis for the posting of information concerning solicitations for projects of the type for which the invitation to bid or request for proposals is issued; and

(2) The solicitation agent determines that the use of electronic publication will be at least as effective in encouraging meaningful competition as publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city of St. Helens metropolitan area and will provide costs savings for the city of St. Helens, or that the use of electronic publication will be more effective than publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city of St. Helens metropolitan area in encouraging meaningful competition. (Ord. 2942 § 18, 2005)


2.04.170 Appeal of debarment or prequalification decision.

(1) Right to Hearing. Any person who has been debarred from competing for city of St. Helens contracts or for whom prequalification has been denied, revoked or revised may appeal the decision to the city council as provided in this section.

(2) Filing of Appeal. The person must file a written notice of appeal with the city administrator within three business days after the prospective contractor’s receipt of notice of the determination of debarment, or denial of prequalification.

(3) Notification. Immediately upon receipt of such notice of appeal, the city administrator shall notify the city council of the appeal.

(4) Hearing. The procedure for appeal from a debarment or denial, revocation or revision of prequalification shall be as follows:

(a) Promptly upon receipt of notice of appeal, the city administrator shall notify the appellant of the time and place of the hearing;

(b) The city council shall conduct the hearing and decide the appeal within 30 days after receiving notice of the appeal from the city administrator; and

(c) At the hearing, the city council shall consider de novo the notice of debarment, or the notice of denial, revocation or revision of prequalification, the standards of responsibility upon which the decision on prequalification was based, or the reasons listed for debarment, and any evidence provided by the parties.

(5) Decision. The city council shall set forth in writing the reasons for the decision.

(6) Costs. The city council may allocate the costs for the hearing between the appellant and the city of St. Helens. The allocation shall be based upon facts found by the council and stated in the decision that, in the council’s opinion, warrant such allocation of costs. If the council does not allocate costs, the costs shall be paid as by the appellant, if the decision is upheld, or by the city of St. Helens, if the decision is overturned.

(7) Judicial Review. The decision of the city council may be reviewed only upon a petition in the circuit court of Columbia County filed within 15 days after the date of the decision. (Ord. 2942 § 19, 2005)


Chapter 2.08 PLANNING COMMISSION

Sections:

2.08.010    Establishment.

2.08.020    Membership.

2.08.030    Term of office.

2.08.040    Vacancies and removal.

2.08.050    Presiding members.

2.08.060    Staff services.

2.08.070    Meetings.

2.08.080    Powers and duties.


2.08.010 Establishment.

There is hereby reestablished a city planning commission for the city of St. Helens, Oregon. (Ord. 2197 § 1, 1978)


2.08.020 Membership.

The commission may consist of up to seven members. The councilmember in charge of planning shall be entitled to sit with the commission and take part in its discussions, but shall not have the right to vote. The following regulations shall also apply to the planning commission:

(1) Planning commission members may be compensated only by resolution from the city council.

(2) No more than two voting members shall be engaged principally in the buying, selling, or developing of real estate for profit as individuals, or by members of any partnership, or officers or employees of any corporation that is engaged principally in the buying, selling, or developing of real estate for profit. No more than two voting members shall be engaged in the same kind of occupation, business, trade or profession.

(3) A member of the planning commission shall not participate in any commission proceeding or action in which any of the following has direct or substantial financial interest: the member or his spouse, brother, sister, child, parent, father-in-law, mother-in-law, any business in which he is then serving or has served within the previous two years, or any business with which he is negotiating for or has an arrangement or understanding concerning prospective partnership or employment. Any actual or potential interest shall be disclosed at the meeting of the commission where the action is being taken. (Ord. 3079 § 1, 2008; Ord. 2697, 1995; Ord. 2197 § 2, 1978)


2.08.030 Term of office.

Members of the planning commission shall be appointed by the city council for a term of four years from the first calendar day of the year in which their existing appointment to the position expires. The members of the present planning commission are hereby reappointed for the unexpired term of the office they presently hold. (Ord. 2197 § 3, 1978)


2.08.040 Vacancies and removal.

Appointments to fill vacancies shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term. A member may be removed by the city council after a hearing for misconduct or nonperformance of duty. A member who is absent from three consecutive meetings without an excuse as approved by the planning commission is rebuttably presumed to be in nonperformance of duty, and the city council shall declare the position vacant unless finding otherwise following the hearing. (Ord. 2197 § 4, 1978)


2.08.050 Presiding members.

At its first meeting of each calendar year, the commission shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman to serve one-year terms. (Ord. 2197 § 5, 1978)


2.08.060 Staff services.

The city council shall provide a secretary to the commission and such other staff and consultation services as may be appropriate. The secretary shall keep a record of commission proceedings. (Ord. 2197 § 6, 1978)


2.08.070 Meetings.

(1) The commission shall meet at least once a month. Meetings of the commission shall be open to the public. Meetings other than at regularly scheduled times may be announced at a prior meeting and thereby be made a part of the meeting records. Upon the request and concurrence of the majority of the commission, the chairman may call a previously unannounced special meeting of the commission for a time not earlier than 24 hours after the notice is given. Notice of a previously unannounced meeting shall be telephoned to the newspaper, posted at the St. Helens City Hall and, to the extent feasible, provided to interested persons at least 24 hours prior to the meeting. Notice shall comply with the Development Code, as applicable.

(2) Rules of Operation.

(a) A majority of the members appointed to the planning commission shall constitute a quorum. A vacancy is not considered an appointed position when determining a majority quorum.

(b) The chairman’s role is to facilitate discussion. As such, the chairman or the commissioner presiding over the meeting in the chairman’s absence only votes in the following circumstances:

(i) To break a tie vote; or

(ii) When there are not enough concurring votes to meet the minimum number required to make a decision per the table below.

(c) When the chairman is absent or must abstain from a meeting’s agenda item, the vice chair shall preside over the meeting or the particular agenda item. When neither the chairman or vice chair can participate, the commission shall elect a commissioner to serve as temporary chairman.

(d) The table below shows the number of concurring votes (affirmative or negative) required to pass or reject a motion. Assuming a quorum is present, the number of concurring votes required varies according to the number of members voting.

(e) Unless a commissioner in attendance does not participate in the process for reasons such as conflict of interest or personal bias, they shall vote affirmative or negative. No action can be taken until all commissioners who are present and able to vote do so.

TABLE 

	Number of appointed commissioners (vacant positions don’t count)	Minimum number present needed for a majority quorum	Number of members actually voting/the number of required concurring votes An “X” indicates no action can be taken (insufficient votes).

	3	2	1/X	2/2	3/2	 	 	 	 

	4	3	1/X	2/2	3/2	4/3	 	 	 

	5	3	1/X	2/2	3/2	4/3	5/3	 	 

	6	4	1/X	2/X	3/3	4/3	5/3	6/4	 

	7	4	1/X	2/X	3/3	4/3	5/3	6/4	7/4

(Ord. 3209 § 1, 2016; Ord. 2697, 1995; Ord. 2197 § 7, 1978)


2.08.080 Powers and duties.

The commission shall have the powers and duties, which are now or may hereafter be assigned to it by charter, ordinances or resolutions of this city and general laws of this state. Those duties and powers shall include but shall not be limited to the following:

(1) Conduct studies appropriate to an understanding of area development and its significance to the public interest.

(2) Develop and maintain comprehensive plan proposals for recommendation to the city council.

(3) Develop specific plans for selected areas or functions as indicated by studies and other evidence of community need and recommend plan adoption, if appropriate.

(4) Investigate and make recommendation regarding the implementation of the comprehensive plan as adopted by the city council.

(5) Prepare and periodically review land development regulations including but not limited to zoning, subdivision and land partitioning and make recommendations to the city council.

(6) Consult and advise with public agencies and private citizens on ways to carry out the comprehensive plan.

(7) The commission shall review and submit recommendations to the council regarding any proposed major (e.g., merger, consolidation or dissolution involving the city) or minor (e.g., annexation or withdrawal of territory to or from the city) boundary changes.

(8) Review public programs that are referred to it for recommendation, such as property acquisition or disposition, public hearing or other public facility proposals, and transportation or right-of-way plans. Report as to the program’s conformity with the comprehensive plan.

(9) Review, conduct hearings on, report on, perform delegated functions with respect to, and make recommendation regarding subdivision, partitioning, public building and new street proposals and approve those meeting city and state standards with such requirements or conditions as are found appropriate under the regulations.

(10) Review and act on land use control ordinance change proposals, contested cases, and discretionary permits as provided by the land use control ordinances.

(11) Approve plats or deeds dedicating land to public use within the city.

(12) Recommend and make suggestion to the city council and to all other public authorities concerning laying out, widening, extending, parking and location of streets, sidewalks, and boulevards, relief of traffic congestion, betterment of housing and sanitation conditions and establishment of zones or districts limiting the use, height, area and bulk of buildings and structures.

(13) Recommend to the city council and all other public authorities plans for regulations of the future growth, development and beautification of the city in respect to its public and private buildings and works, streets, parks, grounds and vacant lots and plans consistent with future growth and development of the city in order to secure to the city and its inhabitants sanitation, proper service of all public utilities, harbor, shipping, and transportation facilities.

(14) Recommend to the city council and all other public authorities plans for promotion, development and regulation of industrial and economic needs of the community in respect to private and public enterprises engaged in industrial pursuits.

(15) Encourage development, advertise opportunities, make economic surveys and study needs with respect to promoting and strengthening industrial growth and employment conditions.

(16) Perform such other functions as the city council may request.

(17) Do and perform all other acts and things necessary or proper to carry out the provisions of this chapter.

(18) Study and propose in general such measures as may be advisable for promotion of the public interest, health, morals, safety, comfort, convenience and welfare of the city and of the area six miles adjacent thereto within the urban growth boundary of the city. (Ord. 2197 § 8, 1978)


Chapter 2.12 CITY ADMINISTRATOR

Sections:

2.12.010    Position created.

2.12.020    Financial department head.

2.12.030    Power and authority – Duties.

2.12.040    Salary.


2.12.010 Position created.

There is hereby created and established for the city of St. Helens the office and position of “city administrator,” and the person who fills such position shall be appointed in the manner and for such term as all other officers of the city of St. Helens are appointed in accordance with the City Charter. The position shall be held by the city recorder and administered by him/her in conjunction with his/her other duties. (Ord. 3030 § 2, 2007)


2.12.020 Financial department head.

The city administrator shall report directly to the city council, shall be the administrative head of the central business office and the financial department of the city of St. Helens, and shall do all things with respect to management of the central business office and the financial department as are permitted or directed by statute, charter, ordinance and the city council. (Ord. 3030 § 3, 2007)


2.12.030 Power and authority – Duties.

The city administrator shall exercise all authority and power herein delegated, or hereinafter delegated, to him/her by the city council and shall have the same responsibility with respect to the central business office and financial department as do other municipal officers with respect to the departments of which they are the department head. The duties of the city administrator shall include, but shall not be limited to, any one or all of the following: preparing, reviewing and approving all orders on the treasury; investing municipal funds; budgeting municipal funds; internal auditing of all municipal financial operations; managing and administering the central business office and finance department; and managing the cash inflow and outflow of the city of St. Helens. The duties and responsibilities hereinabove listed shall not be interpreted as limiting the authority of the city administrator but shall be interpreted as merely a partial definition of his/her responsibilities. (Ord. 3030 § 4, 2007)


2.12.040 Salary.

The salary of the city administrator shall be fixed and determined by action of the city council. (Ord. 3030 § 5, 2007)


Chapter 2.16 PARKS COMMISSION

(Repealed by Ord. 3229)


Chapter 2.18       MUNICIPAL COURT

Sections:

2.18.010  Court of record.

2.18.020  Court of record – Powers.

2.18.030  General qualifications – Municipal court judge and judges pro tempore.

2.18.040  General requirement – Recording.

2.18.050  General requirement – Representation.


2.18.010      Court of record.

As authorized by ORS 221.336 and 221.342 (Section 3, Chapter 682, Oregon Laws 1999, as amended by Section 7, Chapter 687, Oregon Laws 2003), and the St. Helens City Charter, the city of St. Helens municipal court is hereby declared by this chapter to be a court of record. (Ord. 2941 § 2, 2005)


2.18.020      Court of record – Powers.

The municipal court, municipal court judge, municipal court judges pro tempore, as well as court clerk, deputy court clerks, and other court personnel, shall have all the appropriate powers, duties, and responsibilities provided under Oregon Revised Statutes, City Charter, ordinances, and general law for a municipal court established pursuant to city laws and Oregon Statutes as a court of record. (Ord. 2941 § 3, 2005)


2.18.030      General qualifications – Municipal court judge and judges pro tempore.

The chief judge of the St. Helens municipal court and all pro tempore judges shall be attorneys licensed to practice law in the state of Oregon. (Ord. 2941 § 4, 2005)


2.18.040      General requirement – Recording.

All proceedings in the St. Helens municipal court shall be recorded. (Ord. 2941 § 5, 2005)


2.18.050      General requirement – Representation.

A party may represent themselves before the St. Helens municipal court; however, only an attorney licensed to practice law in Oregon may represent another party before the Court. (Ord. 2941 § 6, 2005)


Chapter 2.20       MUNICIPAL JUDGES*

Sections:

2.20.010  Appointment resolution.

2.20.020  Pro tempore judges.

2.20.030  Administration.

2.20.040  Salary.

2.20.050  Term of office.

2.20.060  Standards of conduct and performance.

2.20.070  Supervision – Removal.

2.20.080  Complaints.

*	Code reviser’s note: See also Chapter 2.18 SHMC.


2.20.010      Appointment resolution.

In order to appoint any municipal court judge as the judicial officer of the city under Chapter V, Section 21, of the Charter of the city of St. Helens, the council shall enact a resolution naming the appointee, the effective date of the appointee, and stating terms and conditions of employment. Municipal court judges shall have all the charter and statutory powers of judicial officers and city judges. (Ord. 2383 § 1, 1982)


2.20.020      Pro tempore judges.

There may be more than one municipal court judge appointed for the same term. One or more municipal judges pro tempore may be appointed by resolution to act in the absence of an appointed municipal court judge.

(1)  Pro tempore judges shall have all the charter and statutory powers of judicial officers and city judges.

(2)  Pro tempore judges shall be appointed for whatever term and at whatever compensation designated by the council. (Ord. 2383 § 2, 1982)


2.20.030      Administration.

The municipal court judge so designated shall conduct court for the transaction of judicial business and administer the court calendar. (Ord. 2383 § 3, 1982)


2.20.040      Salary.

The salary of the municipal court judge shall be established annually by resolution during the city budget process and said salary shall not be reduced during the judge’s term of office. Compensation for municipal court judges pro tem shall be set in written order or resolution of the council. Municipal court judge and pro tem compensation is not determined based upon fluctuations in municipal court revenue. (Ord. 2947 § 2, 2005)


2.20.050      Term of office.

The term of office of the St. Helens municipal court judge shall be stated in the resolution appointing the judge pursuant to this chapter. The term shall be two years from the date of initial appointment when the appointment is made in an odd numbered year. Otherwise, the appointment is for one year or the unexpired term of the departing judge. The term for a pro tem shall be as set forth in the resolution appointing the judge pro tem. (Ord. 2947 § 3, 2005)


2.20.060      Standards of conduct and performance.

The city of St. Helens municipal court judge shall conduct himself or herself in accordance with all of the applicable rules of the Government Standards and Practices Commission and applicable rules in the Revised Oregon Code of Judicial Conduct, including but not limited to the following:

(1)  The judge shall have his or her performance and conduct shall be measured against the following standards:

(a)  A judge shall observe high standards of conduct so that the integrity, impartiality and independence of the judiciary are preserved and shall act at all times in a manner that promotes public confidence in the judiciary and the judicial system.

(b)  A judge shall not commit a criminal act.

(c)  A judge shall not engage in conduct that reflects adversely on the judge’s character, competence, temperament or fitness to serve as a judge.

(d)  A judge shall not engage in conduct involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or misrepresentation.

(e)  A judge shall not allow family, social or other relationships to influence judicial conduct or judgment.

(f)  A judge shall not use the position to advance the private interests of the judge or any person, nor shall a judge convey or permit anyone to convey the impression that anyone has a special influence with the judge, but a judge may provide a character or ability reference for a person about whom the judge has personal knowledge.

(g)  A judge shall not testify as a character witness except pursuant to subpoena.

(h)  A judge shall not hold membership in any organization that the judge knows is a discriminatory organization. For purposes of this rule, "discriminatory organization" means an organization that, as a policy or practice and contrary to applicable federal or state law, treats persons less favorably in granting membership privileges, allowing participation or providing services on the basis of sex, race, national origin, religion, sexual orientation, marital status, disability or age.

(2)  The judge shall be impartial and diligent in the performance of his or her judicial duties:

(a)  A judge’s performance of judicial duties shall take precedence over all other activities, and a judge shall not neglect the business of the court.

(i)  A judge shall provide to every person who has a legal interest in a proceeding, and to that person’s lawyer, the right to be heard according to law.

(ii)  A judge shall not communicate or permit or cause another to communicate with a lawyer or party about any matter in an adversary proceeding outside the course of the proceeding, except with the consent of the parties or as expressly authorized by law or permitted by this rule.

(iii)  A judge may communicate ex parte when circumstances require for scheduling, administrative purposes or emergencies that do not deal with substantive matters or issues on the merits; provided, that:

(A)  The judge reasonably believes that no party will gain a procedural or tactical advantage as a result of the ex parte communication; and

(B)  The judge makes provision by delegation or otherwise promptly to notify all other parties of the substance of the ex parte communication and allows an opportunity to respond.

(iv)  Except as provided in subsection (2)(a)(v) of this section, a judge shall promptly disclose to the parties any communication not otherwise prohibited by this rule that will or reasonably may influence the outcome of any adversary proceeding. The disclosure shall identify the person with whom the communication occurred and the substance of the communication, and the judge shall give the parties a reasonable opportunity to respond to the information disclosed.

(v)  Subsection (2)(a)(iv) of this section does not limit or require disclosure to a party of any discussions about legal or administrative matters or other matters in the record related to a case that occur between a judge and any of the following: another judge of the same level; employees of the court; or employees of the judicial branch of government.

(b)  A judge shall not, while a proceeding is pending in any court within the judge’s jurisdiction, make any public comment that might reasonably be expected to affect the outcome or impair the fairness of the proceeding. The judge shall require similar abstention on the part of court personnel who are subject to the judge’s direction or control. This rule shall not prohibit a judge from making public statements in the course of official duties, from explaining for public information the procedures of the courts, from establishing a defense to a criminal charge or civil claim against the judge or from otherwise responding to allegations concerning the judge’s conduct in the proceeding.

(c)  A judge possessing knowledge that another judge or a lawyer has committed a violation of the rules of judicial or professional conduct or law that raises a substantial question as to that individual’s honesty, trustworthiness or fitness as a judge or lawyer shall inform the Commission on Judicial Fitness and Disability or the Oregon State Bar Disciplinary Counsel.

(d)  A judge possessing knowledge or evidence concerning another judge or lawyer shall reveal that knowledge or evidence on request by a tribunal or other authority empowered to investigate or act upon the conduct.

(e)  A judge shall disqualify himself or herself in a proceeding in which the judge’s impartiality reasonably may be questioned, including but not limited to instances when:

(i)  The judge has a bias or prejudice concerning a party or has personal knowledge of disputed evidentiary facts concerning the proceeding;

(ii)  The judge served as a lawyer in the matter in controversy, or a lawyer with whom the judge previously was associated served during the association as a lawyer in the matter, or the judge or the lawyer has been a material witness in the matter;

(iii)  The judge knows that the judge, individually or as a fiduciary, or the judge’s spouse, parent or child, wherever residing, or any other person residing in the judge’s household has a financial interest in the subject matter in controversy, is a party to the proceeding or has any other interest that could be substantially affected by the outcome of the proceeding;

(iv)  The judge, the judge’s spouse, parent or child, wherever residing, or any other person residing in the judge’s household:

(A)  Is a party to the proceeding, or an officer, director, partner or trustee of a party; 

(B)  Is acting as a lawyer in the proceeding; 

(C)  Is known by the judge to have an interest that could be substantially affected by the outcome of the proceeding; or 

(D)  Is, to the judge’s knowledge, likely to be a material witness in the proceeding.

(f)  A judge shall be responsible for knowing about the judge’s financial interests, including such interests relating to service as a fiduciary, and shall make reasonable efforts to be informed about the financial interests of the judge’s spouse, domestic partner, parents and children, wherever residing.

(g)  For purposes of this subsection: 

(i)  "Fiduciary" includes relationships such as personal representative, trustee, conservator and guardian; 

(ii)  "Financial interest" means more than de minimus ownership of a legal or equitable interest or a relationship as director, advisor or other active participant in the affairs of a party, except that:

(A)  Ownership in a mutual or common investment fund that owns securities is not a "financial interest" unless the judge participates in the management of the fund; 

(B)  Holding an office in an educational, religious, charitable, fraternal or civic organization is not a "financial interest" in property of the organization; 

(C)  The proprietary interest of a policyholder in a mutual insurance company, a depositor in mutual savings association, or a similar proprietary interest, is a "financial interest" in the organization only if the outcome of the proceeding could substantially affect the value of the interest; and 

(D)  Ownership of government securities is a "financial interest" in the issuer only if the outcome of the proceeding could substantially affect the value of the securities.

(h)  A judge who is disqualified under this subsection may, rather than withdraw from the proceeding, disclose on the record the basis of the disqualification. If, after such disclosure, the parties all agree in writing or on the record that the judge’s relationship is immaterial or that the judge’s financial interest is insubstantial, the judge may participate in the proceeding. Any writing, signed by or on behalf of all parties, shall be incorporated in the record of the proceeding.

(i)  A judge shall be faithful to the law and shall decide matters on the basis of the facts and applicable law. 

(j)  A judge shall not be swayed by partisan interests, public clamor or fear of criticism.

(k)  A judge shall maintain order and decorum in proceedings before the judge.

(l)  A judge shall be patient, dignified and courteous to litigants, jurors, witnesses, lawyers, court personnel and members of the public.

(m)  A judge shall not act in a way that the judge knows, or reasonably should know, would be perceived by a reasonable person as biased or prejudiced toward any of the litigants, jurors, witnesses, lawyers or members of the public.

(n)  A judge shall require lawyers and court personnel who are subject to the judge’s direction or control to act in accord with the principles embodied in subsections (1) and (2) of this section. (JR 2-101 – JR 2-110)

(3)  Conflict with Judicial Obligations.

(a)  A judge shall not serve as an officer, director, trustee or advisor of a private or public corporation or of an educational, religious, charitable, fraternal, political or civic organization if the corporation or organization regularly engages in proceedings that would ordinarily come before the judge or in adversary proceedings in any court in Oregon.

(b)(i)  A judge shall not personally solicit funds for any private or public entity or for any educational, religious, charitable, fraternal, political, or civic organization, or use or permit the use of the prestige of the judicial office, including a reference to the judge’s official position, for that purpose. 

(ii)  Notwithstanding subsection (3)(b)(i) of this section, a judge may:

(A)  Assist a private or public entity devoted to improvement of the law, legal education, the legal system, or the administration of justice in raising, managing, or investing funds;

(B)  Personally solicit funds from or make recommendations to private and public granting agencies with respect to private or public entities devoted to the improvement of the law, legal education, the legal system, or the administration of justice;

(C)  Permit the judge’s name and position to be identified in stationery or other materials listing officers, directors, trustees, or committee members of a private or public entity devoted to the improvement of the law, legal education, the legal system, or the administration of justice;

(D)  Appear at, participate in, or permit the judge’s name or title to be used in connection with, fundraising events for private or public entities devoted to the improvement of the law, legal education, the legal system, or the administration of justice;

(E)  Assist a not-for-profit private or public educational, religious, charitable, fraternal, or civic organization in raising, managing or investing funds. Such assistance may not include making a direct request for financial support for the entity as part of the judge’s involvement or permitting the judge’s title to be used in connection with such a request.

(iii)  "Personally solicit funds," as used in this subsection, means a direct request for financial support in person, by letter, by telephone, or by any other means of communication but does not include receiving and handling funds or goods donated or offered in exchange for goods or services sold to raise funds.

(iv)  "Assist ... in raising, managing or investing funds," as used in this subsection, means any fundraising activity other than personally soliciting funds.

(c)  A judge shall not directly or indirectly accept gifts, bequests, favors or loans from anyone, except that a judge may accept:

(i)  Gifts incident to a public testimonial to the judge, publications supplied by publishers on a complimentary basis for official use or invitations to the judge to attend law-related functions or activities related to the improvement of law, legal education, the legal system, or the administration of justice;

(ii)  Ordinary social hospitality; gifts, bequests, favors or loans from relatives; gifts from friends for wedding, birthday or other personal occasions; loans from lending institutions in the regular course of business on terms generally available to persons who are not judges; or scholarships, fellowships or grants awarded on terms applied to other applicants;

(iii)  Any other gift, bequest, favor or loan only if the donor is not a party or other person whose interests have come or are likely to come before the judge.

(d)  Nonpublic information acquired by a judge in a judicial capacity shall not be used or disclosed for any purpose not related to judicial duties. (Ord. 2947 § 4, 2005)


2.20.070      Supervision – Removal.

Pursuant to City Charter no appointed official may supervise the judge’s performance; accordingly, the city council alone may take action to remove a judge for misconduct in office or willful violation of applicable rules or standards of conduct; however, the council may refer said complaint or investigation to the Oregon State Bar for appropriate investigation or action, and the council may, in its sole discretion, appoint a hearing examiner, investigator or citizen board to conduct a hearing or investigation and make recommendations to the council regarding the judge’s conduct or performance. A judge shall not be removed during his or her term of office except if the judge ceases to be qualified for office, e.g., no longer an active member of the Oregon State Bar, or except for misconduct or violation of applicable rules or standards of conduct. Notwithstanding the above, the council may, without cause, remove the sitting municipal court judge upon payment of a severance equal to the compensation due for the unexpired term of the judge. (Ord. 2947 § 5, 2005)


2.20.080      Complaints.

No complaint concerning the municipal court judge shall be accepted or considered by the council unless the complainant has submitted such complaint in writing and verified the truthfulness of the allegations and facts asserted in the complaint. The council may summarily dismiss the complaint if it is determined to be unfounded or refer the matter to the appropriate agency for a hearing. (Ord. 2947 § 6, 2005)


Chapter 2.24       JURIES AND JURY TRIALS

Sections:

2.24.010  Master jury list.

2.24.020  Jury term list.

2.24.030  Disqualification of jurors.

2.24.040  Juror summons.

2.24.050  Juror orientation.

2.24.060  Trial schedule.

2.24.070  Pretrial conference.

2.24.080  Juror confirmation.

2.24.090  Final jury selection.

2.24.100  Juror compensation.

2.24.110  Notice – Contempt of court.


2.24.010      Master jury list.

At least once a year, upon order of the municipal judge, the court clerk shall prepare or obtain a master list of names and places of residence of persons selected by random means from electoral rolls. If the master list becomes exhausted or the presiding judge believes it soon will become so, additional jurors may be added to the master list from the electoral rolls in the same random manner as before, and these persons may be summoned in the same manner as those added to the term jury list. (Ord. 2544 § 1, 1988)


2.24.020      Jury term list.

Not less than 10 days from the beginning of the jury term ordered by the municipal judge, a term jury list of names and places of residence of persons randomly selected from the master jury list shall be prepared. The number of names on the list shall be determined, as needed, by the municipal judge. (Ord. 2544 § 2, 1988)


2.24.030      Disqualification of jurors.

When it appears to the municipal judge that the person whose name is drawn is dead or resides out of the city, the ballot shall be destroyed. If it appears to the municipal judge, or he has good reason to believe, that a person whose name is drawn is temporarily absent from the city, or is ill, or is so engaged as to be unable to attend at the time of the trial without great inconvenience, the ballot shall be laid aside, the name not placed on the jury list for the trial for which the jury in being selected, but such ballot shall be returned to the jury box after the drawing is completed. (Ord. 2544 § 3, 1988)


2.24.040      Juror summons.

Not less than 10 days before the beginning of the jury term, the court clerk shall mail notice of summons, juror questionnaire, and information letter to each person on the term jury list. If the term jury list becomes exhausted or the presiding judge believes it may become so, additional jurors may be selected from the master list and added to the term jury list in the same random manner as before. These may be summoned either by written notice through the mail or by official personal delivery, at a reasonable period of time before attendance is required. (Ord. 2544 § 4, 1988)


2.24.050      Juror orientation.

At the time a person is summoned to serve as a juror, the municipal judge shall question the person to determine the eligibility of that person to serve as a juror. This may be accomplished by sending juror eligibility forms to each prospective juror by mail or official delivery along with the summons. Failure to complete and return the form with accurate information and by a specified date without a proper showing of just cause for such a failure can result in punishment for contempt. Review of the juror questionnaire shall usually be done at the juror orientation for each jury term. The municipal judge shall explain the duties of jurors, discuss the questionnaire with prospective jurors and determine the eligibility of a sufficient number for two jury panels for the term. (Ord. 2544 § 5, 1988)


2.24.060      Trial schedule.

An initial list of trials for each jury panel shall be distributed to eligible jurors that become members of a jury panel at the juror orientation. New or rescheduled trials may be added to the jury panel’s trial schedule by mail or actual notice at any time during the term. (Ord. 2544 § 6, 1988)


2.24.070      Pretrial conference.

The municipal judge shall schedule pretrial conferences at least three working days prior to each scheduled trial. A written, pretrial summary prepared by the city and defense counsel may be approved by the judge prior to the scheduled date of pretrial. If a pretrial summary is not approved in advance, the city attorney, defense counsel, and the defendant shall appear at City Hall at the scheduled pretrial date and time. The municipal judge may establish by order such forms and procedures deemed necessary for the pretrial conference. (Ord. 2544 § 7, 1988)


2.24.080      Juror confirmation.

Each juror shall be instructed to contact municipal court prior to each scheduled jury trial assigned to that juror and to record confirmation of their availability. After the pretrial conference, the municipal court clerk shall record the telephone message informing jurors of the final trial scheduled. The municipal court clerk shall prepare the jury list from juror confirmations for the municipal judge. (Ord. 2544 § 8, 1988)


2.24.090      Final jury selection.

At the time of trial, six confirmed eligible potential jurors shall be called by the municipal judge for to the jury box for voir dire examination by the city attorney and defense counsel. Potential jurors may be excused by the municipal judge for cause as defined under state law. Each attorney may exercise up to three preemptory challenges in the manner directed by the municipal judge. (Ord. 2544 § 9, 1988)


2.24.100      Juror compensation.

Jurors who appear at the trial and serve as jurors shall receive as compensation for such services the sum of $10.00 for each day of attendance upon the municipal court. (Ord. 2544 § 10, 1988)


2.24.110      Notice – Contempt of court.

When a jury is drawn, summons therefor shall be issued and mailed by the municipal judge. Any person notified to appear as a juror and disregarding such notice may be adjudged in contempt of court by the municipal judge. (Ord. 2544 § 11, 1988)


Chapter 2.28 CITY LIBRARY AND LIBRARY BOARD

Sections:

2.28.010    Public library established.

2.28.020    Financing.

2.28.030    Hearings.

2.28.040    Council responsibility.

2.28.045    Library rules and compliance therewith.

2.28.050    Library board.

2.28.060    Terms of office – Vacancies.

2.28.070    Officers.

2.28.080    Duties and powers.

2.28.090    Gifts and bequests.


2.28.010 Public library established.

There is hereby established a public library to be known as the “city of St. Helens public library” pursuant to ORS 357.417(a). (Ord. 2627 § 1, 1991)


2.28.020 Financing.

The city proposes to finance the library out of the general fund of the budget, but does have authority and may finance the library by an annual serial levy, providing the same has been approved by the qualified voters of the city. (Ord. 2627 § 2, 1991)


2.28.030 Hearings.

The public library shall not be abolished, nor shall support be withdrawn therefrom, unless at least two public hearings are first held at least 90 days apart. Notice of the public hearings shall be given in a newspaper of general circulation within the city for two successive weeks at least 30 days prior to each hearing. (Ord. 2627 § 3, 1991)


2.28.040 Council responsibility.

The librarian is directly responsible to the city council, unless otherwise provided by city ordinance. Annually the mayor assigns to individual councilmembers liaison responsibility for city departments. The mayor shall assign at least one city councilperson liaison responsibility for the operation of the public library. The liaison shall be responsible for reporting to the city council on the general operation of the library facility, including personnel matters and expenditures of all budgeted funds. The councilperson shall seek the counsel of and consult with the library board and may take part in their deliberations, but the councilperson shall not be a voting member of the library board. The councilperson shall serve as a liaison between the library board and the city council. (Ord. 2943 § 1, 2005; Ord. 2627 § 4, 1991)


2.28.045 Library rules and compliance therewith. 

The librarian shall promulgate rules of conduct to be observed by patrons of the library. Failure to comply with the library rules shall constitute a violation and may be prosecuted as provided in SHMC 1.06.060 through 1.06.160. (Ord. 3152 § 1, 2011)


2.28.050 Library board.

The library board shall consist of at least seven members and no more than nine members appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. A majority of members shall be residents of the city. No member of the library board shall have any financial interest, either directly or indirectly, in any contract to which the library is a party, nor shall any such member receive a salary or any payment for material or for any services rendered the board. Board members may be reimbursed for expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. (Ord. 3212 § 1, 2017; Ord. 2627 § 5, 1991)


2.28.060 Terms of office – Vacancies.

At their first meeting, two of the newly appointed members of the library board shall fill vacancies then existing. The other newly appointed members shall choose their term of office by lot as follows: one member shall hold office for a term expiring on June 30, 2018, and the other newly appointed member shall hold office for a term beginning July 1, 2017, and ending on June 30, 2021. Succeeding appointees shall hold office for a term of four years from July 1st in the year of their appointment. At the expiration of the term of any board member, the mayor shall appoint a new member or may reappoint a member for a term of four years with the confirmation of the city council. If a vacancy occurs, the mayor shall appoint a new member to complete the unexpired term with the confirmation of the city council. No person shall hold appointment as a member for more than two full consecutive terms, but any person may be appointed again to the board after an interval of one year. Any board member failing to attend three consecutive board meetings without approval of the board may be removed by the city council and a new member appointed to complete the unexpired term. (Ord. 3212 § 2, 2017; Ord. 2627 § 6, 1991)


2.28.070 Officers.

Majority members of the board shall comprise a quorum. At the first meeting of each year, the board shall elect a chairman and a vice-chairman, who shall serve for a term of one year. The librarian shall serve as secretary to the board and keep the record of its action. The board shall have authority to make and alter rules, with approval of the city council, for its government and procedure. (Ord. 2627 § 7, 1991)


2.28.080 Duties and powers.

The duties of the library board shall include:

(1) Keeping informed about current trends in library services and administration;

(2) Studying library growth and needs in the city and its vicinity;

(3) Developing long-range plans for library service and facilities, consistent with city priorities and with state, regional and national goals pertinent to libraries;

(4) Recommending types of library service for the city and its vicinity;

(5) Investigating sources of funding for library service and facilities;

(6) Recommending policies for the acceptance and use of gifts for library purposes;

(7) Participation in the annual budgetary process of the city where the process pertains to the library;

(8) Recommending policies and procedures conducive to efficient and effective operation of the library;

(9) Reviewing and recommending terms for contracts and working relationships with other public agencies regarding library services;

(10) Encouraging widespread public support and use of the library;

(11) Submitting an annual report to the city council and the state library; and 

(12) Performing other duties as authorized by the city council. (Ord. 2627 § 8, 1991)


2.28.090 Gifts and bequests.

The board may solicit gifts and bequests of real or personal property or funds (other than fees and fines) to benefit the library.

Acquisition of real or personal property by gift shall occur by a legal instrument of conveyance or other writing transferring title of the real or personal property to the city, and such instrument shall clearly define the rights and responsibilities of all parties. The city council shall decide whether to accept all such gifts of property on behalf of the city and the library that have a value in excess of $250.00 or that impose financial obligations on the city.

All property or funds shall be administered by the city in accordance with its terms. Funds donated to the library shall be placed in a special account to be used exclusively for the improvement of the library or as designated by the donor. Funds in this account may only be expended after they have been properly budgeted or approved by the city.

Donated funds shall be used for improvements in addition to, and not in lieu of, the normal support provided to operate the library out of the city general fund. (Ord. 3044 § 1, 2007; Ord. 2627 § 9, 1991)


Chapter 2.32 NOMINATING PROCEDURES FOR CITY OFFICERS

Sections:

2.32.010    Nominating procedures.

2.32.020    Nominating petitions and declarations of candidacy.

2.32.030    Declaration fee.

2.32.040    Signatures required.

2.32.050    Position number.

2.32.060    List of candidates.


2.32.010 Nominating procedures.

City officers shall be nominated by the same procedures as provided in state election laws for nominating candidates for nonpartisan offices except as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2504 § 1, 1986)


2.32.020 Nominating petitions and declarations of candidacy.

Nomination petitions and declarations of candidacy for city council shall clearly indicate one position number for the candidacy that corresponds to a city council position that is to be filled in that general election. (Ord. 2515, 1986; Ord. 2504 § 2, 1986)


2.32.030 Declaration fee.

The fee for declarations of candidacy for city office shall be as set forth in the most recent universal fee schedule adopted by council. (Ord. 3219 § 1, 2017; Ord. 2504 § 3, 1986)


2.32.040 Signatures required.

Nominating petitions shall contain at least 30 signatures of qualified electors residing in the city that are registered to vote in at least two city precincts. (Ord. 2504 § 4, 1986)


2.32.050 Position number.

Effective upon the swearing in of the newly elected city councilors in January, 1987, each city councilmember shall be assigned a position number, 1 through 4, based on the alphabetical order of their last name. Hereafter, candidates for city council shall be nominated and elected by the city electors at-large by position number. (Ord. 2515, 1986; Ord. 2504 § 5, 1986)


2.32.060 List of candidates.

The city election officer shall include in the certified statement of city offices to be filled and candidates nominated in each general election the list of the city council candidates by the position number for which they have been nominated. (Ord. 2504 § 6, 1986)


Chapter 2.36 ARTS AND CULTURAL COMMISSION

Sections:

Article I. General Provisions

2.36.010    Establishment.

2.36.020    Definition of arts and cultural.

2.36.030    Membership.

2.36.040    Term of office.

2.36.050    Vacancies and removals.

2.36.060    Responsibilities.

Article II. Review of Public Art Proposals

2.36.070    Purpose.

2.36.080    Applicability.

2.36.090    Definitions.

2.36.100    Creation, funding and use of St. Helens public art account.

2.36.110    Review process for public art proposals.

2.36.120    Guidelines for recommendation by the commission.

2.36.130    Standards for the St. Helens public art collection.

2.36.140    Maintenance of the city’s public art collection.

2.36.150    Parks and trails commission.

Article I. General Provisions


2.36.010 Establishment.

There is created a St. Helens arts and cultural commission whose duties and responsibilities are to:

(1) Encourage opportunities for recognition of art and culture in the city of St. Helens.

(2) Provide coordination and communication among groups and individuals engaged in art and cultural activities.

(3) Identify funding sources and help to secure such funding as necessary to promote art and cultural activities in the city of St. Helens.

(4) Identify groups and organizations which could bring art and cultural activities and enrichment to the city of St. Helens.

(5) Provide a liaison and recommendations to the city council and other city commissions and boards regarding projects in the five-year plan and other approved visual art projects.

(6) Development of a five-year plan for art and cultural activities in the city of St. Helens, subject to approval by the city council. The plan shall include, but not be limited to, proposed capital improvement projects for public art. (Ord. 2956 § 2, 2005; Ord. 2921 § 1, 2004)


2.36.020 Definition of arts and cultural.

“Arts” and “cultural” shall include but not be limited to music, drama, dance, creative writing and poetry, architecture and landscape design, painting, sculpture, photography, graphics, craft and folk art, film and video, and such other endeavors as may be designated by the commission. (Ord. 2921 § 2, 2004)


2.36.030 Membership.

The commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the mayor and approved by the city council. (Ord. 2949 § 1, 2005; Ord. 2921 § 3, 2004)


2.36.040 Term of office.

Initially, two members shall serve for two years and three members shall serve for three years. Appointments thereafter shall be made for three years. The sixth and seventh members appointed shall serve until September 30, 2008, and thereafter, the terms will be for three years. (Ord. 2949 § 1, 2005; Ord. 2921 § 4, 2004)


2.36.050 Vacancies and removals.

Any vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term by appointment by the mayor and approval by the council. Any member may be removed for cause. A member of the commission who is absent from two consecutive meetings without an excuse approved by the commission is presumed to be in nonperformance of duty and the city council shall declare the position vacant and appoint a new member to fill the unexpired term. (Ord. 2921 § 5, 2004)


2.36.060 Responsibilities.

The commission shall adopt its own rules for appointment of officers and the frequency and conduct of its meetings. All meetings are subject to the requirements of the Oregon Public Meetings Law (ORS 192.610 through 192.690). A majority of the members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of business and the concurrence of a majority of those members present shall be required to decide any matter. Minutes shall be forwarded to the council after adoption by the commission for acceptance by the city council. (Ord. 2921 § 6, 2004)

Article II. Review of Public Art Proposals


2.36.070 Purpose.

Recommendations from the St. Helens arts and cultural commission regarding the acquisition and placement of public art should be based upon accepted standards and guidelines as opposed to personal opinion. Accordingly, the purpose of this article is to provide assistance to the arts and cultural commission by adoption of standards and guidelines commonly used by other governmental entities when evaluating public art proposals. The arts and cultural commission will commit to making meaningful outreach and public education a part of every public art project. This will ensure that the citizens of St. Helens have full access to the artworks created under this program. (Ord. 2978 § 2, 2006; Ord. 2952 § 1, 2005)


2.36.080 Applicability.

The processes, standards and guidelines of this article concern visual works of art located on real property owned by the city of St. Helens or such other properties made available to the city for public art use by written agreement. For purposes of this article, visual works of art include but are not limited to:

(1) Sculptures and monuments in any combination of materials that are freestanding, wall-supported, or suspended; kinetic; or electronic.

(2) Displays, such as murals, drawings, photographs, prints, calligraphy, or paintings in any combination of materials.

(3) Earthworks, fibers, neon, glass, mosaics; any combination of forms of medias including sound, literary elements, film and video; hybrids of any media and new genres.

(4) Furnishings and outdoor fixtures created by an artist as unique elements or limited editions. Examples include, but are not limited to: gates, railings, streetlights, signage, and seating. 

(5) Architecture on new city structures or landscape designs created by an artist that use architecture and landscape as an integral part of their artwork. 

(6) Temporary artworks or installations, if such artworks serve the purpose of providing community and educational outreach. (Ord. 3097 § 1, 2008; Ord. 2978 § 3, 2006; Ord. 2952 § 2, 2005)


2.36.090 Definitions. 

(1) “Acquisition” means the inclusion of an artwork in the St. Helens public art collection by any means including direct purchase, commission or acceptance of a gift.

(2) “Artwork” means visual works of public art as defined herein.

(3) “Capital improvement program (CIP)” means the city’s program for advance planning of capital improvements. 

(4) “City council” means the city of St. Helens city council, the governing body of the city of St. Helens. 

(5) “City project” or “project” means any capital improvement project in an amount over $25,000 paid for wholly or in part by the city of St. Helens to purchase, construct, remodel or reconstruct any public building, decorative or commemorative public structure, or any portion thereof, within the limits of the city of St. Helens. “City project” or “project” does not include property acquisition, earthwork, street, sidewalk, pathway or public utility construction, emergency work, minor alterations, rehabilitation, minor or partial replacement, remodeling or ordinary repair or maintenance necessary to preserve a facility. Notwithstanding the above limitation, the city council or responsible contracting officer may include any new city utility project in an amount over $25,000 (limited to water, sewer and storm water projects – inclusive of new underground lines or new vertical improvements) as a city project under this article, by either vote of the council or inclusion in the contract solicitation documents prepared by the responsible contracting officer. 

(6) “Commission” means the St. Helens arts and cultural commission created by Ordinance 2921, as amended, consisting of seven members appointed by the city council. 

(7) “Eligible funds” means a source of funds for projects from which art is not precluded as an object of expenditure. 

(8) “Participating department” means the department that is subject to this article by its sponsorship of a city project.

(9) “Percent for art” means the program established by this article to set aside a percentage of the total cost of city projects for public art.

(10) “Public art” means all forms of original works of art accessible to the public and/or public employees, including:

(a) Painting of all media, including both portable and permanently fixed works, such as murals;

(b) Sculpture which may be in the round, bas-relief, high-relief, mobile, fountain, kinetic, electronic and others, in any material or combination of materials;

(c) Artistic or aesthetic elements of overall architecture or landscape design; 

(d) Other visual media including, but not limited to, prints, drawings, stained glass, calligraphy, glass works, mosaics, photography, film, clay, fiber/textiles, wood, metals, plastics or other materials or combination of materials, or crafts or artifacts;

(e) Visual works utilizing a wide range of materials, disciplines and media which are of specific duration, including performance events, and which are documented for public accessibility after the life of the piece has ended;

(f) Artworks that possess functional as well as aesthetic qualities, such as unique or limited edition furnishings or fixtures, including but not limited to gates, railings, streetlights, and signage.

(11) “Public art account” means the city of St. Helens public art account in the city budget established by this article into which all moneys donated, appropriated or derived pursuant to the percent for art program shall be deposited. Funds within the public art account shall be utilized for the purposes outlined in this article.

(12) “Removal” means the exclusion of an artwork from the St. Helens public art collection by the removal and disposal through any available means, such as relinquishing title through sale, gift or destruction.

(13) “St. Helens public art collection” means all public art acquired by the city by any means.

(14) “Total cost” means the entire amount of the city’s contribution toward the price for construction of a project. “Total cost” does not include costs for design and engineering, administration, fees and permits, building demolition, relocation of tenants, contingency funds, change order costs, environmental testing or indirect costs, such as interest during construction, advertising and legal fees. (Ord. 3097 § 2, 2008; Ord. 2978 § 4, 2006; Ord. 2952 § 3, 2005)


2.36.100 Creation, funding and use of St. Helens public art account.

(1) Establishment. The city council hereby establishes a separate account entitled the St. Helens public art account to be reflected in the city budget. All funds donated, appropriated or generated for the purpose of public art acquisition and education shall be deposited in this account and used solely for such purposes, in accordance with this article and other applicable law. 

(2) Permitted Purposes of Public Art Account. The public art account shall be used solely for the acquisition, placement and removal of artworks for inclusion in the St. Helens public art collection and for art education purposes, such as community outreach presentations and workshops, in accordance with the provisions of this article and other applicable law.

(3) Requirement for Dedication of a Percent for Art. Except as provided in subsection (3)(e) of this section, any city official or employee who authorizes or appropriates expenditures on behalf of a participating department for a city project shall, to the degree that the funds are eligible, include within the budget for the project a monetary contribution for the public art account equal to one and one-half percent of the total cost of the project.

(a) One and one-half percent of the total cost of a qualifying city project shall be dedicated to the public art account. Such funds shall be deposited into the public art account by the city official or employee acting on behalf of the participating department no earlier than the time that budgeted funds are encumbered for construction of the city project and no later than final inspection of the completed city project.

(b) Of the one and one-half percent dedication noted in subsection (3)(a) of this section, one percent of the total cost of city projects shall be used for costs associated with the acquisition of public art including, but not limited to, the design, purchase and siting of public art.

(c) Of the one and one-half percent dedication noted in subsection (3)(a) of this section, no more than one-half percent of the total cost of city projects shall be used for costs associated with administration of public art programs, including, but not limited to, costs of selection, conservation and maintenance of the collection, community education, removal and registration of public art.

(d) The participating department shall consider the siting of public art as part of the design and engineering phase of any city project. If costs are incurred by the participating department to comply with this article requirement prior to transfer of the one and one-half percent dedication for the city project to the public art account, the participating department may deduct such costs (not to exceed one-half percent) from the one and one-half percent dedication at the time such funds are transferred.

(e) If the city project is a city public utility project, the percent for art shall be one-half percent instead of the normal one and one-half percent established for other projects. Allocations, if any, for administration (subsection (3)(c) of this section) shall be specified in the contract documents or council authorization. 

(4) Restricted Funds. If funding for a particular city project is subject to legal restrictions that preclude public art as an object for expenditure, the portion of the city project that is funded with the restricted funds shall be exempt from the dedication requirements of this article.

(5) Phased Projects. As a general rule, where a city project will be constructed in phases, the one and one-half percent dedication shall be applied to the estimated total cost of each phase of the city project at the time that funds for the phase are appropriated and encumbered. However, nothing in this section prevents the city council from deciding to hold or set aside all or part of the entire dedication from the funds of a particular phase, as the council deems appropriate. In determining when to hold or set aside the funds for a phased project, the city will consider an overall public art plan for the project to ensure that art is not located on a piecemeal basis with phase construction.

(6) Monetary contributions for public art shall be deposited in separate accounts within the public art account if separate accounting is deemed appropriate by the city finance officer or is required by law.

(7) Monetary contributions or appropriations made other than through the percent for art program shall be deposited in the public art account and may be dedicated to or earmarked for a specific education program or work of art, subject to acceptance by the city council.

(8) Disbursements from the public art account shall be made only after authorization of the city administrator or the city finance officer, and shall be made according to this article and other applicable city ordinances, including but not limited to the public contracting ordinance (Chapter 2.04 SHMC).

(9) The city council may adopt by resolution case specific waivers or guidelines for administration of the percent for art program, including case-by-case waivers of the required dedication set forth herein based on the availability of public funds, as well as any other matters not specifically addressed herein and appropriate or necessary to the administration of the program. (Ord. 2978 § 5, 2006; Ord. 2952 § 4, 2005)


2.36.110 Review process for public art proposals. 

(1) General. Proposals concerning public art may include proposals to acquire or remove art from the St. Helens public art collection. Proposals for acquisition of public art will generally be presented in one of two ways: (a) a work of public art may be offered to the city as a gift or donation; or (b) a work of art will be commissioned or purchased by the city using city funds or donated funds, in accordance with public contracting law. Removal of public art may be by request or owing to some damage or destruction of the artwork. 

(2) Presentation of Acquisition Proposals. Regardless of the source of the funding for the proposal for public art, a proposal for acquisition shall be formally presented by the artist to the arts and cultural commission at a public meeting, advertised in accordance with subsection (3) of this section. Proposals shall meet minimum submission requirements as set forth in the standard application form, approved by city council resolution, or as otherwise provided in the public contract solicitation document. Immediately following the presentation of the proposal, or, in the case of multiple competing proposals, after the completion of all presentations, the commission shall conduct a public hearing and shall take public input on the proposal or competing proposals. The commission may make a recommendation without conducting a public hearing only if the project cost, design and construction cost, is less than $750.00 and the size of the artwork is smaller than two feet in height, two feet in width, and two feet in depth. Presentations shall not be made to city council unless the council specifically makes such request of the artist. Failure of the commission to make a recommendation within 60 days of the formal submission of an artist’s proposal, either independently or in response to a city solicitation document (e.g., RFP), shall forfeit the commission’s opportunity to submit a recommendation and the matter shall be forwarded to the council for decision.

(3) Published Notice for Acquisition. At least 10 days prior to the presentation of proposals and hearing, notice shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The notice shall identify the subject property by address and description reasonably calculated to give notice of the location of the proposed public art site. The notice shall indicate that a public art proposal or multiple competing proposals will be made at a public meeting immediately prior to the public hearing. The public notice shall include the time, place, and date of the presentation or presentations and subsequent public hearing, as well as a statement that both written and oral testimony by the public is invited.

(4) Mailed Notice for Acquisition. At least 10 days prior to the presentation of proposals and hearing, all property owners of record within 300 feet of the location of the proposed public art site shall be sent written notice by regular mail. The notice shall include substantially the same information as required for the published notice.

(5) Conduct of the Public Hearing Regarding Acquisition. The presentation or presentations by the artists to the commission shall be during an advertised public meeting. Presentations shall be uninterrupted by the public; however, commissioners may ask questions during or following the presentations at the discretion of the chair. Following the presentations the public hearing shall be conducted permitting public comment on the proposal or competing proposals. The artists shall not be personally examined or cross-examined by the public; however, the commission may further question the artists following the public hearing. After the close of the hearing, the commission shall deliberate and vote on a recommendation to the council. The record of proceedings, including the reports, exhibits, minutes of the presentation(s), together with the summary of public comment during the hearing shall be forwarded to the council for consideration and decision.

(6) Removal and Disposal Process. Except as provided in SHMC 2.36.130, neither the council nor the commission is bound to follow any particular process for removal and disposal of art in the St. Helens public art collection. (Ord. 3143 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2978 § 6, 2006; Ord. 2952 § 5, 2005)


2.36.120 Guidelines for recommendation by the commission.

(1) Selection Guidelines for Works of Public Art.

(a) Quality. The work of art should be of exceptional quality and enduring value.

(b) Site. The work of art should enhance the existing character of the site by taking into account scale, color, material, texture, content, and the social dynamics of the location.

(c) Initial Cost. The total cost of the artwork including all items related to its installation should be considered.

(d) Maintenance and Durability. The cost to maintain the artwork should be considered and quantified, particularly if the work is servicing, repainting, repairing or replacement of moving parts.

(e) Media. All forms of visual media shall be considered, subject to any requirements set forth by city ordinance.

(f) History and Nature. Works of art should consider the historical, natural features, and the relationship to the existing architecture of the site.

(g) Public Liability. The works of art should not result in safety hazards, nor cause extraordinary liability to the city.

(h) Diversity. The works of art in the St. Helens public art collection should encourage cultural diversity.

(i) Vision. The works of art shall be supportive of the city’s vision.

(2) Guidelines for Site Selection.

(a) Ownership or Control. Public art should be placed on a site owned by the city, or there should be a written agreement for its use.

(b) Visual Accessibility. Public art should be easily visible and accessible to the public.

(c) Visual Enhancement. Public art should visually enhance the overall public environment and pedestrian streetscape.

(d) Pedestrian Accessibility. Public art should experience high levels of pedestrian traffic and be part of the city’s circulation paths.

(e) Circulation. Public art should not block windows, entranceways, or obstruct normal pedestrian circulation.

(f) Scale. Public art should not be placed in a site where it is overwhelmed or competing with the scale of the site, adjacent architecture, large signage, billboards, etc. (Ord. 2952 § 6, 2005)


2.36.130 Standards for the St. Helens public art collection.

(1) Acquisitions.

(a) Artworks may be acquired by direct purchase, commission, gift or any other means.

(b) Acquisition, whether by direct purchase, commission, gift, or otherwise, shall occur by a legal instrument of conveyance or other writing transferring title of the artwork to the city and clearly defining the rights and responsibilities of all parties.

(c) All legal rights to artwork shall be acquired by the city without legal or ethical restrictions on the future use of said artworks, except where expressly provided in the contract with the artist as to any other clearly defined residual rights incorporated into the contract.

(d) Complete records shall be created and maintained for all artworks in the St. Helens public art collection.

(2) Removal.

(a) Arts and cultural commission may recommend removal and/or disposal based on one or more of the following conditions. No public hearing is required for a removal recommendation.

(i) The site for an artwork has become inappropriate because the site is no longer accessible to the public or the physical site is to be destroyed or significantly altered.

(ii) The artwork is found to be forged or counterfeit.

(iii) The artwork possesses substantial demonstrated faults of design or workmanship.

(iv) The artwork causes excessive or unreasonable maintenance.

(v) The artwork is damaged irreparably, or so severely that repair is impractical.

(vi) The artwork presents a physical threat to public safety.

(vii) The artwork is rarely displayed.

(viii) A written request for removal has been received from the artist.

(b) Council Removal Process.

(i) Following receipt of a recommendation for the arts and cultural commission the city council may remove and dispose of any artwork previously accepted into the St. Helens public art collection in their sole discretion.

(ii) Acceptance or placement of donated art by the city does not guarantee continuous public display of the artwork regardless of physical integrity, identity, authenticity, or physical condition of the site.

(iii) Removal officially deletes the work from the city of St. Helens public art collection by a relinquishment of title to the artwork; thus, eliminating the city’s obligation to maintain and preserve the artwork.

(c) Removal and Disposal.

(i) The city may donate the artwork to another governmental entity or a nonprofit organization.

(ii) A work that is deemed to have retained sufficient monetary value to warrant resale, shall be disposed of through a public sale, auction, or any other means as established in city ordinance.

(iii) Artworks removed from the St. Helens public art collection may be disposed of through any appropriate means, including the city’s procedures for the disposition of surplus property.

(3) Borrowing of Artworks.

(a) The arts and cultural commission may also recommend artworks be borrowed. 

(b) With the exception of ownership, the eligibility, review criteria, and procedure for borrowed works shall be the same as those established in this article for acquisition. 

(c) The borrowing of artworks shall be pursuant to written agreement between the city and the artist.

(d) Nothing herein prohibits the city from securing other works of art or art exhibitions for display inside its facilities. (Ord. 2952 § 7, 2005)


2.36.140 Maintenance of the city’s public art collection.

(1) Except where expressly provided in a contract or warranty for public art the city shall be responsible for all maintenance of all artworks acquired into the St. Helens public art collection.

(2) Within the limitation of the city budget the city shall provide necessary and appropriate maintenance of the St. Helens public art collection, including, but not limited to, regular custodial care and landscape maintenance. Maintenance shall be performed in accordance with any special instructions or procedures necessary for the preservation of the work.

(3) Any evidence of damage, deterioration, vandalism or theft of artworks in the St. Helens public art collection shall be immediately reported to the city and the arts and cultural commission. (Ord. 2952 § 8, 2005)


2.36.150 Parks and trails commission.

The standards and procedures in this article are in addition to, not in derogation of, the St. Helens parks and trails commission review responsibilities for projects proposed in city parks or on city trails. Nothing herein exempts public art projects from compliance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws including, but not limited to, land development regulations and building code compliance. (Ord. 3229 § 3, 2018; Ord. 2952 § 9, 2005)


Chapter 2.40       SIGNING OF CHECKS AND WARRANTS

Sections:

2.40.010  Signing of checks and warrants.

2.40.020  Authorized signatures.

2.40.030  Required signatures.


2.40.010      Signing of checks and warrants.

All checks and warrants of the city of St. Helens must be signed by at least two representatives of the city who are legally authorized to sign said checks or warrants. (Ord. 2293 § 1, 1979)


2.40.020      Authorized signatures.

The persons authorized to sign checks or warrants on behalf of the city of St. Helens shall be as follows:

(1)  The mayor or the president of the common council of the city of St. Helens; and

(2)  The recorder or the person specifically appointed as assistant recorder of the city of St. Helens. (Ord. 2293 § 2, 1979)


2.40.030      Required signatures.

Any checks or warrants drawn on the city of St. Helens must by signed by one of the two individuals named in SHMC 2.40.020(1) and one of the two individuals named in SHMC 2.40.020(2). (Ord. 2293 § 3, 1979)


Chapter 2.44 RECORDS RETENTION AND DISPOSAL

Sections:

2.44.010    Retention schedule adopted.

2.44.020    Schedule to govern retention.

2.44.030    Filing system.


2.44.010 Retention schedule adopted.

The most current version of the City General Records Retention Schedule of the Oregon Secretary of State Archives Division is hereby adopted and incorporated by this reference herein as the retention and destruction code of the city of St. Helens. (Ord. 3186 § 1, 2015; Ord. 2771 § 1, 1998)


2.44.020 Schedule to govern retention.

The adopted City Retention Schedule shall be adhered to and shall govern the retention and disposal of all files, documents, papers, and records that are now on file in the city of St. Helens. (Ord. 2771 § 2, 1998)


2.44.030 Filing system.

The city recorder of the city of St. Helens is authorized to cause to have all papers, documents, and records received in all city departments maintained and stored to assure an expeditious and orderly filing system. All records and documents to be stored shall be placed in transfer files or suitable containers that will ensure the safekeeping of all documents and records, and each file or container shall be clearly marked as to the type of record of document contained therein, with the date of disposal, if any, noted on each file or container. (Ord. 2771 § 3, 1998)


Chapter 2.48       EMERGENCY OPERATIONS 

Sections:

2.48.010  Short title.

2.48.020  Purpose.

2.48.030  Definitions.

2.48.040  Declaration of state of emergency.

2.48.050  Coordination in a state of emergency.

2.48.060  Authority of mayor in a state of emergency. 

2.48.070  Authority to enter property.

2.48.080  Suspension of procurement requirements.

2.48.090  Nonliability for emergency services.

2.48.100  Penalty for violation of emergency ordinance, resolution, measure order.


2.48.010      Short title.

This chapter shall be known as the "emergency operations ordinance." (Ord. 2809 § 1, 1999)


2.48.020      Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide for procedures and regulatory measures which set forth the responsibilities and authority of the city in the event an emergency exists within the city. The regulations are intended to reduce the vulnerability of the city to loss of life, injury to persons or property, human suffering and financial loss resulting from emergencies and to assign authority and responsibilities to various city departments. The state has assigned the responsibility for responding to emergencies to local governments. (Ord. 2809 § 2, 1999)


2.48.030      Definitions.

(1)  "Emergency" includes any human-made or natural event or circumstance causing or threatening loss of life, injury to persons or property, human suffering or financial loss, and includes, but is not limited to, fire, explosion, flood, severe weather, drought, earthquake, volcanic activity, spills or releases of oil or other hazardous material as defined in ORS 466.605, contamination, utility or transportation emergencies, disease, blight, infestation, crisis influx of migrants unmanageable by the county, civil disturbance, riot, sabotage and war.

(2)  "State of emergency" means a situation which involves an emergency. (Ord. 2809 § 3, 1999)


2.48.040      Declaration of state of emergency.

(1)  When circumstances so warrant, any city officer, city department head or division head, or sworn police officer, after attempting consultation with the city attorney, may request the declaration of an emergency from the city council. The city council shall consider the request at a regular or emergency meeting and may declare an emergency in accordance with this section. If the nature of the emergency requires that immediate action be taken and it is not reasonably practicable for an emergency meeting of the council prior to the time action must be taken, the mayor may issue the declaration in accordance with this section. In all instances in this chapter, in the absence or incapacity of the mayor, the council president shall exercise the powers granted to the mayor, including the declaration of emergency. In council president’s absence or incapacity, any single councilperson may issue the declaration. A declaration or action by less than a quorum of the council shall be subject to review and revision by the city council.

(2)  Such declaration shall be in writing and shall:

(a)  Describe the nature of the emergency;

(b)  Designate the geographic boundaries of the area where the emergency is deemed to exist, and that portion of the affected area lying within the city limits;

(c)  Estimate the number of persons at risk, injured or killed;

(d)  Identify the type of state, county and city assistance or resources required to respond to the emergency;

(e)  Estimate the length of time during which the designated area shall remain in an emergency state; and

(f)  State the specific regulations or emergency measures imposed as a result of the declaration of emergency.

(3)  The council, or other authorized individual specified in subsection (1) of this section, shall have the power to request the governor to declare a state of emergency or disaster within the city. The request must be submitted through the governing body of Columbia County.

(4)  The council, or other authorized individual specified in subsection (1) of this section, shall terminate the state of emergency by proclamation when the emergency no longer exists or when the threat of an emergency has passed, and if the governor has declared a state of emergency, shall ask the governor to terminate the declaration. (Ord. 2972 § 1, 2005; Ord. 2809 § 4, 1999)


2.48.050      Coordination in a state of emergency.

(1)  The city hereby adopts the National Incident Management System (NIMS) as the standard for incident management during all emergency management program elements including mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery within the city’s jurisdiction.

(2)  Whenever an emergency is declared, the city shall coordinate with and follow applicable Columbia County emergency operations plans. In the event of a declaration, city department heads and division heads, city police and city officers and employees are authorized without more direction to implement any city emergency preparedness plans and programs in place, to act in cooperation with and in accordance with Columbia County emergency operations plans, and to act in accordance with state statutes, local laws, and emergency regulations and orders, to protect the health and safety of the citizens of the city of St. Helens. (Ord. 2933, 2005; Ord. 2809 § 5, 1999)


2.48.060      Authority of mayor in a state of emergency. 

Whenever an emergency is declared under this chapter, the mayor, or other authorized individual in his absence or incapacity, may authorize specific emergency powers for the duration of the emergency period and the specific areas or portions of the city wherein the emergency is declared to exist and over which the city has authority, consistent with the declaration of emergency as required to protect the public health, safety and welfare, including the following:

(1)  A curfew may be established for the area designated as an emergency area which fixes the hours during which all persons, other than public officers and officials, may not be upon the public streets or in other places;

(2)  Streets and areas may be barricaded and vehicular and pedestrian traffic prohibited or regulated on streets leading to the area designated as an emergency area for such distance as may be deemed necessary under the circumstances;

(3)  Persons may be evacuated from the emergency area, instructed to shelter in place or given instruction for other protective actions;

(4)  The mayor may prohibit or restrict the sale of alcoholic beverages and the sale of gasoline or other flammable liquids;

(5)  The mayor may declare other measures as are imminently necessary under the circumstances for the protection of life or property or to prevent or minimize danger to lives or property.

These powers are specifically delegated to the mayor when an emergency requiring immediate action exists. Whenever possible, the mayor shall convene an emergency meeting of the city council to adopt such emergency measures by ordinance or resolution as authorized by ORS 401.309. (Ord. 3174 § 1, 2014; Ord. 2809 § 6, 1999)


2.48.070      Authority to enter property.

During an emergency declared under this chapter, a city employee or agent may enter onto or upon private property, if the person has reasonable grounds to believe there is a true emergency and an immediate need for assistance for the protection of life or property, and that entering onto private land will allow the person to take steps to alleviate the emergency and prevent or minimize danger to lives or property from the declared emergency. (Ord. 2809 § 7, 1999)


2.48.080      Suspension of procurement requirements.

When an emergency is declared under this chapter, and consistent with applicable state law, the mayor is authorized to suspend the applicable public procurement requirements and, to the extent sufficient funds are available and budgeted, to redirect city funds to pay expenses incurred as a result of responding to the emergency. (Ord. 2809 § 8, 1999)


2.48.090      Nonliability for emergency services.

During the existence of a declared or undeclared emergency, the city and any agent of the city engaged in any emergency services activity, while complying with or attempting to comply with the adopted plan and this chapter, shall not, except in cases of willful misconduct, gross negligence or bad faith, be liable for the death or injury of any person, or damage or loss of property as a result of that activity. (Ord. 2809 § 9, 1999)


2.48.100      Penalty for violation of emergency ordinance, resolution, measure order.

No person shall knowingly violate any regulation promulgated pursuant to this chapter, and imposed in a state of emergency declared under this chapter. Violation of an emergency regulation shall be a class A misdemeanor. (Ord. 2809 § 10, 1999)


Chapter 2.52 MEASURE 37 CLAIMS

(Repealed by Ord. 3078)


Chapter 2.56 MEASURE 37 VOLUNTARY ASSESSMENT DISTRICT

(Repealed by Ord. 3078)


Chapter 2.60 TOURISM COMMITTEE 

(Repealed by Ord. 3199)


Chapter 2.64 BICYCLE AND PEDESTRIAN COMMISSION

(Repealed by Ord. 3229)


Chapter 2.68 URBAN RENEWAL AGENCY

Sections:

2.68.010    Declaration of blight.

2.68.020    Need.

2.68.030    Powers and limitations.

2.68.040    Agency title.

2.68.050    Membership.


2.68.010 Declaration of blight.

Pursuant to ORS 457.035, the St. Helens city council, hereinafter referred to as “city,” hereby finds and declares that blighted areas, as defined in ORS 457.010, exist within the city based upon the findings marked Exhibit A of the ordinance codified in this chapter and incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein. (Ord. 3093 § 1, 2008)


2.68.020 Need.

The city declares and recognizes that there is a need for an urban renewal agency to function within the city of St. Helens. (Ord. 3093 § 2, 2008)


2.68.030 Powers and limitations.

The city further declares, pursuant to ORS 457.045(3), that all of the rights, powers, duties, privileges and immunities granted to and vested in an urban renewal agency by the laws of the state of Oregon shall be exercised by and vested in the urban renewal agency of the city of St. Helens; provided, however, that any act of the governing body acting as the urban renewal agency shall be and shall be considered the act of the urban renewal agency only and not of the city council. (Ord. 3093 § 3, 2008)


2.68.040 Agency title.

The corporate name of the agency created by this chapter shall be, and said agency shall be known as, the St. Helens urban renewal agency. (Ord. 3093 § 4, 2008)


2.68.050 Membership.

The St. Helens urban renewal agency shall be comprised of members of the St. Helens city council as it lawfully exists from time to time. (Ord. 3093 § 5, 2008)


Chapter 2.70 YOUTH COUNCIL

Sections: 

2.70.010    Established.

2.70.020    Membership.

2.70.030    Meetings.

2.70.040    Compensation.


2.70.010 Established.

There is hereby established a St. Helens youth council, hereinafter “SHYC.” The purpose of the SHYC is to actively advise the city council with thoughtful recommendations on issues concerning youth and to assist city staff in considering youth perspectives in its planning efforts. The SHYC shall hold periodic meetings with the mayor and/or city council and will attend city council and city board and commission meetings when youth issues are on the agenda. SHYC shall create task forces as needed. (Ord. 3185 § 1, 2015)


2.70.020 Membership.

The SHYC shall be composed of 15 members, and five to 10 alternate members between the grades six through 12, from St. Helens High School, the St. Helens Middle School, St. Helens Alternative School and home schooling programs, with the majority of the members from St. Helens High School. City council shall appoint members to serve one-year terms. The existing members can continue to serve on the SHYC for two years or more if they so desire. The SHYC shall have adult nonvoting advisors. The advisors may be appointed from the city council members, school staff or may be community volunteers. (Ord. 3185 § 2, 2015)


2.70.030 Meetings.

The SHYC shall meet at least one time per month. All members shall serve on at least one task force and cannot miss more than four unexcused meetings in a one-year period. The SHYC shall choose its own officers and shall adopt rules of procedure for the proper conduct of its business. (Ord. 3185 § 3, 2015)


2.70.040 Compensation.

No member of the SHYC shall receive compensation for service, but members of the SHYC may be reimbursed necessary expenses which are approved in advance by the city council. (Ord. 3185 § 4, 2015)


Chapter 2.72 CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD CHECK POLICIES

Sections:

2.72.010    Purpose.

2.72.020    Procedure.


2.72.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to authorize the city of St. Helens police department to access Oregon State Police (OSP) criminal offender information through the Law Enforcement Data System (LEDS) to run background checks for prospective employees, city volunteers, liquor license applicants, social gaming license applicants, and any other applicant for whom the St. Helens Municipal Code requires a background check. (Ord. 3126 § 1, 2010)


2.72.020 Procedure.

All proceedings pursuant to this chapter shall be conducted in accordance with ORS 181.555 and OAR 257-010-0025, which establish procedures for access to criminal record information possessed by the Oregon State Police (OSP) through the Law Enforcement Data System (LEDS), and as supplemented below.

(1) Parties subjected to a background check under the provisions of this chapter will be required to authorize the city to conduct a criminal offender information check through the OSP LEDS system.

(2) The city administrator will maintain the criminal history authorization forms for those doing work on behalf of the city and request that a criminal history check be made if it is determined that this will be in the best interest of the city in filling the position.

(3) The city of St. Helens police department will conduct the check on the prospective employee, volunteer, or applicant, and report to the city administrator whether the person’s record indicates “no criminal and/or traffic infraction record” or “criminal and/or traffic record does not meet the standards set for that position.”

(4) If the person’s record is reported as “criminal record and/or traffic record does not meet standards set for that position,” the city administrator may, in accordance with OAR 247-010-0025(1)(c), request a written criminal history report from the OSP Identification Services Section and pay the applicable fee for this service. The city administrator may make a written criminal and/or driving history record available to the selecting official for his/her consideration in determining whether the prospective employee meets the standards set for the position.

(5) The written criminal history record on persons who are not hired or appointed as a volunteer will be retained by the city administrator in accordance with the requirements of OAR 166-200-0090 and thereafter will be destroyed by shredding.

(6) The criminal history record of applicants and volunteers with a criminal history that are hired or appointed will become a part of the confidential personnel file of that employee or volunteer. Access to confidential personnel files is limited to authorized persons who have an official need to access such files as sanctioned by law or regulation.

(7) Applicants for employment or appointment as a volunteer who have a felony criminal history or a history of conviction of a misdemeanor will be closely examined to determine if the person possesses the required degree of public trust and confidence. Each selection will, however, be made on an individual case-by-case basis, taking into account the person’s qualifications, the requirements of the particular job or volunteer post applied for and the results of the criminal history check. Factors such as the age of the offender at the time of the offense, the type of offense and subsequent rehabilitation, and the public sensitivity of the position under consideration shall be taken into account in evaluating a criminal history report.

(8) Hiring an applicant or appointing a volunteer with a criminal history record will require a positive recommendation by the police department official conducting the background investigation and the approval of the city administrator, after full disclosure and consideration of the criminal history of the applicant. (Ord. 3126 § 2, 2010)


Chapter 2.74 PARKS AND TRAILS COMMISSION

Sections:

2.74.010    Creation of commission.

2.74.020    Membership.

2.74.030    Terms of office.

2.74.040    Vacancies.

2.74.050    Removal/resignation.

2.74.060    Officers.

2.74.070    Secretary.

2.74.080    Meetings.

2.74.090    Responsibilities, powers and duties.


2.74.010 Creation of commission.

There is hereby created within the city of St. Helens a parks and trails commission. (Ord. 3229 § 1, 2018)


2.74.020 Membership.

The parks and trails commission shall consist of 10 members, including one council member and nine at-large members. One of the 10 members shall be the member of the city council annually designated as parks and trails commissioner and council liaison to the public works (including parks) department by the mayor. The council member shall be an ex officio, nonvoting member of the commission. No less than six of the at-large members shall be residents of the city of St. Helens. At-large members are appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city council. Parks and trails commission membership is an unpaid voluntary appointed position and members shall receive no compensation for their service except for expenses specifically budgeted and authorized by the city council. (Ord. 3229 § 1, 2018)


2.74.030 Terms of office.

The terms of office of each at-large parks and trails commissioner shall be for a period of four years with no more than two full-term commissioners being replaced each year. Appointments are normally made in December with terms of office to commence on January 1st. The provisions of the ordinance amending this section do not alter the terms of office of current commissioners and said positions shall continue in accordance with their terms. (Ord. 3229 § 1, 2018)


2.74.040 Vacancies.

Any vacancies on the parks and trails commission shall be filled by appointment of the mayor at any time, with the consent of the council. Said appointment shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term of the vacated commissioner position. (Ord. 3229 § 1, 2018)


2.74.050 Removal/resignation.

An at-large parks and trails commissioner may be removed from the commission, for cause, following a hearing before the city council. A commissioner may resign in lieu of removal following a hearing. Cause for removal includes but is not limited to misconduct in office or nonperformance of official duties, violation of government standards and practices, conviction of a crime, including the crime of official misconduct, as well as any other actions or conduct by the commissioner which is detrimental to the reputation and good will of the city of St. Helens. Notwithstanding the above provisions for removal, a parks and trails commissioner who is absent from three consecutive regular parks and trails commission meetings without an excused absence as approved by the commission shall be deemed to have resigned his/her position on the commission. In the event of such resignation, the council shall be notified, the position declared vacant and reappointment procedures commenced. Nothing herein prohibits a commissioner who has resigned by operation of this section from being reappointed to the commission. (Ord. 3229 § 1, 2018)


2.74.060 Officers.

At the first meeting of each calendar year, the parks and trails commission shall elect a chairman and a vice-chairman to serve a one-year term. (Ord. 3229 § 1, 2018)


2.74.070 Secretary.

The city council may provide a secretary to the parks and trails commission and assign such other staff and consultant services as may be appropriate. In the event that the city staff cannot be provided, the parks and trails commission may designate one of its members or a volunteer as secretary to keep an accurate record of meetings of the parks and trails commission. The designated secretary need not be a member of the parks and trails commission. (Ord. 3229 § 1, 2018)


2.74.080 Meetings.

The parks and trails commission shall meet as often as deemed appropriate by the commission but not less than once every other calendar month or as otherwise directed by the city council. All meetings of the parks and trails commission shall be open to the public and shall in all respects fully comply with Oregon public meetings law. Special meetings of the commission shall require not less than 24 hours’ notice to local newspapers and posting of meeting notice in public places reasonably calculated to give notice to interested parties. The parks and trails commission shall have the authority to make and alter written rules for the conduct of its business, including rules of procedure for conduct of public meetings and public hearings. The adoption of bylaws is expressly authorized, subject to the consent of the city council. For purposes of conducting business, a quorum shall require the attendance of a majority of the at-large commissioners that are currently appointed to the parks and trails commission at the time of the meeting. Minutes of parks and trails commission meetings and activities shall be regularly submitted to the city council for review and acceptance. (Ord. 3229 § 1, 2018)


2.74.090 Responsibilities, powers and duties.

The parks and trails commissioners shall have the responsibilities, obligations and duties of appointed public officers and the parks and trails commission shall have the responsibilities, obligations and duties of an advisory public body as provided for in laws of the state of Oregon and the laws of the city of St. Helens. The parks and trails commission shall have the power to act in an advisory capacity to the city council in all matters pertaining to the operation, planning, development, improvement, beautification, equipment and maintenance of public parks, trails, public bicycle and/or pedestrian ways, vacant park properties, public squares, public recreational facilities and publicly accessible buildings and associated grounds. The parks and trails commission shall have authority:

(1) To review and call to the attention of the city council any deteriorating condition of city public parks, trails, bicycle and/or pedestrian ways, vacant park properties, public squares and publicly accessible buildings and associated grounds, public recreational facilities, and their associated infrastructure improvements including but not limited to access roads, equipment, athletic fields, gardens, landscape areas, open spaces, natural areas, playgrounds, and parking areas.

(2) To review and call to the attention of the city council the effectiveness, or lack thereof, of parks, trails, public bicycle and/or pedestrian ways, and recreation programs conducted by or for the city of St. Helens.

(3) To review and make recommendations to the city council on the operation, administration, maintenance and equipment needs of the public works department relative to parks, trails, public bicycle and/or pedestrian ways and recreation and the other public facilities identified in this section.

(4) To review and make recommendations to the city council on the annual budget of the public works department relative to parks, trails, public bicycle and/or pedestrian ways, and recreation and the other public facilities identified in this section.

(5) To review and make recommendations to the city council on master plans and capital improvement plans for parks, trails, public bicycle and/or pedestrian ways, and recreation and the other public facilities identified in this section.

(6) To review and make recommendations to the city council on public park, public bicycle and/or pedestrian ways and recreation facility development plans, construction plans, recreation use or development proposals, and such other park related activities as deemed advisable by the city council.

(7) To make periodic site visits and inspections, in accordance with public meetings law, and with the approval of the city engineering director, of city park and recreation facilities, public bicycle and/or pedestrian ways and other public facilities identified herein, as are necessary for the parks and trails commission to carry out its assigned duties.

(8) To request that the city council assign or direct staff to prepare reports and compile information necessary for the parks and trails commission to carry out its assigned duties. (Ord. 3229 § 1, 2018)


Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE

Chapters:

3.04    Library Fees and Fines

3.08    Unclaimed Property Disposition

3.12    Utility Privilege Tax

3.16    Alarm Response Fee

3.20    Transient Room Fee

3.24    Police Officer Training Fee

3.28    Installment Payment Fee

3.32    Municipal Court Administration Fee


Chapter 3.04       LIBRARY FEES AND FINES

Sections:

3.04.010  Library fees.

3.04.020  Fines.

3.04.030  Overdue materials.

3.04.040  Enforcement/penalty.


3.04.010      Library fees.

The city council may set fees for use of the library. Such fees shall provide for the equitable sharing of the costs of operating the library, considering the fact that taxes paid by city residents are used to support the library while nonresidents provide support only through library fees. Fees may also be assessed to cover postage and other costs associated with obtaining materials from the state library or other sources at the request of a patron. (Ord. 2309 § 1, 1979)


3.04.020      Fines.

The city council may set fines for overdue library property, destruction of library property, or violation of special library rules and policies. (Ord. 2309 § 2, 1979)


3.04.030      Overdue materials.

It shall be unlawful for any person to detain any library materials belonging to the city of St. Helens public library for 30 days after receiving notice in writing from the city librarian or other city official. That notice shall be given after the expiration of time allowed for keeping such materials by the library rules and regulations. (Ord. 2817 § 1, 2000; Ord. 2309 § 3, 1979)


3.04.040      Enforcement/penalty.

The city shall enforce the provisions of this chapter by any appropriate proceedings, including administrative, civil or criminal action or any combination as necessary to obtain compliance with this chapter. In the event a civil penalty is pursued for violation of this chapter, violation of SHMC 3.04.030 is punishable, upon conviction, by a fine of not less than $50.00, nor more than $500.00. Citations requiring appearance in municipal court for criminal or civil enforcement proceedings may be issued by any city police officer. The code enforcement officer is authorized to issue noncriminal citations for violation of this chapter. Such conviction and payment of the fine shall not be construed to constitute payment for library materials, nor shall a person convicted under this section be thereby relieved of any obligation to return to the library such material. (Ord. 2817 § 1, 2000; Ord. 2309 § 4, 1979)


Chapter 3.08       UNCLAIMED PROPERTY DISPOSITION

Sections:

3.08.010  City custody of personal property.

3.08.020  Quarterly disposition of unclaimed property.

3.08.030  Repealed.

3.08.040  Conduct of sale – Proceeds.

3.08.050  Subsequent claim of property.


3.08.010      City custody of personal property.

The police department shall dispose of any personal property that comes into its possession in a manner consistent with state law and this chapter.

(1)  Found Property. The finding of any money or goods valued at $100.00 or more, if the owner is unknown, shall be reported to the county clerk as provided by state law on finders and owners.

(2)  Unclaimed or Abandoned Intangible Property. Money, stocks, bonds, securities, or other intangible personal property unclaimed or abandoned in the possession of the police department must be retained for seven years and included on the city’s report of abandoned property before it is presumed abandoned by the Uniform Disposition of Unclaimed Property Act.

(3)  Other Personal Property. Unclaimed or abandoned tangible property or property not within the Uniform Act shall be disposed of in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 2641, 1992; Ord. 2391 § 1, 1982)


3.08.020      Quarterly disposition of unclaimed property.

At least every 90 days, the police department shall inventory unclaimed or abandoned property in its possession for disposition. All unclaimed moneys shall be retained in accordance with state law. The inventory of tangible property shall be reported to the city council together with a proposed disposition of the property.

(1)  Public Sale. If the proposed disposition is a public sale, the police chief shall post written or printed notice of sale in three public places within the city at least 10 days before the sale. The notice shall describe the property, state the time and place of the sale, and that sale will be to the highest bidder.

(2)  Donation for a Public Purpose. In lieu of the expense of a public sale, the police chief may propose and the city council may approve disposition of the property by donation of all or part of the inventoried property to a specific private or public agency for a specific public purpose. A representative of the agency accepting such property shall certify that it shall be used only for the public purpose approved by the city council. (Ord. 2391 § 2, 1982)


3.08.030      Repealed.

Repealed by Ord. 2666. (Ord. 2391 § 3, 1982)


3.08.040      Conduct of sale – Proceeds.

The marshal shall conduct the sale and shall deposit the proceeds thereof, after deducting the cost of the sale, together with any other money included in the notice, in the city treasury to the credit of the city general fund. (Ord. 2391 § 4, 1982)


3.08.050      Subsequent claim of property.

If the property is sold as provided herein, and if within six months after a public sale the owner of the property, including money, files with the city council a claim for the property, including money, and proves his right to the same, the council shall direct that the money or the amount received for the property, less expenses of the sale, shall be paid to the owner from the city treasury. The council shall not approve any claims filed more than six months after the sale. If the property is transferred to the city in lieu of the sale, it may be claimed by the lawful owner thereof at any time within one year from the transfer to the city. The marshal, in disposing of property in the manner provided herein, shall not be liable to the owner thereof. (Ord. 2391 § 5, 1982)


Chapter 3.12 UTILITY PRIVILEGE TAX

Sections:

3.12.010    Franchise required.

3.12.020    Definitions.

3.12.030    Privilege tax.

3.12.040    Deductions.

3.12.050    Franchise expiration.

3.12.060    Report of gross earnings.

3.12.070    Payment, penalty and interest.

3.12.080    Retroactivity.


3.12.010 Franchise required.

(1) All persons, firms, copartnerships, associations, corporations, districts, or people’s utility districts operating a utility as herein defined within the corporate limits of the city of St. Helens shall obtain a franchise regulating use of city streets and rights-of-way.

(2) Any utility desiring to operate within the corporate limits of the city shall apply to the city council for a franchise to do so.

(3) If any utility operates unregulated upon streets and rights-of-way within the corporate limits of the city without a franchise, the city council may take action to refuse to allow such utility the use of city streets and rights-of-way. (Ord. 2480 § 1, 1985)


3.12.020 Definitions.

(1) Gross Revenue. “Gross revenue” as used in this chapter shall be deemed to include any revenue earned within the city from the sale of utility services after adjustment for the net write-off of uncollectible accounts computed on the average annual rate for the entire utility, excluding sales of utility services by the utility to any other utility when the utility purchasing such utility services is not the ultimate consumer. Gross revenues do not include proceeds from the sale of bonds, mortgages, or other evidence of indebtedness, securities, or stocks and do not include revenue paid directly by the United States of America or its agencies.

(2) Utility. As used in this chapter, the term “utility” includes the business of supplying electrical energy, gas, communications, and other services through or associated with telephone or telegraph by means of facilities utilizing and/or occupying rights-of-way, public grounds, or public places within the corporate limits of the city, whether or not the business owns the facilities.

(3) Rights-of-Way. As used in this chapter, the term “rights-of-way” includes the present and future streets, viaducts, elevated roadways, alleys, public highways and avenues in the city, including the subsurface and air space over or under these areas and including rights-of-way held in fee, or by virtue of an easement or dedication. (Ord. 3237 § 1, 2019; Ord. 2480 § 2, 1985)


3.12.030 Privilege tax.

Any utility, using and/or occupying and continuing to use and/or occupy the whole or any part of the rights-of-way, public grounds, or public places within the corporate limits of the city without a franchise, shall pay a privilege tax for the use and occupancy of the whole or any part of the rights-of-way, public grounds, or public places within the corporate limits of the city. The privilege tax shall be in an amount set by resolution of the city council. The privilege tax shall be computed, as applicable, as of the later of: (1) April 1, 2019; (2) the commencement of activities subject to this section; or (3) upon the expiration of any franchise under which such utility might formerly have operated and shall be due and payable as hereinafter provided so long as the utility continues to operate within the city and to use and/or occupy the whole or any part of the rights-of-way, public grounds, or public places without a franchise. Except as set out in SHMC 3.12.040, when a franchise tax herein required and the franchise become effective, then the privilege tax shall cease to apply from the effective date of the franchise. But the franchise holder shall pay the proportionate earned amount of the privilege tax for the period. The privilege tax shall in such cases become immediately due and payable. In the event that any such utility shall operate under a permit granted by the city council and accepted in writing by it, there shall be no tax applicable under this section. (Ord. 3237 § 2, 2019; Ord. 2603, 1990; Ord. 2480 § 3, 1985)


3.12.040 Deductions.

Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, an entity that is subject to the privilege tax may enter into a franchise agreement with the city. Any payments made under the franchise agreement will be a deduction from the obligation under the privilege tax. Such payment becomes an offset of and a valid deduction of that amount owed under this chapter. (Ord. 2603, 1990; Ord. 2480 § 4, 1985)


3.12.050 Franchise expiration.

The privilege tax herein required shall immediately apply and continue to apply to all utilities using and/or occupying and continuing to use and/or occupy the whole or any part of the streets, avenues, lanes, alleys, public highways, public grounds, or public places within the corporate limits where the utility’s franchise to so operate expires and no new franchise shall have been granted and become in full force and effect. (Ord. 2480 § 5, 1985)


3.12.060 Report of gross earnings.

Each utility subject to the privilege tax provided for in SHMC 3.12.030 shall file with the city recorder a statement verified under oath of the utility’s gross revenues earned within the boundary of the city for each three-month period. Quarterly reports shall be filed on or before July 15th, October 15th, January 15th, and April 15th of each year, and as long as the utility operates without a franchise. In the event a franchise is granted to any utility that is subject to the privilege tax herein required and the franchise becomes effective, then a report shall be filed within 10 days after the franchise becomes effective showing the gross revenues earned for the proportionate period of the quarter in which the franchise is granted. (Ord. 3047 § 1, 2007; Ord. 2480 § 6, 1985)


3.12.070 Payment, penalty and interest.

The city may agree to any reasonable method of payment. However, if there is no agreement, then the following shall apply. Payments shall be made quarterly on or before July 20th, October 20th, January 20th, and April 20th of each year. In the event the utility fails to pay the privilege tax within the times fixed, the city recorder shall notify the city attorney of such fact, and the city attorney is authorized to and shall institute and action in the circuit court of the state of Oregon for the privilege tax due the city. Interest shall be charged and collected on any taxes not paid when due, at the rate of one percent per month or fraction of a month until paid. (Ord. 3047 § 2, 2007; Ord. 2603, 1990; Ord. 2480 § 7, 1985)


3.12.080 Retroactivity.

(1) It is the express intent of the city council that this chapter apply retroactively to any utility that begins its operations creating gross revenues prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter to accomplish uniformity of taxation among utilities in the city. The privilege tax shall apply to any utility operating without a franchise from the commencement of utility service within the city.

(2) If a court of competent jurisdiction rules that the five percent privilege tax portion of SHMC 3.12.030 cannot be applied at a rate higher than an existing electric utility franchise rate, then the privilege tax rate shall be three and one-half percent. (Ord. 2480 § 9, 1985)


Chapter 3.16 ALARM RESPONSE FEE

Sections:

3.16.010    Response to burglar alarms or hold up alarms.

3.16.020    False alarm response fees.

3.16.030    False alarm definition.


3.16.010 Response to burglar alarms or hold up alarms.

The city of St. Helens police department will respond to alarms without charge except as herein provided. (Ord. 2626 § 1, 1991)


3.16.020 False alarm response fees.

A fee shall be charged the tenant, owner or other person in charge of the premises for each false alarm, exceeding two within any 12-month period, to which the police department responds by sending police officers to investigate. A fee will be charged for each false alarm, of four or more, in any 12-month period. The fees described herein shall be as set forth in the most recent universal fee schedule adopted by council. (Ord. 3219 § 2, 2017; Ord. 2626 § 2, 1991)


3.16.030 False alarm definition.

For purposes of this chapter, a “false alarm” shall be defined as the discharge of an alarm system which is caused by the intentional misconduct or negligent act of the owner, tenant or other person in charge of the premises upon which the alarm is located, or by the mechanical malfunction of the alarm system. (Ord. 2626 § 3, 1991)


Chapter 3.20 TRANSIENT ROOM FEE

Sections:

3.20.010    Title.

3.20.020    Definitions.

3.20.030    Imposition of fee.

3.20.040    Exemptions.

3.20.050    Disposition of revenue, adjustment.

3.20.060    Collection and use of revenues.

3.20.070    Administration of chapter.

3.20.080    Registration of operator – Form and contents – Execution – Certification of authority.

3.20.090    Collection of fee by operator.

3.20.100    Monthly reporting and payment – Extension.

3.20.110    Operator required to keep records.

3.20.120    Records exempt from disclosure.

3.20.130    Refunds.

3.20.140    Delinquency.

3.20.150    Sanctions.

3.20.160    Petition for redetermination.

3.20.170    Appeals to city council.

3.20.180    Amendments.


3.20.010 Title.

This chapter shall be known as the “transient room fee ordinance.” (Ord. 3225 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2843 § 1, 2001)


3.20.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter the following terms and definitions shall apply unless the context requires otherwise:

“Accrual accounting” means a system whereby the operator enters the rent due from a transient on the records when the rent is earned whether or not it is paid.

“Administrator” means the person designated as such by the city.

“Booking agent” means any person that provides a means through which a host may offer a hotel for transient lodging occupancy. This service is usually, though not necessarily, provided through an online platform and generally allows a host to advertise the hotel through a website provided by the booking agent’s hosting platform and provides a means for potential users to arrange transient lodging occupancy and payment, whether the transient pays rent directly to the host or to the booking agent. Booking agents include, but are not limited to:

(a) Online travel booking sites that are involved in the process of listing and booking hotel occupancy and handling any aspect of the resulting financial transaction; or

(b) Online travel booking sites for transient lodging occupancy where advertisements of hotels are displayed; or

(c) A hosting or other online site that provides a means through which an operator, host or booking agent may offer a hotel for transient lodging occupancy; or

(d) Any person who directly or indirectly accepts, receives or facilitates payment, whether or not they are the ultimate recipient of the payment, including through application programming interfaces (APIs) or other computerized devices where third party providers receive information about a transaction and collect funds for transient lodging occupancy from a transient.

“Cash accounting” means a system whereby the operator does not enter the rent due from a transient on the records until rent is paid.

“City” means the city of St. Helens, Oregon, a municipal corporation.

“Fee” means either the fee payable by the transient, or the aggregate amount of fees due from an operator during the period for which collections must be reported. “Fee” includes the fees imposed by SHMC 3.20.030.

“Host” means the owner or individual who resides at a short-term rental or has been designated by the owner or resident of the short-term rental and who rents out the short-term rental for transient lodging occupancy either directly or through the use of a booking agent.

“Hotel” means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed, in whole or in part, for transient occupancy for 30 consecutive calendar days or less, for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes. “Hotel” includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or tourist house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, boutique hotel, lodging house, rooming house, short-term rental, vacation home or vacation cabin, multi-dwelling structure, accessory dwelling unit, hostel, corporate housing or executive housing space or facility, public or private dormitory, fraternity, sorority, public or private club, bed and breakfast, or similar structure or portions thereof so occupied, provided such occupancy is for 30 consecutive calendar days or less. “Hotel” specifically includes a structure or a portion of a structure that is rented out for transient occupancy in addition to being used by the owner as a personal residence or for other uses. All hotels must comply with all local codes applicable to their location and use, including but not limited to zoning and building codes.

“Occupancy” means the use or possession of, or the right to use or possess for lodging or sleeping purposes, any room or rooms in, or all or a portion of, a hotel.

“Operator” means:

(a) Any person who provides a hotel or any room or rooms for occupancy for periods of 30 days or less to the general public for compensation. Furnishing accommodations can be done via employees, contractors, agents or any other person the hotel consents to allow to process reservations and accept payments from the transient on behalf of the hotel; or

(b) Any person that facilitates the reservation of an accommodation and collects the payment for the room reservation from the transient; or

(c) Any transient lodging provider, transient lodging intermediary, or transient lodging tax collector as defined in ORS 320.300; or

(d) A booking agent as defined in this chapter.

There may be more than one operator for a hotel and each operator is independently responsible for compliance with this chapter though the fee will only be collected once. Operators include, but are not limited to, the hotel owner and/or management, online travel companies, booking agents or other online travel facilitators, travel agents or companies, contracted management companies or any other person that secures the right to occupy a room on behalf of the transient and receives payment from the transient for that right whether or not the operator is the ultimate recipient of the payment. 

“Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, fraternity, sorority, public or private dormitory, joint stock company, corporation, limited liability company, limited liability partnership, host, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

“Rent” means the full consideration charged to the transient, whether or not received by the operator, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, goods, labor, credits, property or other consideration valued in money, without any deduction. Rent is considered to be the total amount represented to the transient by an operator as the consideration charged for the occupancy, including any accommodation fees, commissions or similar amounts paid to or withheld by a person that facilitates the reservation of a room. “Rent” excludes, however, the sale of any goods, services and commodities, other than the furnishing of rooms or room or space in a hotel.

“Rent package plan” means a plan where a single rate or charge is made for the total of food and rent. The amount applicable to rent for determination of a transient room fee under this chapter shall be the same charge made for rent when consideration is not a part of a package plan.

“Room” means each portion of a hotel that may be rented or is intended to be rented to a separate transient lodger or lodging party, other than rooms containing no sleeping accommodations and intended to be used for purposes other than sleeping and living accommodations, such as meetings, recreation, education, business or other purposes. In rooms with multiple beds where each bed may be rented or is intended to be rented to a separate transient lodger such as bunk or dormitory style rooms, each bed is counted as a room.

“Short-term rental” means a house, duplex, multiplex, apartment, condominium, houseboat, trailer or other residential dwelling where a person rents rooms for transient lodging occupancy. Generally, a short-term rental is zoned residential or has building occupancy that only allows for residential use.

“Tourism” means the business of attracting and providing services and accommodations to those persons who are traveling for recreational or cultural purposes.

“Transient” means any individual who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy in a hotel for a period of 30 consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. The day a transient checks out of the hotel shall not be included in determining the 30-day period if the transient is not charged rent for that day by the operator. Any such individual so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of 30 days has expired, unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter may be considered. A person who pays for lodging on a monthly basis, irrespective of the number of days in such months, shall not be deemed a transient. (Ord. 3225 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 3046 § 8, 2007; Ord. 2843 § 2, 2001)


3.20.030 Imposition of fee.

(1) Transient Room Fee. For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, on and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, each transient shall pay a fee in the amount of 10 percent of the rent charged by the operator.

(2) Payment of Fee by Transient.

(a) The fees imposed pursuant to this chapter constitute a debt owed by the transient to the city, which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city.

(b) The transient shall pay the fees to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid.

(c) If rent is paid in installments, the transient shall pay a proportionate share of the fee to the operator with each installment.

(d) If for any reason the fees due are not paid to the operator of the hotel, the administrator may require that the transient pay such fee(s) directly to the city.

(3) Payment of Fee by Operator. The fee collected or accrued by the operator constitutes a debt owing by the operator to the city. (Ord. 3225 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2843 § 3, 2001)


3.20.040 Exemptions.

No fee imposed under this chapter shall be imposed upon:

(1) Time Period. Any occupant who pays for lodging on a monthly basis, irrespective of the number of days in such months.

(2) Minimum Rent. Any occupant whose rent or cash equivalent thereof is less than $5.00 per day.

(3) Care Facilities. Any occupant whose rent is paid for a room or living space in a hospital, medical or mental health clinic, foster home, rehabilitation center, convalescent home, nursing home, or assisted living facility.

(4) Government or Public Institutions. Any occupant in a government owned and operated public institution.

(5) Emergency Shelter. Any person housed through an emergency shelter or disaster program where the rent is paid with government assistance funds.

(6) Federal Government Employee. Any federal government employee traveling on official government business, who presents an official government exemption certificate or official travel authorization. An exemption may also be granted for direct bills to a federal government department, agency or instrumentality. An exemption may not be granted for rents paid by contractors of the federal government, even if the occupancy was for a federal government employee on official business, and notwithstanding the fact that such rent may be reimbursed by the federal government or paid under the contract with the federal government. (Ord. 3225 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 3054 § 1, 2007; Ord. 2843 § 4, 2001)


3.20.050 Disposition of revenue, adjustment.

(1) Adjustment of Fees. Any adjustment of fees, penalties or interest that is necessary to correct a mistake or error in collection or distribution may be made by the administrator at a subsequent collection or disbursement or by the procedure set forth in SHMC 3.20.160. (Ord. 3225 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2843 § 5, 2001)


3.20.060 Collection and use of revenues.

(1) The transient room fee shall be 10 percent of the rent charged by the operator. This amount must be remitted to the city as outlined in SHMC 3.20.090, except that the operator may retain five percent of the total fee collected. This five percent of the total fee collected is intended to help the operator defray the costs associated with the administration of the fee. Records must adequately show that the retained portion is accurate.

(2) The remaining funds will be allocated as follows:

Ninety-one percent of the remaining funds shall be placed in a reserve account in the St. Helens visitors and tourism bureau fund, which shall be called the transient room fee reserve account. Moneys collected may be invested to earn the highest amount of interest legally and reasonably possible from the moneys placed in the account. Moneys in this account can only be used to promote tourism in the city of St. Helens. No administrative fee shall be charged to this account by the city.

Nine percent will be placed in the city’s general fund, to help defray administrative costs associated with the tourism bureau, and tourism bureau fund. (Ord. 3225 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 3186 § 2, 2015; Ord. 3046 § 8, 2007; Ord. 2843 § 6, 2001)


3.20.070 Administration of chapter.

(1) Appoint Administrator. The city council appoints the city finance director or, in that person’s absence, the city administrator, to administer the provisions of this chapter and may delegate to any person the powers, rights, duties, and authority with respect to collections, refunding, and administration of fees imposed under SHMC 3.20.030.

(2) Examination of Records, Investigations. The administrator or any person so authorized in writing by the city council may examine, during normal business hours, the books, papers, and accounting records relating to room rents of any operator after 24 hours’ written notification to the operator liable for the tax and may investigate the business of the operator in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. (Ord. 3225 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2843 § 7, 2001)


3.20.080 Registration of operator – Form and contents – Execution – Certification of authority.

(1) Registration Required. Every person engaging in, or about to engage in, business as an operator of a hotel in the city limits shall register with the administrator on a form provided by the administrator. The failure to register does not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of the fee.

(2) Period for Registration.

(a) Operators commencing business after the ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted must register within 15 calendar days after commencing business.

(b) The privilege of registering after the date of commencing business shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of the transient room fee from the date of commencing business regardless of the date of registration.

(3) Information Required. The operator shall set forth on the registration form the name under which he or she transacts or intends to transact business, any affiliated companies or brands that are associated with the registration, the location of the place or places of business, and such other information to facilitate the collection of the fee as the administrator may require. The operator shall sign the registration.

(4) Fire/Safety/Health Inspection.

(a) At the time of initial application for registration of a short-term rental, the applicant must schedule an inspection with the building official or designee, and pay an initial inspection fee of $125.00. The purpose of this inspection is to assure conformance of the short-term rental with the State of Oregon Residential Specialty Code, the Uniform Housing Code and the Uniform Fire Code regulations related to potential safety issues and to establish maximum occupancy, including but not limited to an approved means of egress from every bedroom. The applicant is responsible for obtaining septic approval from DEQ and providing said documentation to the city. Applicants must correct any identified deficiencies within 180 days before a certificate will be issued. A follow-up inspection is included in the initial fee. Any further inspections will cost $50.00 each.

(b) Every year, the city will conduct a reinspection of short-term rentals. A reinspection fee of $50.00 will be charged. Failure to correct any identified deficiencies within 30 days of the building inspector’s notification of required alterations may result in the revocation of the certificate.

(5) Certification. The administrator shall use his or her best efforts to issue, within 10 days of receiving the registration form, a certificate of transient occupancy registration to the registrant to collect the fee from the occupant, together with a duplicate thereof for each additional place of business of each registrant.

(6) Contents of Certificate. At a minimum, the certificate shall state the following information:

(a) The name of the operator;

(b) The address of the hotel;

(c) The date upon which the certificate was issued;

(d) The following statement:

This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the City of St. Helens Transient Room Fee Ordinance by registration with the Administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the room fee imposed by the City of St. Helens and remitting said fee to the administrator. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, or to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws. This certificate does not constitute a permit.

(7) Display and Transfer of Certificate.

(a) Each certificate and duplicate shall be prominently displayed in the hotel to which it is applicable so as to be seen and come to the notice readily of all occupants and persons seeking occupancy.

(b) No operator may assign or transfer the hotel’s certificate, but shall surrender it immediately to the administrator upon the cessation of business at the named location or upon its sale or transfer. (Ord. 3225 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 3054 § 2, 2007; Ord. 2843 § 8, 2001)


3.20.090 Collection of fee by operator.

(1) Operator to Collect Fee From Transient. Unless otherwise exempted by this chapter, every operator shall collect the fee from the transient at the time the transient pays the rent.

(2) Incremental Fee Schedule. For rent collected on portions of a dollar, the fee shall be collected according to the schedule below:

	Amount of Incremental Rent	Amount of Incremental Fee

	$0.05 through $0.14	$0.01

	$0.15 through $0.29	$0.03

	$0.30 through $0.44	$0.04

	$0.45 through $0.59	$0.06

	$0.60 through $0.74	$0.07

	$0.75 through $0.89	$0.09

	$0.90 through $1.00	$0.10

(3) Waiving Fee Prohibited. Operators may not advertise or allow that any part of the fee will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent or, if added, that any part of it will be refunded, except in the manner provided by this chapter. (Ord. 3225 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2843 § 9, 2001)


3.20.100 Monthly reporting and payment – Extension.

(1) Report and Payment. On or before the fifteenth day of the month following each calendar month, every operator shall report the rents paid to the operator during the preceding month and pay the amount of fees due on forms prescribed by the administrator.

(2) Returns to Be Signed. Returns shall be signed by the operator required to file the return or by his or her authorized agent.

(3) Information Required. Returns required under this section shall contain such information as the administrator deems necessary for the proper administration of this chapter.

(4) Remittance. The operator liable for filing the return required under this section shall deliver the return together with the fee due to the city of St. Helens. Delivery must be in person or by first class mail.

(5) Other Reporting and Payment Periods. For the purpose of the administration, payment, or collection of the fees imposed under this chapter, the administrator may, upon written request, permit or require returns or fee payments on other than a monthly basis; however, no operator may change the reporting system required under this section without the prior written authorization of the administrator.

(6) Extension.

(a) The administrator may, upon written request received on or before the due date of the return or fee, for good cause satisfactory to the administrator, extend the time for filing the return or paying the fee for a period not to exceed 30 days.

(b) Any operator to whom an extension is granted and who pays the fee within the period for which the extension is granted shall pay, in addition to the fee, simple interest at the rate of 10 per-cent per annum from the date on which the fee would otherwise have been due.

(7) No Exceptions. A report and a fee return are required for each reporting period even though there may be no rents due or payable to the hotel of the operator during the preceding month, nor any fees due.

(8) Failure to File Reports. If an operator fails to make a report of the information required by this section within the time and manner prescribed, the administrator may examine the books, records, and files of the operator to determine the fee due on the rents, as provided by this chapter.

(9) Special Determination and Collection – Operator Delay.

(a) The administrator may make a special determination of the fee amount and may make that amount due and payable immediately; provided, that:

(i) The administrator reasonably believes that delay may jeopardize either the collection of any amount of any fee, or the determination of that fee amount; and

(ii) The purpose of the collection is noted on the special determination.

(b) The administrator shall serve notice of the special determination to the operator in person or, if by first class mail, at the operator’s last known address as shown on the administrator’s records.

(c) The operator shall pay the determined amount to the administrator immediately upon receiving notice of the special determination.

(d) After making the required payment, but within 14 days of receiving notice of the special determination, the operator may appeal the decision by filing a petition for redetermination with the administrator, pursuant to SHMC 3.20.160. (Ord. 3225 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2843 § 10, 2001)


3.20.110 Operator required to keep records.

(1) Separate Accounting. Every operator shall state the fee imposed under this chapter separately on room receipts and shall account for such fees separately in the hotel’s records.

(2) Recordkeeping. Every operator liable for the reporting or payment of the fee imposed under this chapter shall keep such records, receipts, and other pertinent documents in such form as the administrator may require.

(3) Three-Year Minimum – Exception. Every operator shall keep such records for not less than three years, unless the administrator issues written authorization to destroy them sooner. (Ord. 3225 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2843 § 11, 2001)


3.20.120 Records exempt from disclosure.

(1) Policy. Pursuant to ORS 192.502(16) and except as provided by subsection (2) of this section, no city of St. Helens employee or agent, and no employee or agent of cities participating by ordinance or resolution under this chapter, may disclose the records, reports, and returns required by this chapter to be submitted to or inspected by the city to allow it to determine the amount of any transient fee payable or the amount of such fees paid, to the extent that such information is in a form that would permit identification of the individual concern or enterprise.

(2) Authorized Use.

(a) Nothing in this section shall limit the use which the city may make of such information for regulatory purposes, or the admissibility of such information in any enforcement proceedings.

(b) In the event that the payment or delivery of fees imposed under this chapter is delinquent by more than 60 days, the city shall disclose, upon the request of any person, the following information:

(i) The identity of the individual concern or enterprise that is delinquent more than 60 days in the payment or delivery of the fees;

(ii) The period for which the fees are delinquent; and

(iii) The actual or estimated amount of the delinquency. (Ord. 3225 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2843 § 12, 2001)


3.20.130 Refunds.

(1) Operator’s Fee Refunds. Whenever an operator has paid the amount of any fee, penalty, or interest more than once, or the administrator has erroneously or illegally collected or received it under this chapter, it may be refunded; provided, that the operator first files a petition for redetermination and refund with the administrator, pursuant to SHMC 3.20.160. In addition to any other requirements imposed by this chapter, the petitioner shall state the specific reason upon which the claim is founded and file the petition within three years from the date of overpayment. All refunds shall be charged to the transient room fee reserve account.

(2) Transient Fee Refunds. Whenever the fee required by this chapter has been collected by the operator, and deposited by the operator with the administrator, and it is later determined that the fee was erroneously or illegally collected or received by the administrator, it may be refunded by the administrator to the transient; provided, that the transient, or the administrator or other person acting in the transient’s behalf, first files a petition for redetermination and refund with the administrator, pursuant to SHMC 3.20.160. In addition to any other requirements imposed by this chapter, the petitioner shall state the specific reason upon which the claim is founded and file the petition within three years from the date of the overpayment. All refunds shall be charged to the transient room fee reserve account. (Ord. 3225 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2843 § 13, 2001)


3.20.140 Delinquency.

Unless an operator obtains an extension pursuant to SHMC 3.20.100(6), the operator becomes delinquent with respect to this chapter any time the operator fails:

(1) Improper Reporting. To submit his or her reports completely and accurately, on time or as otherwise required by this chapter; or

(2) Improper Payment. To remit his or her fee payment fully, on time, or as otherwise required by this chapter. (Ord. 3225 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2843 § 14, 2001)


3.20.150 Sanctions.

An operator who is delinquent may be subject to one or more of the following sanctions:

(1) Inadequate or Untimely Reporting. If an operator is delinquent in submitting reports, the administrator may take one or both of the following measures:

(a) Examine the operator’s books, records, and files in order to compute the fee due on the rents, as provided for by this chapter.

(b) Assess the fee at no more than twice the amount estimated to be due and add a penalty of 10 percent of the amount of the fee assessed. This penalty shall be in addition to all other penalties. The additional fee and 10 percent penalty provided for in this subsection may be assessed if the operator in question has failed to report or make payments within the previous 12-month reporting period.

(c) The administrator may also impose a civil penalty of up to $500.00 for each violation of this chapter.

(2) Inadequate or Late Payments. If an operator is delinquent in making fee payments:

(a) The administrator may assess interest payments on the outstanding fee accounts at a rate of 10 percent per annum from the date due until the date of payment.

(b) These fees shall operate as a first lien and privilege on the hotel and its personal property, which lien and privilege shall follow the hotel into the hands of these persons whether in good or bad faith, and the city of St. Helens may place a lien upon the property.

(3) Notice and Payment. Once the administrator determines that an operator is delinquent and is subject to the sanction or sanctions imposed by subsections (1) and (2) of this section, the administrator shall give that operator a written notice of the delinquency.

(a) The notice may be served personally or by mail, and if by mail, the notice shall be sent by certified mail and addressed to the operator at the last known address as it appears in the records of the administrator. In case of service by mail of any notice required by this chapter, the service is complete when the city administrator, or his authorized agent or designee, signs a certificate of mailing, or three days after the mailing if mailed to an address within the state.

(b) Except in the case of fraud, or intent to evade the provisions of this chapter, every deficiency determination shall be made and notice thereof mailed within three years after the last day of the month following the close of the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period expires later.

(c) The amount stated in the determination shall become due and payable immediately upon receipt of notice. Such determination shall become final unless the operator files a petition for redetermination pursuant to SHMC 3.20.160.

(4) Court Action to Collect Delinquent Amounts. At any time within three years after any fee or any amount of fee required to be collected becomes due and payable or at any time within three years after any determination becomes final, the administrator may bring an action in the courts of this state, or any other state, or of the United States in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent, together with penalties and interest. In the case of the filing of a false or fraudulent return with the intent to evade this chapter, or willful refusal to collect and remit the fee, a deficiency determination may be commenced at any time and is not subject to the three-year limitation.

(5) Attorney Fees. Should the city prevail in any legal proceedings in any state or federal court to collect the taxes, penalties and interest assessed in accordance with this chapter, the city shall be entitled to its reasonable costs and attorney fees. (Ord. 3225 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 3054 § 3, 2007; Ord. 2843 § 15, 2001)


3.20.160 Petition for redetermination.

(1) Petition for Redetermination. Any operator who receives a notice of determination or delinquency may petition the administrator for redetermination. The petitioner may request an oral hearing on the matter by stating this request on the petition.

(2) Requirements for Filing. The petition for redetermination allowed under this section must be received by the administrator no more than 14 days after the administrator serves the notice of delinquency or determination. It must be on a form supplied by the administrator or it must state substantially the same information. However, no petition for redetermination shall be effective for any purpose unless the operator has first paid any and all fees and interest due and payable on the account.

(3) Hearing. In the event of an oral hearing, the administrator shall give the petitioner a 10-day written notice of the time and place of the hearing. The administrator may continue the hearing from time to time, as may be necessary.

(4) Redetermination. After reconsidering his or her determination, the administrator shall prepare a decision in writing and shall serve notice of this decision to the petitioner by first class mail. Service shall be complete when the city administrator, or his authorized agent or designee, signs a certificate of mailing, or three days after the mailing if mailed to an address within the state.

(5) Amount of Fee Determination Subject to Change. As a result of the redetermination, the administrator may increase or decrease the amount of the delinquency of determination. If an increase is established, it shall be due and payable immediately after the decision is made. If a decrease is established, the administrator shall refund the amount or credit it to the operator, or the hotel’s assignees or executors.

(6) Redetermination is Final – Appeal. The decision of the administrator upon a petition for redetermination becomes final, unless within 14 days following the service of such notice the petitioner files an appeal of the redetermination with the city council pursuant to SHMC 3.20.170. (Ord. 3225 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 3054 § 4, 2007; Ord. 2843 § 16, 2001)


3.20.170 Appeals to city council.

A petitioner affected by the redetermination of the administrator may appeal to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the administrator within 14 days of the service of the redetermination. The administrator shall transmit the notice of appeal, together with the file of the appealed matter, to the city council which shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal. The city council shall give the appellant not less than 14 days’ written notice of the time and place of hearing. The city council shall consider the matter de novo and may approve, revise, or remand the administrator’s redetermination. The city council’s decision shall be by written order and shall be subject to writ of review proceedings pursuant to ORS 34.010 et seq. (Ord. 3225 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2843 § 17, 2001)


3.20.180 Amendments.

Amendments to this chapter shall only be made by a four-fifths majority vote of the city council. (Ord. 3225 § 2 (Exh. A), 2018; Ord. 2843 § 18, 2001)


Chapter 3.24       POLICE OFFICER TRAINING FEE

Sections:

3.24.010  Short title.

3.24.020  Assessment fee established.

3.24.030  Fee not a tax.


3.24.010      Short title.

This chapter shall be known as the "police officer training fee ordinance." (Ord. 2864 § 2, 2002)


3.24.020      Assessment fee established.

(1)  Except as provided in subsection (2) of this section, whenever the St. Helens municipal court imposes a fine, orders a default or orders a bail forfeiture as penalty for violation of a city ordinance provision, including Oregon Statutes adopted by reference, concerning a criminal action as defined in ORS 131.005, a police officer training fee in addition to such fine, default, or bail forfeiture shall be collected and credited to the city general fund, for the benefit of police department training and training-related expenses. The fee schedule shall be established by resolution of the city council and may be revised by resolution of the council at any time.

(2)  If the municipal court determines that the person issued the citation did not commit the offense or has established an affirmative defense, or the charge is dismissed for whatever reason, no fee shall be imposed. No fee shall be imposed if no fine or other assessment is imposed for the offense. The fee does not apply to citations for violation of parking limitations established by city ordinance, resolution or order.

(3)  The amount of the fee shall be added to any bail amount for those who do not contest the citation and shall be included as part of the judgment for all those who contest the citation and are determined to have committed the offense. When any deposition of bail is made for an offense to which this section applies, the person making such deposit shall also deposit a sufficient amount to include the fee prescribed pursuant to this chapter.

(4)  If bail is forfeited or applied, the fee prescribed pursuant to this section shall be deducted. If bail is returned, the fee paid shall also be returned, less normal administrative charges per state statute.

(5)  Proceeds from payment of the fee shall be used for police department training and training-related expenses as well as courtroom security measures, including but not limited to secure transportation, video security and bailiff services. (Ord. 2929 § 1, 2004; Ord. 2864 § 3, 2002)


3.24.030      Fee not a tax.

The city council determines that the police officer training fee imposed by this chapter is not a tax subject to the property tax limitations of Article XI, Section 11(b) of the Oregon Constitution. (Ord. 2864 § 4, 2002)


Chapter 3.28 INSTALLMENT PAYMENT FEE

Sections:

3.28.010    Short title.

3.28.020    Fee established.

3.28.030    Fee not a tax.

3.28.040    Court power not limited.


3.28.010 Short title.

This chapter shall be known as the “installment payment fee ordinance.” (Ord. 2871 § 2, 2002)


3.28.020 Fee established.

(1) Except as provided below, whenever the St. Helens municipal court imposes a fine, assessment, default or other such judgment including any monetary obligation as a result of a violation of a city ordinance provision, including Oregon Statutes adopted by reference, concerning a criminal action as defined in ORS 131.005 and the court gives the debtor a period of time to pay after the financial obligation is imposed, an installment payment fee in addition to such fine, default, or other such judgment including any monetary obligation shall be collected and credited to the city general fund. The fee schedule shall be established by resolution of the city council and may be revised by resolution.

(2) If the municipal court determines that the person issued the citation did not commit the offense or has established an affirmative defense, or the charge is dismissed for whatever reason, or the person pays the amount owed within five business days, no fee shall be imposed. No fee shall be imposed if no fine, other assessment, or other monetary obligation is imposed for the offense. The fee does not apply to citations for violation of parking limitations established by city ordinance, resolution or order.

(3) After imposition of the fee for one judgment including a monetary obligation as described herein, the St. Helens municipal court judge may waive the fee prescribed for subsequent judgments including a monetary obligation imposed on the same day as the first offense. Notwithstanding the above, multiple violations on the same citation resolved on the same day shall have only one fee imposed if an installment payment plan is established.

(4) For judgments entered after July 1, 2007, upon which post-judgment interest as authorized by ORS 137.183 is imposed, the fee prescribed in this chapter shall be waived.

(5) For all other judgments, the fee prescribed in this chapter shall be imposed upon an admission of an allegation or determination of guilt on a probation violation, when a suspended monetary obligation is imposed or when the allegation is for failure to pay and a new pay agreement is permitted by the court.

(6) If bail is forfeited or applied, the fee prescribed in this chapter shall be deducted only if there is a balance remaining to be paid on an installment basis.

(7) Proceeds from payment of the fee shall be credited to the city general fund. (Ord. 3186 § 3, 2015; Ord. 2891 § 1, 2003; Ord. 2871 § 3, 2002)


3.28.030 Fee not a tax.

The city council determines that the installment payment fee imposed by this chapter is not a tax subject to the property tax limitations of Article XI, Section 11(b) of the Oregon Constitution. (Ord. 2871 § 4, 2002)


3.28.040 Court power not limited.

Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to limit or restrict the power of the municipal court to impose a collection fee as per ORS 137.118. (Ord. 2871 § 5, 2002)


Chapter 3.32       MUNICIPAL COURT ADMINISTRATION FEE

Sections:

3.32.010  Short title.

3.32.020  Administration fees established.

3.32.030  No limitation on court authority.

3.32.040  No taxation under Oregon Constitution.


3.32.010      Short title.

This chapter shall be known as the "municipal court administration fee ordinance." (Ord. 2880 § 2, 2003)


3.32.020      Administration fees established.

(1)  Except as provided in subsection (2) of this section, whenever the St. Helens municipal court finds a defendant guilty after trial, accepts a guilty or no contest plea for a criminal action or probation violation, orders a default judgment, or orders a warrant issued or a bail forfeiture as penalty for violation of a city ordinance provision, including Oregon Statutes adopted by reference, concerning a criminal action as defined in ORS 131.005, an appropriate municipal court administration fee for the corresponding court action shall be collected and credited to the city general fund, for the benefit of municipal court administration. Administration fees are in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other assessments, fees, charges, fines, defaults, or forfeitures. The fees shall be established by resolution of the city council and may be revised by resolution of the council at any time.

(2)  If the municipal court determines that the person issued the citation did not commit the offense or the charge is dismissed for whatever reason, no fee shall be imposed. No fee shall be imposed if no fine or other assessment is imposed for the offense due to a finding that the defendant is indigent. The fee does not apply to citations for violation of parking limitations established by city ordinance, resolution or order. After imposition of the fee for one criminal action, the St. Helens municipal court judge may waive the fee prescribed for subsequent criminal actions disposed of on the same day as the first action. Notwithstanding the above, multiple violations on the same citation resolved on the same day shall have only one fee imposed. 

(3)  The amount of the fee shall be added to any bail amount for those who do not contest the citation and shall be included as part of the judgment for all those who contest the citation and are determined to have committed the offense. When any deposition of bail is made for an offense to which this section applies, the person making such deposit shall also deposit a sufficient amount to include the fee prescribed pursuant to this chapter. Notwithstanding the above, the court may, by court order, waive any administrative fee or fees for violations paid in full before the court date specified on the citation/complaint

(4)  If bail is forfeited or applied, the fee prescribed pursuant to this section shall be deducted. If bail is returned, the fee paid shall also be returned, less normal administrative charges, per state statute. 

(5)  Proceeds from payment of the fee shall be used for municipal court administration and training. (Ord. 2880 § 3, 2003)


3.32.030      No limitation on court authority.

Nothing in this chapter is intended to detract from or impact the inherent power of the court or the authority of the court pursuant to general law to establish fees and charges in addition to the fees specified herein and in resolutions adopted by the council. The municipal court judge has the authority to establish fees and charges by court order and the council may from time to time ratify those charges as part of a comprehensive fee resolution. (Ord. 2880 § 4, 2003)


3.32.040      No taxation under Oregon Constitution.

The city council determines that the municipal court administration fee imposed by this chapter is not a tax subject to the property tax limitations of Article XI, Section 11(b) of the Oregon Constitution. (Ord. 2880 § 5, 2003)

 


Title 4       (Reserved)

 


Title 5 BUSINESS TAXES, LICENSES AND REGULATIONS 

Chapters:

5.04    Business Licenses

5.08    Taxicab Companies, Drivers, and Taxicabs

5.12    Repealed

5.16    Secondhand Dealers

5.20    Solicitation

5.24    Premises Serving Alcoholic Liquor

5.28    Liquor License Review

5.30    Marijuana Business Regulations

5.32    Dismantler Certificates

5.36    Tax Relief for Enterprise Zone Investments

5.38    Recreational Marijuana Tax


Chapter 5.04 BUSINESS LICENSES

Sections:

5.04.010    Purpose.

5.04.020    Definitions.

5.04.030    Licenses required – Presumption of conducting business.

5.04.040    Licensing exemptions.

5.04.050    License applications.

5.04.060    Investigation of applicant.

5.04.070    Issuance of a license.

5.04.080    Characteristics of license.

5.04.090    Fees.

5.04.100    License requirements.

5.04.110    Renewal of license – Late fees.

5.04.120    Denial or revocation of license.

5.04.130    Appeal.

5.04.140    Penalties.

5.04.150    Additional remedy.


5.04.010 Purpose. 

This chapter is enacted primarily for the purpose of regulating businesses and collecting revenues. The public’s interest is served by ensuring that businesses will be regulated in a manner that promotes compliance with applicable federal, state, and municipal laws, and encourages businesses to engage in activities in a manner which does not detract from the public health, safety, and welfare. (Ord. 3061 § 1, 2007)


5.04.020 Definitions.

(1) “Applicant” means owner, proprietor or duly authorized agent for the business requesting a license.

(2) “Business” means any profession, trade, occupation, shop, or any calling carried on for profit or livelihood, including but not limited to the rental of commercial or residential property, and those working as independent contractors, whether or not the contractor is paid on an hourly or job basis.

(3) “City” means the city of St. Helens.

(4) “City administrator” means the person holding the position of city administrator or any agent, employee, or designee authorized to perform the duties of this chapter by the city administrator.

(5) “City council” means the St. Helens city council.

(6) “Hearings officer” means the city council, or an outside party not affiliated with the city that is hired or selected to conduct an appeals proceeding.

(7) “License” means the permission, privilege or approval granted by the city to allow an applicant to engage in a business or activity regulated by this chapter upon issuance of an annual or weekly license. A weekly license shall expire seven days after issuance.

(8) “Person” means an individual, partnership, corporation or other business entity recognized by Oregon law. (Ord. 3061 § 2, 2007)


5.04.030 Licenses required – Presumption of conducting business.

(1) License Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct business within the city without first obtaining the appropriate business license and maintaining compliance with this chapter. 

(2) Presumption of Conducting Business. A person is presumed to be conducting business in the city and subject to this chapter if engaged in any of the following activities:

(a) Advertising or otherwise professing to be doing business within the city;

(b) Providing goods and/or services to customers within the city;

(c) Owning, leasing or renting personal or real property within the city which is used in a trade or business;

(d) Engaging in any transaction involving the production of income from holding property or the gain from the sale of property; or

(e) Engaging in any activity with the intent to realize a profit. (Ord. 3061 § 3, 2007)


5.04.040 Licensing exemptions. 

The following persons are exempt from the licensing requirements imposed by this chapter:

(1) Persons whom the city is prohibited from licensing or taxing under the Constitution or laws of the United States, the Constitution or laws of the state of Oregon, or the City Charter.

(2) Nonprofit, charitable, religious or educational organizations which have received a tax exempt certificate from the Internal Revenue Service, and which devote the net proceeds from the sale of goods or services to the purpose of the organization.

(3) Business operating under a city franchise.

(4) A warehouse used in connection with a business, but maintained at a separate location within the city, as long as the business which owns the warehouse maintains a valid business license. 

(5) The sale of personal property acquired for household or other personal use by the seller (e.g., garage or yard sales); provided, that the total length of all sales combined is fewer than six days in any one calendar year.

(6) The operation of a display space, booth or table maintained for displaying or selling merchandise at any trade show, convention, festival, fair, market, bazaar, or swap meet; provided, that the sponsor of the event is licensed to do business.

(7) A person whose business consists of renting out less than two residential rental units within the city.

(8) Domestic Help. An individual hired or employed primarily for the performance of domestic duties or chores including child care, the maintenance of a residence and the care, comfort and convenience of members of the residential household.

(9) Individuals who are employed by a business which is required to obtain a license pursuant to this chapter.

(10) Producers of farm products raised in Oregon, produced by themselves or their immediate families, shall not be subject to license fees prescribed in this section that may apply to the selling of such products in the city by themselves or their immediate families. (Ord. 3061 § 4, 2007)


5.04.050 License applications. 

(1) The applicant for a business license shall provide the information required on the city’s business license application, and the appropriate nonrefundable business license fee, at least 30 days prior to the date the license is requested to be effective. The city shall require the name and address of the applicant and the business to be licensed, and any other information appropriate to determine the ownership, location, management, purpose, or other factors related to the business, which have bearing on the health, safety, welfare, economic development, convenience or necessity of the business to the city or its citizens. The application shall be signed by the applicant under penalty of perjury and false swearing. Incomplete applications shall not be processed. 

(2) A temporary license may be issued to applicants applying for a permanent business license. The temporary license shall expire 30 days after issuance, or upon decision of the city administrator to issue or deny a business license, whichever occurs first.

(3) Applicants filing applications for licenses less than 30 days prior to the date the license is requested to be effective shall pay a late application fee. (Ord. 3061 § 5, 2007)


5.04.060 Investigation of applicant. 

By signing and submitting an application for a business license, the applicant consents to an investigation by the city to determine whether the business is in compliance with applicable federal, state, and local laws. At the request of the city administrator, the applicant shall submit additional documentation or information needed to determine compliance. (Ord. 3061 § 6, 2007)


5.04.070 Issuance of a license. 

All business licenses shall be issued by the city recorder after a finding by the city administrator that the applicant has met all requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 3061 § 7, 2007)


5.04.080 Characteristics of license.

(1) Nontransferable. A license issued pursuant to this chapter is nontransferable, unless the transferee has applied for a license transfer that was approved by the city administrator and paid the license transfer fee.

(a) Circumstances Allowing Transfer. If a person licensed to do business within the city sells or transfers such business to another, the business license may also be transferred to the purchaser of the business upon completion of an application and approval by the city administrator. In order for the city administrator to approve the transfer of the business, the principal purpose of the business must not change and the business must not have any delinquent fees.

(2) Renewable. Unless otherwise provided, a license issued pursuant to this chapter is renewable as provided in SHMC 5.04.110. Annual licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter remain effective from January 1st of the license year, or the date of issuance, whichever is later, until December 31st of the license year.

(3) Revocable. A license issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked as provided in SHMC 5.04.120. (Ord. 3061 § 8, 2007)


5.04.090 Fees. 

All businesses, except those exempted in SHMC 5.04.040, that engage in business activities within the city limits shall be licensed. The amount to be paid as license fees, and all other fees required by this chapter, shall be established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 3061 § 9, 2007)


5.04.100 License requirements. 

In addition to any other requirements of this chapter, a licensee shall:

(1) Abide by all federal, state, and local laws, zoning regulations, and provisions of this chapter, with the exception of the Controlled Substances Act as it applies to marijuana legal under the laws of the state of Oregon.

(2) Notify the city administrator in writing within 10 days of any change in the name, address, or telephone number of the business itself or the business owner(s), principal purpose of the business, status of state-issued licenses, or other material information.

(3) Maintain and preserve, for a period of not less than three years, such books and records as will accurately reflect the number of employees for each license year.

(4) Advertise for business using only the name for which a license is held. (Ord. 3196 § 1 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 3061 § 10, 2007)


5.04.110 Renewal of license – Late fees.

(1) Application for a renewal of a license shall be made to the city administrator 30 days prior to the license expiration date on the business license renewal form provided by the city, accompanied by the appropriate renewal fee. 

(2) Applicants filing renewal applications after February 1st of the license year shall pay a late renewal fee as set by resolution. (Ord. 3061 § 11, 2007)


5.04.120 Denial or revocation of license. 

(1) The city may deny or revoke a license upon finding that:

(a) The applicant fails to meet the requirements of this chapter, or is doing business in violation of this chapter, zoning regulations, or applicable federal, state, county, or local law, with the exception of the Controlled Substances Act as it applies to marijuana legal under the laws of the state of Oregon.

(b) The applicant has provided false or misleading information, or has omitted disclosure of a material fact on the application, related materials, or license.

(c) The applicant has a previous history of unlawful business activity, which, if continued, would be grounds for revocation of the license. 

(d) The applicant’s past or present violations of law, including a violation which does not lead to a conviction, presents reasonable doubt that the activity performed by the applicant can be performed without harm or danger to persons or property. However, if the applicant demonstrates to the city administrator that the violation has no bearing on the applicant’s fitness to undertake the licensed activity without endangering property or the public health, safety or welfare, the city administrator may issue the license. The city administrator may consider as a basis for denial or revocation: 

(i) Only those violations which would constitute felonies, if convicted, which occurred within the preceding 15 years;

(ii) All other violations only if they occurred within the preceding three years.

(e) The information supplied for the review does not indicate that the applicant has the special knowledge or skill required to perform the licensed activity.

(f) The licensed activity would endanger property or the public health or safety. 

(g) The applicable business license fee has not been paid by the due date.

(2) The city shall provide written notice to the applicant of a denial or revocation. The notice shall state the reason for denial or revocation and shall inform the applicant of the right to appeal under SHMC 5.04.130.

(3) The notice shall be given at least 30 days before the revocation becomes effective. If the violation ends within the 30 days, the city may discontinue the revocation proceedings. 

(4) A person whose application for any business license has been denied or whose license has been revoked may, after 90 days from the date of denial or revocation, apply for a license upon payment of the application fee and submission of an application form and required attachments. 

(5) A person whose application for any business license has been denied or whose license has been revoked for a total of two times within one year or who has a total of four denials or revocations shall be disqualified from applying for a license for a period of two years from the date of the last revocation or denial. (Ord. 3196 § 1 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 3061 § 12, 2007)


5.04.130 Appeal. 

Any person aggrieved by the city administrator’s decision to deny or revoke their business license may appeal such action to a hearings officer through the following procedures: 

(1) A person appealing the city administrator’s action shall, within 10 days of such action and notice, file a written notice of appeal with the city recorder. The written notice shall include the name and address of the appellant, the nature of the decision being appealed, the reason(s) the original decision is alleged to be incorrect, and the result the appellant desires on appeal. 

(2) The city recorder shall fix the time for the appeal to be heard by the hearings officer, place the hearing of the appeal upon the calendar of the hearings officer, and notify the appellant of the time fixed no less than five days prior to that time. 

(3) The appellant shall pay a nonrefundable appeals fee to facilitate the appeal.

(4) The appellant shall be entitled to appear personally and by counsel and to present such facts and arguments as may tend to support his appeal. 

(5) The hearings officer shall take such action upon the appeal as he sees fit and such action by the hearings officer shall be final. 

(6) The action of the city administrator shall be stayed pending the outcome of an appeal properly filed pursuant to this section. 

(7) Failure to strictly comply with the applicable appeal requirements, including but not limited to the required elements for the written notice of appeal, time for filing, and payment of the applicable appeal fee, shall constitute jurisdictional defects resulting in the summary dismissal of the appeal.

(8) If the appellant loses on appeal, the appellant will be held financially responsible for the cost to the city of the appeal, including but not limited to the hiring of the hearings officer. (Ord. 3061 § 13, 2007)


5.04.140 Penalties. 

A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a Class C misdemeanor. (Ord. 3061 § 14, 2007)


5.04.150 Additional remedy. 

The conviction of any person for a violation of any provision of this chapter shall not operate to relieve such person from paying any fee or penalty thereupon for which such person shall be liable, nor shall the payment of any such fee be a bar to, or prevent any prosecution in, the St. Helens municipal court, of any complaint for the violation of any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 3061 § 15, 2007)


Chapter 5.08 TAXICAB COMPANIES, DRIVERS, AND TAXICABS

Sections:

5.08.010    Definitions.

5.08.020    Taxicab company permit required – Exemption.

5.08.030    Taxicab company permit application – Issuance of permit.

5.08.040    Taxicab company permit renewal.

5.08.050    Minimum standards for taxicab service companies.

5.08.060    Equipment.

5.08.070    Safety inspections and certification.

5.08.080    Digital security camera regulations.

5.08.090    Identification.

5.08.100    Insurance.

5.08.110    Taxicab driver’s permits required.

5.08.120    Taxicab driver’s permit application and renewal.

5.08.130    Denial of taxicab driver’s permit.

5.08.140    Driver’s permit approved and posting requirements.

5.08.150    Reports to the city.

5.08.160    Conduct of taxicab companies.

5.08.170    Conduct of drivers.

5.08.180    Permit suspension, revocation, and civil penalties.

5.08.190    Criminal provisions and penalties.

5.08.200    Appeals.

5.08.210    Rates.

5.08.220    Multiple fare groups.

5.08.230    Complaints.

5.08.240    Items lost and found.


5.08.010 Definitions. 

(1) “Business license fee schedule” means a list of fees, adopted by resolution of the city council, establishing the cost of licenses for businesses located inside and outside of the St. Helens city limits. 

(2) “Chief of police” means the person holding the position of chief of police of the St. Helens police department, or any agent, employee, or designee authorized to perform the duties of this chapter by the chief of police. 

(3) “City” means the city of St. Helens, Oregon. 

(4) “City administrator” means the person holding the position of city administrator or any agent, employee, or designee authorized to perform the duties of this chapter by the city administrator. 

(5) “Digital security camera system” means a camera system installed at the taxicab owner’s discretion. 

(6) “Hearings officer” means the city council or an outside party not affiliated with the city that is hired or selected to conduct an appeals proceeding. 

(7) “Operate” means driving a taxicab, using a taxicab to conduct a business, receiving money from the use of a taxicab, or causing or allowing another person to do the same. 

(8) “Person” means any individual, partnership, trust, estate, corporation, or other form of business organization recognized by Oregon law. 

(9) “Seating capacity” means the number of permanent seats in a motor vehicle that are equipped with properly operating seatbelts. 

(10) “Shuttle transportation” means transportation provided in a motor vehicle that has a valid Port of Portland permit:

(a) Over a fixed route and time schedule; or

(b) Other than on a fixed route and time schedule for transportation originating at Portland International Airport or originating in St. Helens when the destination is Portland International Airport. 

(11) “Taxicab” means any motor vehicle which carries passengers for hire where the destination and route traveled may be controlled by a passenger and the fare is calculated on the basis of an initial fee, distance traveled, waiting time, a flat fee, any fee allowed under SHMC 5.08.210, or any combination thereof, and which is duly permitted by the city under the terms of this chapter. 

(12) “Taxicab certificate” means a numbered identification card, certificate, or plate, issued by the city, permanently affixed to and prominently displayed in the rear taxicab window. 

(13) “Taxicab company” means any entity that either has its primary place of business within the city limits, or regularly conducts business within the city limits, that is duly authorized by the city as a taxicab company to operate taxicabs, other than as a driver, regardless of whether the vehicles operated are owned by the company, leased, or owned by individual members of the company. 

(14) “Taxicab driver” means any person duly authorized by the city as a taxicab driver under the terms of this chapter that operates taxicabs as a driver for any permitted taxicab company, regardless of whether the vehicles operated are owned by the company, leased, or owned by individual members of the company. 

(15) “Taximeter” means a mechanical or electronic device which calculates and displays a fare based on an initial fee, distance traveled, waiting time, or any combination thereof. 

(16) “Waiting time” means time during which the taxicab is under the direction of a passenger and the taxicab is not moving. (Ord. 3062 § 1, 2007)


5.08.020 Taxicab company permit required – Exemption. 

(1) No person shall conduct business as a taxicab company without a current taxicab company permit to do business issued by the city. 

(a) Exemption. Public transportation provided and funded in whole or in part by public organizations shall be exempt from the permit requirements of this chapter. 

(2) No taxicab company permit shall be assigned, transferred, merged, or leased without the prior written consent of the city administrator. The city’s granting of consent in one instance shall not render unnecessary any subsequent consent in any other instance. Within 10 days after execution and delivery of any instrument so consented to by the city, the grantee shall file with the city recorder an executed counterpart or certified copy thereof. 

(3) In determining whether the city will consent to any assignment, transfer, merger, or lease, the city may inquire into the technical, legal, and financial qualifications of the prospective party. The taxicab company shall assist the city in any such inquiry. The city may impose conditions relating to the technical, legal, and financial qualifications of the prospective party. 

(4) Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the mortgage, pledge, or assignment of tangible assets of a taxicab company for the purpose of financing the acquisition of equipment for the operation of a taxicab company without the city’s consent. Taxicab companies may sell tangible assets in the ordinary conduct of business without the consent of the city. (Ord. 3062 § 2, 2007)


5.08.030 Taxicab company permit application – Issuance of permit. 

(1) A person applying for an initial taxicab company permit shall submit to the city a taxicab company permit application containing such information as the city may require. The application shall include a nonrefundable fee in the amount specified by the business license fee schedule. 

(2) The city administrator may only approve a taxicab company permit if after reviewing the taxicab company permit application the city administrator finds that: 

(a) The applicant has established both fitness and ability to comply with the requirements and standards of this chapter, including the minimum standards required in SHMC 5.08.050 and the equipment standards of SHMC 5.08.060;

(b) The applicant has submitted an acceptable rate schedule pursuant to SHMC 5.08.210; 

(c) The applicant has sufficient financial resources to meet the minimum insurance standards established by SHMC 5.08.100; and 

(d) The applicant has obtained, or is in the process of obtaining, a valid business license. 

(e) After consideration of the current status of the public transportation system in the city, that the interests of the city will be served by issuance of a permit. The factors affecting the current status of transportation include: 

(i) The current and future ability of the public transportation system to provide the timely and effective movement of persons;

(ii) The ratio of the population within the city to the number of taxicabs currently in operation; 

(iii) The demonstrated need for additional taxicab service in the city that is not met by existing companies, as shown by the applicant; 

(iv) The present utilization patterns of taxicabs currently in operation; 

(v) The interests of the applicant in establishing a local business to legitimately serve the citizens of this city; and

(vi) The extent to which granting the application will serve the purposes of this chapter. 

(3) The permit may contain such terms or conditions as the city administrator deems appropriate. The permit may establish the number of vehicles that may be operated as taxicabs by the taxicab company. Violation of these terms or conditions may result in revocation of the permit. 

(4) The application shall be forwarded to the city council as a consent agenda item for approval after a finding by the city administrator that the application has met all the requirements of this chapter. The city recorder shall issue a taxicab company permit on the order of the city council upon approval. (Ord. 3062 § 3, 2007)


5.08.040 Taxicab company permit renewal.

Taxicab company permits shall remain in effect upon submission of the annual vehicle inspection certifications with payment of the annual business license fee specified by the business license fee schedule, unless otherwise revoked under this chapter. Failure to renew the taxicab company’s business license before February 1st shall result in late fees. (Ord. 3062 § 4, 2007)


5.08.050 Minimum standards for taxicab service companies. 

Any taxicab company operating under permit to do business issued under this chapter shall comply with the following minimum standards: 

(1) An office open and staffed for a minimum of eight hours a day, five days a week. 

(2) A dispatch system in operation 24 hours each day capable of providing reasonably prompt service in response to requests received by telephone. 

(3) Facilities and personnel sufficient to ensure that every taxicab operated by the company complies with the requirements of this chapter. 

(4) Insurance policies in force sufficient to meet the requirements of SHMC 5.08.100 and to protect the company to the same limits of liability. 

(5) A taxicab company may only refuse to respond to a request for taxicab service received from a location within the city if: 

(a) Providing the service would present safety concerns; or 

(b) The person requesting the service has a history of refusing taxicab services after the taxicab arrives. 

(6) Each driver shall maintain a log in which a record of every trip shall be kept. The taxicab company shall retain the log for at least one year after the last entry therein. 

(7) Each taxicab company shall have an effective policy that prohibits smoking of any substance and the use of tobacco in any form by drivers or passengers in taxicabs. 

(a) Each permitted taxicab shall display a warning sign, in a form and location approved by the city, including details of the prohibition, fines for violating the smoking and tobacco use prohibitions and a contact telephone number for complaints. 

(b) Taxicab companies found to be in violation of this prohibition shall be subject to civil penalties as provided in this chapter. 

(c) If civil penalties have been assessed against a taxicab driver for a violation of this section, the taxicab company shall be prohibited from assessing additional penalties against the taxicab driver for the same incident. 

(d) In the event that a passenger persists in smoking or using tobacco after being warned by the taxicab driver that they are violating this prohibition, the passenger may be subject to denial of service, provided such denial does not jeopardize the safety of the passenger. (Ord. 3062 § 5, 2007)


5.08.060 Equipment. 

(1) Taximeters. Every taxicab shall be equipped with a taximeter in accurate operating condition, with a lighted face which can be easily read at all times by passengers. Every taximeter shall be inspected and certified at installation, at change in rate, and within one year of the last inspection. A certificate of inspection shall be issued by a qualified taximeter repair service upon each inspection. Such certificate of inspection shall include: 

(a) The identifying number of the taximeter; 

(b) The make, model and license number of the taxicab in which the taximeter is installed; 

(c) The name of the taxicab company; 

(d)  The date of inspection; 

(e) A certification that the taximeter has been inspected and approved as operating within the limits of accuracy as specified by this section and on the basis of rates on file with the city under SHMC 5.08.210; 

(f) The signature of the individual making the certification; and

(g) A copy of the certificate shall be kept on file in the office of the taxicab company. 

(h) No taxicab shall be operated with a taximeter which fails to operate within the following limits of accuracy: plus or minus 150 feet in one mile and five seconds in one minute of waiting time. A certificate of inspection may be examined or a taximeter re-inspected by any police officer or the city at any time during normal business hours. 

(2) Every taxicab will be equipped with such safety equipment as is required by state law, federal law, or this chapter. Every taxicab shall be equipped with seat belts or other restraining devices for every passenger. 

(3) Every taxicab authorized to operate by the city under this chapter shall be equipped with a taxicab certificate issued by the city. 

(4) Every taxicab shall be properly identified as required by SHMC 5.08.090. 

(5) Every taxicab shall have proof of insurance coverage in the amount specified in SHMC 5.08.100. 

(6) Every taxicab shall have the rate schedule approved by the city council posted as required by SHMC 5.08.210. 

(7) Every taxicab shall warn about the smoking and tobacco use prohibitions in accordance with SHMC 5.08.050(7). (Ord. 3062 § 6, 2007)


5.08.070 Safety inspections and certification.

Every taxicab company shall make an appointment for its taxicabs to be inspected once annually by the St. Helens police department to ensure that each taxicab is: 

(1) Outfitted according to the equipment requirements of SHMC 5.08.060, including specifically that the taxicabs submitted for inspection are properly insured; 

(2) Kept clean; 

(3) Kept in good appearance and good repair; 

(4) Kept in a safe condition; and

(5) Equipped with all pollution control equipment and safety devices originally installed by the manufacturer, and such equipment and devices shall be kept in good working order. (Ord. 3062 § 7, 2007)


5.08.080 Digital security camera regulations.

Digital security camera systems are not mandatory, but if a company chooses to install cameras the requirements of this section shall apply. 

(1) No person other than a sworn officer of the St. Helens police department, Oregon State Police Department, or other police department may access any record produced by the digital security camera systems. 

(2) Immediate access to any record produced by the digital security camera systems shall be made available to the police to assist in the investigation of any crime. 

(3) No taxicab company or driver shall offer for sale or otherwise attempt to benefit or gain from any records produced by digital security camera systems. 

(4) In the event a taxicab is sold, or ceases to be utilized by a taxicab company, or a driver-owner of a taxicab, the responsible taxicab company shall remove any records produced by the digital security camera system from the taxicab prior to the completion of the sale or the decommissioning of the taxicab. (Ord. 3062 § 8, 2007)


5.08.090 Identification. 

Every taxicab shall prominently display on both sides of the outside of the vehicle the full name of the taxicab company, the telephone number of the company where service can be requested, and the word “taxi” or “cab” with paint or vinyl lettering. A taxicab company may submit color selections on the taxicab company application, but color selections are not required. A vehicle that is temporarily being used as a taxicab while the usual taxicab is temporarily out of service does not need to be signed with paint or vinyl lettering as long as: 

(1) The temporary taxicab has been inspected by the St. Helens police department; and 

(2) The vehicle is properly insured pursuant to SHMC 5.08.100 and proof of such insurance was presented to the St. Helens police department or the city administrator. (Ord. 3062 § 9, 2007)


5.08.100 Insurance.

(1) No person shall operate any vehicle as a taxicab unless that vehicle is covered by commercial liability insurance providing coverage of not less than $700,000 for personal injury to any person, $1,500,000 for each occurrence, and $550,000 for each occurrence involving property damage, or in lieu of such coverage, a single limit commercial insurance policy of not less than $2,000,000 covering all claims per occurrence. A certificate of insurance coverage, evidencing insurance coverage in compliance with this section, shall be filed with the city. The adequacy of such insurance coverage shall be subject to the approval of the city attorney. 

(2) The limits of insurance coverage required under this section shall be subject to any statutory changes regarding the minimum limits of liability required for taxicab companies. 

(3) Insurance policies for all vehicles operating as taxicabs shall contain a provision that the policy will not be reduced in coverage or canceled without 30 days’ prior written notice to the city. 

(4) The city council may consider proposed alternatives to the insurance requirements of this section, such as deposit of securities, letters of credit or self-insurance, as provided by Oregon laws. Alternatives to insurance may occur only if the level of coverage shall not be reduced, and the public’s safety and well being will not be affected. The adequacy of proposed alternative insurance coverage shall be subject to the approval of the city attorney before the alternative to insurance may become effective. 

(5) Failure to maintain adequate insurance as required under this section shall be cause for immediate suspension or revocation of a taxicab company permit. (Ord. 3186 § 4, 2015; Ord. 3062 § 10, 2007)


5.08.110 Taxicab driver’s permits required. 

(1) No person shall drive or allow another person to drive a taxicab without a valid motor vehicle driver’s license, issued by the Oregon Department of Motor Vehicles or an equivalent government agency, together with any endorsements necessary to operate a taxicab, and a taxicab driver’s permit issued under this chapter. 

(2) Taxicab driver’s permits shall be valid for no more than one year and all such permits shall expire on December 31st of each year. (Ord. 3062 § 11, 2007)


5.08.120 Taxicab driver’s permit application and renewal. 

(1) An applicant for a taxicab driver’s permit shall submit an application to the city administrator containing such information as the city may require, including an official copy of the applicant’s driving record, which can be obtained from the DMV, and a nonrefundable fee set by the business license fee schedule. The applicant shall submit evidence of fingerprinting if required by the city administrator. 

(2) Review of Permit Applications – Issuance of Permit. 

(a) The city shall review the driver’s license background check provided by the applicant to verify that the applicant has the correct licenses and a history of safe driving. For drivers licensed from states other than Oregon, the applicant shall provide a copy of his or her driving record from the state in which the driver is licensed for the driver license background check. 

(b) The city recorder shall refer any taxicab driver applications to the St. Helens police department before issuing a final license. The chief of police shall obtain a St. Helens police records check and a Law Enforcement Data Systems (LEDS) check of any criminal activity. The city may, at the chief of police’s sole discretion, require or accept in lieu of St. Helens police records and LEDS check a criminal background report from another source, as long as such source is approved by the city attorney. After reviewing the applicant’s criminal history, the chief of police shall issue an opinion in writing to either grant or deny the applicant’s taxicab driver license. If it appears from such investigation or otherwise that a taxicab driver license should not be issued to an applicant, the chief of police shall issue an opinion in writing notifying the city recorder of the reasons for denying the applicant a license.

(c) The city administrator shall review the application, the driving record, and the chief of police’s recommendation, and either issue the driver permit or notify the applicant and sponsoring company that the application is being denied or that additional time is needed to process the application within 10 calendar days of the application’s receipt. 

(d) The city shall only issue taxi driver permits to persons 21 years of age or older. 

(3) Except as provided in SHMC 5.08.130, a taxicab driver’s permit shall be renewed upon the submission of a signed renewal application stating that the information and criminal background checks on file with the city are current and accurate, and the payment of the annual taxicab driver’s license fee set by the business license fee schedule on or before December 31st of each year. If any of the information contained in the application changes, the applicant or taxicab company shall promptly report the change to the city. Failure to renew a license before February 1st shall result in late fees. (Ord. 3062 § 12, 2007)


5.08.130 Denial of taxicab driver’s permit.

No taxicab driver’s permit shall be issued or renewed to any person if the city determines, after a review of that person’s traffic, criminal record, and any other information the city deems pertinent, that the public health, welfare, and safety would not be served by the issuance or renewal of a permit to that person. The applicant may appeal from this finding to the council, requesting that the finding be set aside and a license be granted, but pending the finding, a license shall not be granted. The city may not deny a taxicab driver’s permit under this chapter on the bases of race, ethnicity, religion, or gender. (Ord. 3062 § 13, 2007)


5.08.140 Driver’s permit approved and posting requirements. 

(1) Upon receipt of the application materials specified in SHMC 5.08.120, the city shall issue to the applicant a temporary taxicab driver’s permit, valid for 30 days after date of issuance. The permit shall prominently display the words, “TEMPORARY DRIVER’S PERMIT. NOT VALID AFTER ...,” followed by the expiration date of the permit in the same font size. The temporary driver’s permit shall be posted in the manner specified in subsection (2) of this section, and shall be surrendered immediately if the taxicab driver’s permit is denied. 

(2) When a taxicab driver’s permit has been granted, the city recorder shall furnish to the taxicab driver a printed card containing the permit number and the taxicab driver’s name, date of birth, sex, height, weight, hair color, and eye color. This card shall be posted in a prominent place within the passenger compartment of any taxicab being driven by the taxicab driver, and shall be shown to any passenger, police officer, or the city upon request. 

(3) Upon presentation of convincing evidence that a taxicab driver’s permit has been lost or destroyed and payment of a replacement fee as set forth in the most recent universal fee schedule adopted by council, the city recorder shall issue a replacement permit. (Ord. 3219 § 3, 2017; Ord. 3062 § 14, 2007)


5.08.150 Reports to the city. 

(1) Every taxicab company shall immediately report to the city as soon as it becomes aware of the occurrence of any of the following events: 

(a) The arrest or conviction for any criminal offense of any officer or principal managing employee of the taxicab company involving the operation of the taxicab company;

(b) Any taxicab accident required to be reported to the state of Oregon involving a vehicle driven for the taxicab company; 

(c) The filing of a lawsuit against or on behalf of the taxicab company related to the operation of the taxicab company; 

(d) The initiation of bankruptcy proceedings or corporate or partnership dissolution by the taxicab company; or

(e) Any information required to be disclosed by subsection (2) of this section that comes to the taxicab company’s attention. 

(2) Every taxicab driver shall immediately report to the city, and any taxicab company for whom he drives, the occurrence of the following: 

(a) Any arrest, charge, or conviction of the taxicab driver for any criminal offense, or any traffic violation, that occurs during, or arises out of, the taxicab driver’s operation of a taxicab; 

(b) Any arrest, charge or conviction of the taxicab driver for any criminal offense involving theft, robbery, burglary, assault, sex crimes, drugs, prostitution, or any related offense; 

(c) Any vehicle accident required to be reported to the state of Oregon involving any taxicab operated by the taxicab driver; or

(d) Any restriction, suspension or revocation of the taxicab driver’s motor vehicle driver’s license. (Ord. 3062 § 15, 2007)


5.08.160 Conduct of taxicab companies. 

A taxicab company shall not: 

(1) Fail to report events or circumstances required by SHMC 5.08.150; 

(2) Allow any taxicab to be driven without a valid taxicab driver’s permit and an inspected and permitted vehicle; or

(3) Allow any driver to drive with the permit card of another taxicab driver displayed. (Ord. 3062 § 16, 2007)


5.08.170 Conduct of drivers. 

A taxicab driver shall not: 

(1) Operate any taxicab without a valid taxicab driver’s permit; 

(2) Allow another person to use his driver’s permit; 

(3) Operate any taxicab while consuming or while under the influence of intoxicants, in a careless or reckless manner or in a manner contrary to the laws of this city or the state of Oregon; 

(4) Operate any taxicab while consuming or while under the influence of drugs, unless such drugs are available commercially over the counter, or are being taken pursuant to a doctor’s prescription, and, in any case, such drug usage does not impair the driver’s ability to operate the taxicab; 

(5) Use a taxicab in the commission of any crime; 

(6) Use profane or obscene language offensive to the passenger while operating a taxicab; 

(7) Smoke any substance or use tobacco in any form, inside a taxicab; 

(a) Violation of this prohibition by any driver shall result in the penalties provided for in SHMC 8.32.110;

(8) Charge a fare higher than that authorized by this chapter for passenger transportation or defraud a passenger in any way, including but not limited to manipulating the odometer, timepiece or any other device so as to cause a registration to be made of a greater distance or more time; 

(9) Be discourteous to a passenger; 

(10) Drive a passenger to his destination by any other than the most direct and safe route, unless requested to do so by the passenger; 

(11) Refuse to transport to his requested destination any passenger of proper demeanor who requests services or is assigned by a taxicab service company when the taxicab is not already in service, and who is able to demonstrate the ability and willingness to pay the fare; 

(12) Refuse to issue a receipt for a fare paid if one is requested; nor 

(13) Fail to immediately notify the taxicab company if a digital security camera system in a taxicab driven by the driver is, or appears to be, stolen. (Ord. 3062 § 17, 2007)


5.08.180 Permit suspension, revocation, and civil penalties. 

(1) Suspension and Revocation. Any permit issued under this chapter may be revoked or suspended by the city if the city finds after a reasonable investigation that: 

(a) The provisions of this chapter or regulations adopted hereunder have been violated; 

(b) Any statement contained in the application for such permit or license is false; 

(c) The suspension or revocation is necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare generally or the safety of the taxicab-riding public in particular; or 

(d) The revocation or suspension is otherwise authorized by ordinances of the city. 

(2) Any suspension or revocation pursuant to this section shall be in writing, setting forth the reasons therefor and the right of appeal pursuant to SHMC 5.08.200. 

(3) Except as provided below, any suspension or revocation shall be effective 10 days after mailing a copy thereof by first class United States mail addressed to the taxicab company and taxicab driver at the business or residence address shown on the permit application or renewal. 

(4) Notwithstanding subsection (3) of this section, a suspension or revocation may be made effective immediately if the city finds reasonable grounds to believe that: 

(a) A person holding a taxicab driver’s permit is not covered by liability insurance required by SHMC 5.08.100;

(b) A vehicle being operated as a taxicab is not covered by liability insurance required by SHMC 5.08.100; or 

(c) Continued operation by the taxicab company or taxicab driver would cause, or is likely to cause, imminent danger to the public health, safety, or welfare. 

(5) The city administrator may assess a civil penalty in an amount of up to $1,000 per day or per occurrence against any person found to be in violation of this chapter. In assessing a civil penalty against a taxicab company or taxicab driver, the city may assess civil penalties in lieu of a suspension, and may provide that if the specified civil penalty is paid in full, within the time and on the terms and conditions specified, the suspension shall be waived. 

(6) In calculating the amount of any civil penalty to be assessed under this section, the city shall consider: 

(a) The extent and nature of the person’s involvement in the violation; 

(b) The benefits, economic, financial, or otherwise, accruing or likely to accrue as a result of the violations;

(c) Whether the violations were repeated and continuous, or isolated and temporary; 

(d) The magnitude and seriousness of the violation;

(e) The city’s costs of investigating the violation and correcting or attempting to correct the violation;

(f) Whether the facts underlying the violation have been considered in a previous disciplinary proceeding; and

(g) Any other factors the city deems to be relevant. 

(7) If a suspension, revocation, or civil penalty in lieu of suspension is appealed to the city council pursuant to SHMC 5.08.200, such action of the city shall generally be stayed, pending the outcome of such appeal; however, suspensions or revocations made immediately effective pursuant to subsection (4) of this section shall remain in effect during the appeals process. (Ord. 3062 § 18, 2007)


5.08.190 Criminal provisions and penalties.

The violation of the following provisions is punishable upon conviction as a Class C misdemeanor unless otherwise stated: 

(1) It is unlawful to tamper with a taximeter or to conduct any fraudulent scheme with the intent to charge any person a fare greater than that allowed by this chapter. 

(2) It is unlawful for any person to charge, cause or allow any person to charge any fare other than the applicable fare from rate schedules posted on the taxicab or from contracts approved by the city council. 

(3) It is unlawful for any person to knowingly falsify any application, certification, report, or document of any kind required by this chapter. A violation of this prohibition is a Class A misdemeanor. 

(4) It is unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab without a current, valid taxicab driver’s permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 

(5) It is unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab company without a current, valid taxicab company permit, issued pursuant to this chapter. 

(6) It is unlawful for anyone to violate the digital security camera regulations of SHMC 5.08.080. A violation of this prohibition is a Class A misdemeanor. 

(7) It is unlawful for any person to refuse or fail to pay the applicable fare for a taxicab after hiring or requesting that taxicab. A violation of this prohibition shall be a Class A misdemeanor if the value of the taxicab service was greater than $50.00 but less than $750.00.

(a) In the event of a dispute over a fare, the passenger shall pay the fare demanded by the driver. The driver shall give the passenger a receipt noting the amount of the fare and a description of the trip. The passenger may apply for a refund of any overcharge and ask that the driver be disciplined by filing a complaint in accordance with SHMC 5.08.230. (Ord. 3062 § 19, 2007)


5.08.200 Appeals. 

(1) Grounds for Appeals. Appeals to a hearings officer may be made by any person assessed a civil penalty for violating any provision of this chapter, including: (a) any person operating a taxicab company or driving a taxicab without the required permit, or (b) any taxicab company, taxicab driver, or applicant for a taxicab company or driver permit: 

(a) Whose application for the required permit or permit renewal has been denied by the city administrator; 

(b) Whose taxicab company’s permit has been approved with terms or conditions they oppose; 

(c) Whose taxicab company’s permit or driver’s permit has been revoked or suspended by the city; 

(d) Who has been directed to pay a civil penalty in lieu of suspension by the city; or 

(e) Whose permit has been suspended by the city so that the company no longer has authority to operate any vehicle under its permit. 

(2) Appeals Procedure. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the city, or any person appealing on grounds defined in subsection (1) of this section, may appeal such action to a hearings officer through the following procedures: 

(a) A person appealing the city’s action shall, within 10 days of such action, file a written notice of appeal with the city recorder. 

(b) The city recorder shall fix the time for the appeal to be heard by the hearings officer, place the hearing of the appeal upon the calendar of the hearings officer, and notify the appellant of the time fixed no less than five days prior to that time. 

(c) The appellant shall pay a nonrefundable appeals fee to facilitate the appeal in the amount specified by the business license fee schedule. 

(d) The appellant shall be entitled to appear personally and by counsel and to present such facts and arguments as may tend to support his appeal. 

(e) The hearings officer shall take such action upon the appeal as he sees fit and such action by the hearings officer shall be final. 

(f) The action of the city shall be stayed pending the outcome of an appeal properly filed pursuant to this section. 

(g) Failure to strictly comply with the applicable appeal requirements, including but not limited to time for filing and payment of the applicable appeal fee, shall constitute jurisdictional defects resulting in the summary dismissal of the appeal. 

(h) If the appellant loses on appeal, the appellant will be held financially responsible for the cost to the city of the appeal, including but not limited to the hiring of the hearings officer. (Ord. 3062 § 20, 2007)


5.08.210 Rates. 

(1) Every taxicab company shall file with the city a schedule of rates to be charged for the services of taxicabs it operates. The rate schedule shall be forwarded to the city council as a consent agenda item for approval after a finding by the city administrator that the rate schedule complies with this chapter. 

(2) The rate schedule filed with the city council may contain special rates for zone fares, ride sharing, taxi pooling, jitney service, fixed route service, or any other special services offered by the company. 

(a) Each rate schedule shall also include a meter-based fare that shall not exceed the maximum fare established in subsection (3) of this section.

(b) The fare schedule shall also require that the passenger or passengers shall pay an airport gate fee not to exceed the amount charged by the Port of Portland for trips originating at the Portland International Airport. 

(3) The following schedule of meter rates shall be the maximum fare which shall be charged and collected for the transportation of passengers in taxicabs to locations other than the Portland International Airport: 

(a) An initial charge of $2.50, for one passenger, and waiting time at a rate of $30.00 per hour or proportionate fraction thereof; 

(b) Subsequent to the initial charge provided for in subsection (3)(a) of this section, the maximum charges shall not exceed $3.00 per mile, divided in a manner approved in advance by the city council and waiting time subsequent to the initial charge provided in subsection (3)(a) of this section shall be at the rate of $30.00 per hour or proportionate fraction thereof; 

(c) For each extra passenger, $1.00 additional charge.

(4) Where a passenger is being transported, no extra charge is to be made for transporting any items belonging to that passenger, including personal luggage and aids necessary for travel by disabled persons, if those items fit within the interior of the taxicab, including the trunk, each item can be carried by a single person, and all such items can be carried by the passenger or passengers in a single trip to the taxicab. 

(5) No charge is to be made for time lost or distance traveled while the taxicab is disabled. No charge is to be made for traveling empty while en route to pick up a passenger, unless the person requesting the taxicab refuses to hire it after it arrives, in which case an amount equal to the minimum charge on file as specified in subsection (3)(a) of this section may be made. 

(6) A taxicab company may make written contractual arrangements to charge rates other than those specified in the filed rate schedules; provided, that these contracts are not effective until the contract is filed with the city council in the same manner as prescribed for rate schedules. 

(7) A clear and complete summary of the rate schedule filed with the city, pursuant to this section, shall be printed on a rate card to be posted in a conspicuous place in the passenger compartment of every taxicab, and a summary of the meter rate in a form approved by the city administrator shall be placed in a manner to be visible from the outside of every taxicab. The form of the rate summaries shall be subject to the review and approval of the city administrator prior to their being posted. When a change of rate schedule is approved by the city council, the taximeter, rate card, and rates posted shall be converted for every taxicab immediately. The rates posted shall not vary from those used in the taximeter in any taxicab in service. (Ord. 3062 § 21, 2007)


5.08.220 Multiple fare groups.

It is unlawful for the driver of any taxicab who is engaged by any person within the city limits to accept more than one passenger on the same trip, unless: (1) the additional passengers are part of a single party group and they request to be carried together, or (2) the passengers are utilizing the taxicab company’s Portland International Airport shuttle service. In the event that all the passengers of a taxicab constituting a single party group do request a trip together where different passengers are seeking to reach different destinations, then the driver shall drive by the most direct route to the nearest destination; the first passenger(s) dropped off shall pay the fare from the initial pick-up location to the drop-off point. Then the driver shall drive by the most direct route to the next destination of the passenger(s) who go to the next nearest point of destination, whereupon the driver shall operate the taximeter as a new and separate fare and then continue in the same manner until the entire trip is completed and all passengers are delivered. In cases where two or more passengers go to the same place, the fare shall be as for one passenger plus the additional passenger fee for the other passengers going to the same destination. (Ord. 3062 § 22, 2007)


5.08.230 Complaints. 

(1) Every taxicab shall have posted in a prominent place within the passenger compartment the following notice entitled “Complaints” in the following form: 

The driver of this taxicab is required by the St. Helens City Code to give a receipt for services provided to any passenger who requests one. If you have a complaint about a taxicab or taxicab driver, contact (taxicab company name) at: 

Street address 

City, State Zip Code 

Phone Number 

The City can be contacted concerning any complaints at: 

265 Strand Street 

St. Helens, OR 97051 

(503) 397-6272 

The size, shape, color, type of material, size of characters, location of the notice, and other relevant factors shall be subject to the city administrator’s approval. 

(2) A taxicab company that receives a complaint regarding the fare charged by one of its drivers shall investigate the complaint and issue a refund if the fare did not comply with company rate schedule or this chapter. 

(3) The city shall have the power to investigate any and all complaints concerning possible violations of this chapter or regulations adopted hereunder. All complaints alleging civil violations of this chapter shall be referred to the city administrator for further investigation, and all complaints alleging criminal violations of this chapter shall be referred to the city prosecuting attorney for further action. (Ord. 3062 § 23, 2007)


5.08.240 Items lost and found. 

Taxicab drivers shall examine their cabs at the end of each shift and turn over any items left by a passenger within the cab to the taxicab company. The taxicab company shall maintain a written record of all items turned over to it. This record shall contain a description of the item, the date it was turned in, the cab in which it was found, and the driver who turned in the item. The item shall be examined and the owner identified and notified, if possible. If the item is claimed, a record shall be made of the name and address of the claimant. No item shall be disposed of, other than by return to its owner. At the conclusion of 30 days any unclaimed property shall be turned over to the police department along with any records the taxicab company has concerning the acquisition of the property. (Ord. 3062 § 24, 2007)


Chapter 5.12       FIRE AND CLOSING-OUT SALES

(Repealed by Ord. 2530)


Chapter 5.16 SECONDHAND DEALERS

Sections:

5.16.010    Purpose.

5.16.020    Licenses and fees.

5.16.030    Exclusions.

5.16.040    Definitions.

5.16.050    Application requirements.

5.16.055    License characteristics.

5.16.060    Reporting of transactions.

5.16.070    Reserved.

5.16.080    Regulated property sales.

5.16.090    Reserved.

5.16.100    Article to be tagged.

5.16.110    Reserved.

5.16.120    Reserved.

5.16.130    Prohibited acts.

5.16.140    Reserved.

5.16.150    Inspection of articles and records.

5.16.155    Denial and revocation criteria.

5.16.160    Revocation and suspension procedure.

5.16.165    Appeals.

5.16.170    Penalties.

5.16.180    Injunction.

5.16.190    Administrative policies and procedures.


5.16.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide strict regulation of certain business activities that the council finds present an extraordinary risk of being used as a means of concealing criminal behavior involving the theft of property. This risk is present despite the best efforts of legitimate dealers because of the large volume of goods and material that are processed in such businesses. Therefore, this chapter is intended to reduce this type of criminal activity by providing more timely police awareness of such business transactions. The council finds that the regulations provided herein are necessary, and the need for the regulation outweighs any anticompetitive effect that may result from their adoption. (Ord. 3210 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 2491 § 1, 1986)


5.16.020 Licenses and fees.

Every person who is a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall obtain from the city an annual license to conduct such business. The fees to be charged for the annual license shall be those fees established by the general licensing ordinance of the city. (Ord. 3210 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 2491 § 2, 1986)


5.16.030 Exclusions.

The terms of this chapter, except those terms relating to licensing, shall not apply to the following:

(1) To sales conducted by sheriffs, constables or other public officers who are acting according to law in their official capacity.

(2) To regularly licensed business establishments whose gross sales of new merchandise are more than 60 percent of their gross sales. Anyone relying upon this exclusion shall file with the city, upon demand, a written statement as approved by the city showing gross sales.

(3) To the business of selling at auction livestock, poultry or agricultural products.

(4) To a single auction sale that is conducted by the owner of the goods, or someone under his immediate supervision and control, upon the premises of the owner where such goods have been held or stored. No more than one such auction sale may be held on the premises during any 12-month period.

(5) To garage, basement or occasional sales as herein defined.

(6) To charitable or religious organizations.

(7) To the sale of property purchased from manufacturers or wholesale dealers having an established place of business, or secured from any person doing business and having an established place of business in the city; provided, that such goods shall be accompanied by a bill of sale or other evidence of legitimate purchase and must be shown to the chief of police or any police officer upon written order of the chief of police. (Ord. 3210 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 2491 § 3, 1986)


5.16.040 Definitions.

The following words and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section:

(1) “Crimes of moral turpitude” means a crime which requires as an element of the crime a knowing or intentional act and has one of the following characteristics: fraud, deceit, dishonesty, harm to a specific victim, or illegal activity undertaken for personal gain.

(2) “Hearings officer” means the city council, or an outside party not affiliated with the city, hired or selected to conduct an appeals proceeding.

(3) “Pawnbroker” means any person engaged in conducting, managing or carrying on the business of loaning money for himself or for another, upon personal property, personal security, pawn or pledges, or engaged in the business of purchasing articles of personal property and reselling or agreeing to resell such articles to the vendors, or their assigns, at prices agreed upon at or before the time of such purchase.

(4) “Pawnshop” means any room, store or place in which a pawnbroker business is carried on or conducted.

(5) “Police department” means the St. Helens police department.

(6) “Regulated property” means property of a type that has been determined by the chief of police to be property that is frequently the subject of theft, including new items as defined in this section as well as used items including but not limited to precious metals, precious gems, watches, sterling silver, electronic equipment, photography equipment, tools, musical instruments and cases, firearms, sporting equipment, gift cards, in-store credit cards, activated phone cards and household appliances. In order to enhance the police department’s ability to reduce property crimes and recover stolen goods, a list of regulated property may be included in the administrative policies and procedures, and shall be updated by the chief of police. A copy will be kept on file in the police department.

(7) “Secondhand dealer” means any person who buys, sells or otherwise deals in secondhand tools, goods, wares or merchandise or other articles and things usually found in a secondhand store, except books, or any person who goes from house to house, or place to place, within the city, purchasing or soliciting the purchase of gold, silver or other precious metals or jewelry.

A “secondhand dealer” shall also include an auction market operator.

A “secondhand dealer” shall include the owner or occupant of any premises where a sale of secondhand or used merchandise commonly known as a “garage sale” or a “basement sale” is conducted, except such sales as satisfy all of the requirements of a “garage sale,” “basement sale” or “occasional sale” as defined herein.

For the purposes of SHMC 5.16.050 through 5.16.090, a “secondhand dealer” shall include an antique dealer or anyone holding himself out as an antique dealer.

(8) “Garage sale,” “basement sale,” or “occasional sale” means a sale of quantity of merchandise, clothes, household goods, personal property, etc., previously used or acquired for use by any person, which sale is of a duration of less than three days and which sale is more than 12 months from any previous such sale on the same premises. (Ord. 3210 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 3055 § 1, 2007; Ord. 2491 § 4, 1986)


5.16.050 Application requirements.

The applicant for a secondhand dealer’s license shall provide the information required on the city’s secondhand dealer license application, and the appropriate nonrefundable license fee, at least 30 days prior to the date the license is requested to be effective. The application shall require:

(1) The name, address, telephone number, date of birth, and principal occupation of the applicant.

(2) Whether the applicant will be a sole proprietorship, partnership, limited partnership, family limited partnership, joint venture, association, cooperative, trust, estate, corporation, personal holding company, limited liability company, limited liability partnership or any other form of organization for doing business.

(a) If a partnership, the application must set forth the names, birth dates, addresses, telephone numbers, and principal occupations, along with all other information required of any individual applicant, of each partner, whether general, limited, or silent, and the respective ownership shares owned by each;

(b) If a corporation, or limited liability company, the application must set forth the corporate or company name, copies of the articles of incorporation or organization and the corporate by-laws or operating agreement, and the names, addresses, birth dates, telephone numbers, and principal occupations, along with all other information required of any individual applicant, of every officer, director, members or managers, and shareholder (owning more than five percent of the outstanding shares) and the number of shares held by each.

(3) The address of the place where the licensee will conduct his business and a statement of the kind of business which the applicant intends to conduct.

(4) The web address of any and all webpages used to acquire or offer for sale regulated property on behalf of the secondhand dealer, and any and all Internet auction account names used to acquire or offer for sale regulated property on behalf of the secondhand dealer.

(5) Written proof that all principals are at least 18 years of age.

(6) Each principal’s business occupation or employment for the three years immediately preceding the date of application.

(7) The business license and permit history of the applicant in operating a business identical to or similar to those regulated by this chapter.

(8) If the applicant does not own the business premises, a true and complete copy of the executed lease (and the legal description of the premises to be permitted) must be attached to the application.

(9) All arrests or convictions of each principal enumerated in subsections (1) through (7) of this section.

(10) Upon request, principals and employees shall submit to the chief of police the following information: fingerprints, passport size photographs, and a copy of the signature initials to be used by persons on transaction report forms. Principals and employees must submit new photos if requested to do so by the chief of police.

(11) Any other information appropriate to determine the ownership, location, management, purpose, and any other factors related to the operation of a secondhand dealer, and the appropriate nonrefundable secondhand dealer license fee as set by resolution.

(12) The applicant to sign under penalty of perjury and false swearing. (Ord. 3210 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 3055 § 2, 2007; Ord. 2491 § 5, 1986)


5.16.055 License characteristics.

(1) Nontransferable. A license issued pursuant to this chapter is nontransferable.

(2) Revocable. A license issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked as provided in SHMC 5.16.155 and 5.16.160. (Ord. 3210 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 3055 § 3, 2007)


5.16.060 Reporting of transactions.

Every pawnbroker and secondhand dealer shall provide the police department all required information as set forth by the police department for each regulated property transaction (not including sales) on the same day as the regulated property transaction occurs. The chief of police may designate the format for the transfer of this information and may direct that it be communicated to the police department by means of mail, the Internet, or other computer media.

(1) In any such case that the chief of police directs that the information be transmitted via computer media, the chief of police may also direct the system that will be utilized in order to ensure conformity among all secondhand dealers.

(2) If, after establishing the format and requirements for the transmission of computerized reports of transactions, the chief of police alters the required format, secondhand dealers will be given at least 60 days to comply with the new format requirements. If unable to implement the reporting system before the deadline, a secondhand dealer must submit a written request for additional time to the chief of police before the deadline.

(3) Pawnbrokers are required to report only new transactions. Loan renewals do not need to be reported.

(4) Secondhand dealers and pawnbrokers may request an exemption from the standard reporting format. This exemption will allow secondhand dealers and pawnbrokers to, as an alternative, submit their transactions on transaction report forms created by the chief of police. The request for this exemption must be made in writing to the chief of police. The police department will provide all secondhand dealers with transaction report forms at cost until 60 days after such time that the chief of police directs a change in the reporting method. The chief of police may specify the format of the transaction report form. The chief of police may require that the transaction report form include any information relating to the regulations of this chapter. Secondhand dealers may utilize their own forms, in lieu of those supplied by the police department, if the chief of police has approved such forms. The declaration of proof of ownership will be considered to be included in references in this chapter to the transaction report form, as appropriate. (Ord. 3210 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 2491 § 6, 1986)


5.16.070 Reserved.

(Ord. 3210 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 2491 § 7, 1986)


5.16.080 Regulated property sales.

(1) Regulated property is subject to the following limitations:

(a) Holding Period. Regulated property acquired by any secondhand dealer or pawnbroker must be held for a period of 30 full days from the date of acquisition. Pawnbroker loan transactions are exempt from the 30-day hold requirements of this section because of the redeemable nature of the loans and the holding requirements in ORS 726. However, if the loan is converted to a buy by the pawnbroker within 30 days from the date of the pawn transaction, the difference between the original date of the pawn and the buy will count toward the 30-day hold requirement. All other provisions of this section remain in effect.

(b) Requirements of Held Property. All held property must remain in the same form as when received, must not be sold, dismantled or otherwise disposed of, and must be kept separate and apart from all other property during the holding period to prevent theft or accidental sale and to allow for identification and examination by the police department. Held property must be kept at the business location during this holding period so that it can be inspected during normal business hours (as provided in SHMC 5.16.150). Held property, other than property on police hold, may be held in a place within public view, as long as the other requirements of this subsection (1)(b) are met.

(c) Held property requirements do not apply if:

(i) The property is received from a secondhand dealer or pawnbroker regulated by the city of St. Helens who has already satisfied the holding requirements of this chapter and the secondhand dealer or pawnbroker records the original transaction report number on the transaction report completed for the new transaction; or

(ii) If a customer, who originally purchased property from a secondhand dealer or pawnbroker, returns it to that secondhand dealer or pawnbroker with the original receipt.

(2) Notwithstanding subsection (1) of this section, the chief of police may determine that certain types of transactions pose a reduced risk of being an outlet for the sale of stolen property and therefore may modify the hold period and/or reporting requirements for those types of transactions. Those transactions and the modified requirements are described in the administrative policies and procedures available at the police department.

(3) Upon reasonable belief that an item of regulated property is the subject of a crime, any police officer may provide notice to any secondhand dealer or pawnbroker that a specifically described item of regulated property must be held in a separate police hold area for a period not to exceed 30 days from the date of notification, and is subject to the requirements of subsection (1)(b) of this section. The hold may be extended an additional 30 days upon notice provided to the secondhand dealer or pawnbroker that additional time is needed to determine whether a specific item of regulated property is the subject of a crime. The secondhand dealer or pawnbroker shall comply with the hold notice and notify the police department of the hold notice not later than five calendar days from the day the notice was received, either by telephone, fax, email, or in person. A secondhand dealer or pawnbroker must notify the police department of their intent to dispose of any item of regulated property under police hold at least 10 days prior to doing so.

(a) A police hold area must meet the following criteria:

(i) Located out of public view and access; and

(ii) Marked “Police Hold”; and

(iii) Contain only items that have been put on police hold.

(b) Secondhand dealers and pawnbrokers may maintain up to three police hold areas as necessary for the safe storage of high value items, physically large items, and general merchandise put on police hold.

(c) If it is not possible or practical to move an item to or store an item in the police hold area, a secondhand dealer or pawnbroker may submit a written request to the chief of police for approval to keep the item with other held property. Approval may be granted with the understanding that the item will be clearly marked as being on police hold and kept from public view and access.

(4) Upon probable cause that an item of property is the subject of a crime, the chief of police may take physical custody of the item or provide written notice to any secondhand dealer or pawnbroker to hold such property for a period of time as determined by the chief of police, not to exceed the statute of limitations for the crime being investigated. Any property placed on hold pursuant to this subsection is subject to the requirements found in subsection (1)(b) of this section, and will be maintained in the police hold area unless seized or released by the police department. Seizure of property will be carried out in accordance with Oregon Revised Statutes.

(5) If a secondhand dealer or pawnbroker acquires regulated property with serial numbers, personalized inscriptions or initials, or other identifying marks which have been destroyed or are illegible due to obvious normal use, the secondhand dealer or pawnbroker shall continue to hold the property at the business location for a period of 90 full days after acquisition. The secondhand dealer or pawnbroker must notify the police department by writing “90-day hold” next to the item on the transaction report or by an electronic means approved by the chief of police. The held property must conform to all the requirements found in subsection (1)(b) of this section.

(6) If a secondhand dealer or pawnbroker receives information that leads to an objectively reasonable basis to believe that any property already at his/her business location has been previously lost or stolen, he/she must report that belief to the police department by day’s end. The notice must include the transaction report number and any additional information regarding the name of the owner, if known.

(7) If a peace officer seizes any property from a secondhand dealer or pawnbroker, the secondhand dealer or pawnbroker must notify the police department of the seizure not later than five calendar days from the day the seizure occurs. The secondhand dealer or pawnbroker must provide the name of the agency, the name of the peace officer, the number of the receipt left for the seizure, and the seized property information. Notification to the police department may be given by telephone, fax, email, or in person.

(8) Any property purchased by the dealer which is proven to be stolen property may be seized by the police department and may not be released to anyone other than the secondhand dealer or pawnbroker unless the property is released to:

(a) Another law enforcement agency that has provided documentation to the satisfaction of the chief of police of the stolen status of the property; or

(b) A person who reported the property as stolen; and

(i) A stolen property report has been filed with a law enforcement agency where making an untruthful report is a violation of the law, and

(ii) A notice has been delivered to the secondhand dealer or pawnbroker holding the property or from whom the property was seized;

(c) The notice required by this subsection (8) will state that the property will be released to the person who has filed the stolen property report unless the secondhand dealer or pawnbroker or pawner/seller files a motion for return of seized property within 10 days of the date of the notice and in the manner set forth in the notice;

(d) The notice required by this subsection (8) will be sent electronically with a request for acknowledgement, or delivered in person to the secondhand dealer or pawnbroker at the email or physical address shown on the secondhand dealer’s or pawnbroker’s permit application or most recent permit renewal application, and to the pawner/seller at the address shown in the transaction report required by SHMC 5.16.060;

(e) The notice required by this subsection (8) will provide the information necessary to submit a motion for return of seized property;

(f) The failure of any person to receive the notice required in this subsection (8) will not invalidate or otherwise affect the proceedings of this subsection. (Ord. 3210 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 2491 § 8, 1986)


5.16.090 Reserved.

(Ord. 3210 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 2491 § 9, 1986)


5.16.100 Article to be tagged.

Any pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall affix a tag to every item of regulated property, which must contain a unique, legible number. That unique number must either be the same as the transaction report number for that item or be referenced to the transaction report required by the police department or assigned by the approved reporting method described in the police department’s administrative policies and procedures. After the holding period has expired, the transaction number must remain identifiable on the property until the sale of the property.

(1) After the applicable holding period has expired, hand tools or items that are sold with other like items and have no identifiable numbers or markings need not remain tagged.

(2) After the applicable holding period has expired, items that are remanufactured need not remain tagged. (Ord. 3210 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 2491 § 10, 1986)


5.16.110 Reserved.

(Ord. 3210 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 2491 § 11, 1986)


5.16.120 Reserved.

(Ord. 3210 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 2491 § 12, 1986)


5.16.130 Prohibited acts.

It is unlawful for any person regulated by this chapter:

(1) To receive any property from any person:

(a) Known to the principal, employee or secondhand dealer or pawnbroker to be prohibited from selling by a court order,

(b) Under the age of 18 years unless the person’s parent or guardian completes the applicable information on the declaration of proof of ownership,

(c) About whom the principal, employee or secondhand dealer or pawnbroker has been given notice by law enforcement as having been convicted of burglary, robbery, theft or possession of or receiving stolen property within the past 10 years whether the person is acting in his or her own behalf or as the agent of another who meets the above criteria;

(2) To receive property prohibited by this chapter or the police department’s administrative policies and procedures, including:

(a) Medications;

(b) Property with serial numbers, personalized inscriptions or initials or other identifying marks that appear to have been intentionally altered or rendered illegible;

(3) To receive property that a reasonable person under similar circumstances would believe is more likely than not stolen, except as allowed by the police department’s administrative policies and procedures. A later determination regarding whether or not an item is found to be stolen will not be used as a factor to determine whether a secondhand dealer or pawnbroker has violated this subsection. (Ord. 3210 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 2676, 1994; Ord. 2491 § 13, 1986)


5.16.140 Reserved.

(Ord. 3210 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 2491 § 14, 1986)


5.16.150 Inspection of articles and records.

All persons licensed to do business as a pawnbroker, an antique dealer or secondhand dealer, and any person employed thereby, shall permit the chief of police, or his designee, upon presentation of official identification, entry to such business premises for the limited purpose of inspecting any regulated property purchased or for sale in the business and currently being held and/or the records incident thereto, to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Any such inspection shall only be authorized during normal business hours. The chief of police, or his authorized designee, will first present proper credentials to the appropriate party and request entry. If such entry is refused, the chief of police, or his authorized designee, will have recourse to any remedy provided by law to obtain entry. (Ord. 3210 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 3055 § 5, 2007; Ord. 2491 § 15, 1986)


5.16.155 Denial and revocation criteria.

Upon the application for a license by a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer, the city recorder shall refer the same to the city police for investigation preparatory to issuing a license. If it shall appear from such investigation or otherwise that a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer license should not be granted to said applicant or applicants, the chief of police shall notify the city recorder to that effect. The chief of police shall set forth the criteria given in this section that support his decision to deny a license. The applicant may appeal from this finding in accordance with SHMC 5.16.165, but while the appeal is pending a license shall not be granted. The city may deny or revoke a license on a finding that:

(1) The applicant fails to meet the requirements of this chapter, or is doing business in violation of this chapter, zoning regulations, or applicable federal, state, or local law.

(2) The applicant has provided false or misleading information, or has omitted disclosure of a material fact on the application, related materials, or license.

(3) The applicant does not have the state-issued license required by ORS 726.040 and the applicant is applying for a license to conduct a pawnbroker business as defined in SHMC 5.16.040(3).

(4) The applicant’s past or present violations of law consist of crimes of moral turpitude, including, but not limited to, theft or the receipt of stolen property. (Ord. 3210 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 3159 § 1, 2012; Ord. 3055 § 4, 2007)


5.16.160 Revocation and suspension procedure.

(1) When any licensee fails to comply with any provision of this chapter, the city administrator may, by order, revoke or suspend any license granted by the city. Before taking any such action, the city shall set a time for the licensee to appear before it to be heard, either in person or by attorney, in opposition to such action. The city administrator shall give the licensee at least 10 days’ notice by registered mail addressed to the licensee at his last address, as shown by the license records, of the time of the hearing, of the action intended to be taken and the reason for such action. Within 30 days after such hearing, the city administrator shall make and enter in city records an order setting forth its findings, determination and action, notice of which shall be given the licensee by mailing a copy thereof by registered mail to the licensee at his last address as shown by the license records. The licensee shall have the right to appeal such determination in accordance with SHMC 5.16.165.

(2) In the event a licensee is convicted for any violation of this chapter, such conviction shall be sufficient ground for summary suspension or revocation of his license without notice and hearing by order made and entered as provided in subsection (1) of this section. (Ord. 3210 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 3055 § 5, 2007; Ord. 2491 § 16, 1986)


5.16.165 Appeals.

Any person aggrieved by the city’s decision to deny or revoke their secondhand dealer license may appeal such action to a hearings officer through the following procedures:

(1) A person appealing the city’s action shall, within 10 days of such action and notice, file a written notice of appeal with the city recorder. The written notice shall include: the name and address of the appellant, the nature of the decision being appealed, the reason(s) the original decision is alleged to be incorrect, and the result the appellant desires on appeal.

(2) The city recorder shall fix the time for the appeal to be heard by the hearings officer, place the hearing of the appeal upon the calendar of the hearings officer, and notify the appellant of the time fixed no less than 10 days prior to that time.

(3) The appellant shall pay a nonrefundable appeals fee, set by resolution of the city council, to facilitate the appeal.

(4) The appellant shall be entitled to appear personally, or by counsel, to present such facts and arguments as may tend to support his or her appeal.

(5) The hearings officer shall take such action upon the appeal as he or she sees fit and such action by the hearings officer shall be final.

(6) A decision to revoke a license made by the city shall be stayed pending the outcome of an appeal properly filed pursuant to this section. However, a decision to deny a license made by the city shall be enforced pending the outcome of an appeal properly filed pursuant to this section.

(7) Failure to strictly comply with the applicable appeal requirements, including, but not limited to, the required elements for the written notice of appeal, time for filing, and payment of the applicable appeal fee, shall constitute jurisdictional defects resulting in the summary dismissal of the appeal.

(8) If the appellant loses on appeal, the appellant will be held financially responsible for the cost to the city of the appeal, including, but not limited to, the hiring of the hearings officer, if any. (Ord. 3210 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 3055 § 4, 2007)


5.16.170 Penalties.

A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a Class C misdemeanor. (Ord. 3210 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 3055 § 13, 2007; Ord. 2491 § 17, 1986)


5.16.180 Injunction.

Any violation of the provisions of this chapter may be restrained or enjoined by suit in circuit court. (Ord. 3210 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016; Ord. 2491 § 18, 1986)


5.16.190 Administrative policies and procedures.

The chief of police may implement the requirements and specifications of this chapter. Administrative policies and procedures stemming from this chapter will be maintained by the police department and copies will be provided to all secondhand dealers and pawnbrokers. (Ord. 3210 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)


Chapter 5.20 SOLICITATION

Sections:

5.20.010    Solicitation hours.

5.20.020    Business license required.

5.20.030    Criminal trespass.

5.20.040    Criminal trespass exception.

5.20.050    Penalties.


5.20.010 Solicitation hours.

No person shall offer goods or services for sale, or solicit money or anything having monetary value from another person on premises occupied as a residence except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. or by the prior, express permission of the person occupying or in control of those premises. (Ord. 3014 § 2, 2006)


5.20.020 Business license required.

Except for not-for-profit organization fundraising, a business, shop, trade, profession, calling, or occupation transacting or carrying on business by soliciting door-to-door within the city limits is required to obtain a business license pursuant to the most recently adopted version of the business license ordinance. (Ord. 3014 § 3, 2006)


5.20.030 Criminal trespass.

A person that enters private property with a clearly visible “No solicitation,” “No peddling,” or similar sign posted is subject to prosecution for criminal trespass, regardless of whether the purpose for entry was to engage in business or otherwise. Signs posted under this section shall not exceed 12 inches by 12 inches in dimension. (Ord. 3014 § 4, 2006)


5.20.040 Criminal trespass exception.

The prohibition of SHMC 5.20.030 does not apply to government officials entering the property in the performance of their lawful duties, including, but not limited to: peace officers, emergency service personnel, or city employees. (Ord. 3014 § 5, 2006)


5.20.050 Penalties.

A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a Class C misdemeanor. (Ord. 3069 § 1, 2007)


Chapter 5.24 PREMISES SERVING ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR

Sections:

5.24.010    Definitions.

5.24.020    Providing liquor to certain persons prohibited.

5.24.030    Persons not allowed to drink alcoholic liquor on licensed premises.

5.24.040    Purchase or possession of liquor by minor.

5.24.050    Lawful consumption of liquor by minors.

5.24.060    Loitering on licensed premises by minors.

5.24.070    Minors not permitted to drink or loiter on licensed premises.

5.24.080    Permitting minors on licensed premises.

5.24.090    Delivering or selling liquor by minors.

5.24.100    Sales by unlicensed person prohibited.

5.24.110    Intoxicated persons on licensed premises.

5.24.120    Bringing alcoholic liquor upon licensed premises.

5.24.130    Disposal of liquor containers.

5.24.140    Lawful hours of sale.

5.24.150    Defense of written age statement.

5.24.160    Liquor in public dance hall.

5.24.170    Nuisances.

5.24.180    Possession of open container.

5.24.190    Drinking in public places.

5.24.200    Repealed.

5.24.210    Responsibility of licensee for employees.

5.24.220    Penalty.

5.24.230    Liquor Commission to be notified.


5.24.010 Definitions.

(1) For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall mean:

(a) “Alcoholic liquor” means any alcoholic beverage containing more than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume, and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol and capable of being consumed by a human being.

(b) “Commission” means the Oregon Liquor Control Commission.

(c) “Distilled spirits” or “distilled liquor” means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 14 percent of alcohol by volume, including sweet wines and all spirituous liquor.

(d) “Licensee” means a person who has an alcoholic liquor license from the Commission authorizing such person to sell or dispense alcoholic liquor.

(e) “Licensed premises” means the room or enclosure at the address within the corporate limits of the city for which a license has been issued by the Commission for the serving, mixing, handling or selling of alcoholic liquor.

(f) “Liquor Control Act” means the state law so designated by ORS 471.027 as now or hereafter amended and supplemented.

(g) “Minor” means any person under the age of 21 years.

(h) “Other responsible relative” means:

(i) An adult who is the spouse of a minor.

(ii) An adult, related to the minor, who has taken over the parental duties of governing the minor’s actions.

(iii) A duly appointed, qualified and acting guardian who has taken over the parental duties of governing the minor’s actions.

(i) “Person” means an individual, partnership, corporation, association or club.

(j) “Sell” means to solicit or receive an order; to keep or expose for sale; to deliver for value or in any way other than purely gratuitously; to peddle; to keep with intent to sell; to traffic in; or for any consideration, promised or obtained, directly or indirectly, or under any pretext or by any means, to procure or allow to be procured for any other person.

(2) As used in this chapter, the singular includes the plural and the masculine includes the feminine. (Ord. 3057 § 1, 2007; Ord. 2244 § 1, 1978)


5.24.020 Providing liquor to certain persons prohibited.

No person shall sell, give, furnish, serve or otherwise make available any alcoholic liquor to:

(1) Any minor except as provided in SHMC 5.24.050.

(2) Any person visibly intoxicated. (Ord. 2244 § 2, 1978)


5.24.030 Persons not allowed to drink alcoholic liquor on licensed premises.

(1) No person shall allow or permit any person who is visibly intoxicated to drink or consume any alcoholic liquor upon any licensed premises.

(2) No bartender shall drink or consume any alcoholic liquor, or be under the influence of alcoholic liquor, while on duty in a licensed premises. (Ord. 2244 § 3, 1978)


5.24.040 Purchase or possession of liquor by minor.

(1) Except as provided in SHMC 5.24.050, no minor shall attempt to purchase, acquire, or have in his possession, any alcoholic liquor.

(2) For the purposes of this section, possession of alcoholic liquor includes the acceptance or consumption of a bottle of such liquor, or any portion thereof, or a drink of such liquor. However, this section does not prohibit the acceptance or consumption by any person of sacramental wine as part of a religious rite or service. (Ord. 2244 § 4, 1978)


5.24.050 Lawful consumption of liquor by minors.

Nothing in this chapter contained shall be construed as prohibiting a parent or other responsible relative of a minor from giving such minor alcoholic liquor and permitting him to consume the same within the home of such parent or other responsible relative of the minor, or at such other private place not in view of the public where the parent or other responsible relative is present. (Ord. 2244 § 5, 1978)


5.24.060 Loitering on licensed premises by minors.

Except as provided in SHMC 5.24.080, no minor, whether or not he is accompanied by a parent or other responsible relative, shall enter, loiter or remain on any licensed premises, or any portion thereof, which has been posted by the Commission to prohibit the use thereof by minors. (Ord. 2244 § 6, 1978)


5.24.070 Minors not permitted to drink or loiter on licensed premises.

(1) No licensee or his employee or agent shall permit any minor to:

(a) Consume any alcoholic liquor upon any licensed premises, whether or not such alcoholic liquor is given to the minor by a parent or other responsible relative.

(b) Loiter on such licensed premises, which have been posted by the Commission to prohibit the use thereof by minors, except as provided in SHMC 5.24.080.

(c) Remain upon such premises or any portion thereof, except as provided in SHMC 5.24.080.

(2) The fact that a parent or other responsible relative has accompanied a minor upon any licensed premises shall not constitute a defense to any charge brought for violation of this section, except as provided in SHMC 5.24.080. (Ord. 2244 § 7, 1978)


5.24.080 Permitting minors on licensed premises.

(1) The provisions of SHMC 5.24.060 and 5.24.070 shall not be construed to prohibit:

(a) Any minor from entering any licensed premises, or portion thereof, for the transaction of any business pursuant to his duties in the regular course of his lawful employment.

(b) A minor spouse from entering and remaining on licensed premises, or any portion thereof, when he is in the immediate company of his spouse who is 21 years of age or older.

(2) This section shall not be construed to authorize a minor spouse to consume alcoholic liquor on any licensed premises. (Ord. 2244 § 8, 1978)


5.24.090 Delivering or selling liquor by minors.

(1) Except as provided in subsection (3) of this section, no minor, either for himself or as agent or employee of another, shall sell, offer for sale or deliver any alcoholic liquor.

(2) Except as provided in subsection (3) of this section, no person shall employ, hire or engage any minor to sell, offer for sale or deliver any alcoholic liquor.

(3) Any employee 18 years of age or older of a person who holds any package store license from the Commission may sell any alcoholic liquor authorized by such license on the licensed premises. (Ord. 2244 § 9, 1978)


5.24.100 Sales by unlicensed person prohibited.

No person shall sell alcoholic liquor unless he has a license from the Commission to sell alcoholic liquor. Sales by a licensee or his employee shall be only such sales as are authorized by the license issued for the premises. (Ord. 2244 § 10, 1978)


5.24.110 Intoxicated persons on licensed premises.

No licensee or his employee or agent shall permit a visibly intoxicated person to enter upon the licensed premises, which the licensee controls. (Ord. 2244 § 11, 1978)


5.24.120 Bringing alcoholic liquor upon licensed premises.

No licensee of the Commission, nor any agent or employee of such a licensee, shall keep or knowingly permit to be kept, brought or consumed upon the licensed premises any alcoholic liquor not allowed to be sold or served upon said premises. (Ord. 2244 § 12, 1978)


5.24.130 Disposal of liquor containers.

(1) No licensee or his employee or agent shall permit any empty or discarded containers of alcoholic liquor to be in the public view on the exterior of his licensed premises or in parking areas maintained in connection with such premises.

(2) No person shall discard, throw away or dispose of any container of alcoholic liquor, whether broken or not, upon any street, alley, public grounds or public place. (Ord. 2244 § 13, 1978)


5.24.140 Lawful hours of sale.

(1) No package store licensee shall sell, dispense, deliver or permit the removal of any alcoholic liquor from the licensed premises between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.

(2) No retail malt beverage restaurant or dispenser licensee shall sell, dispense, deliver or allow the consumption of any alcoholic liquor on any licensed premises between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. (Ord. 2244 § 14, 1978)


5.24.150 Defense of written age statement.

If a licensee or his employee or his agent is prosecuted in the municipal court under this chapter for selling alcoholic liquor to a minor, or permitting a minor to consume alcoholic liquor or to enter or loiter upon the licensed premises, the licensee or his employee or agent may offer in his defense any written statement made by or for such minor prior to the violation, which statement was made and taken pursuant to the laws of Oregon and the rules and regulation of the Commission; and such statement shall constitute a prima facie defense. (Ord. 2244 § 15, 1978)


5.24.160 Liquor in public dance hall.

No person shall possess, keep, sell, give away or otherwise dispose of or consume alcoholic liquor in any public dance hall, or in any room or building used for public dancing that is not licensed under the Liquor Control Act. (Ord. 2244 § 16, 1978)


5.24.170 Nuisances.

Any room, house, building, boat, structure or place of any kind where alcoholic liquor is sold, manufactured, bartered or given away in violation of the law; or where persons are permitted to resort for the purpose of drinking alcoholic liquors in violation of the law; or any place where alcoholic liquors are kept for sale, barter or gift in violation of the law; and all alcoholic liquor, whether purchased from or through the Commission or purchased or acquired from any source; and all property, including bars, glasses, mixers, lockers, chairs, tables, cash registers, music devices, and all furniture, furnishings and equipment; and all facilities for the mixing, storing, serving or drinking of alcoholic liquor kept and used in such place, hereby are declared to be a common nuisance; and any person who maintains or assists in maintaining such common nuisance is guilty of a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2244 § 17, 1978)


5.24.180 Possession of open container.

No person shall have in possession on his person any bottle, can or other receptacle containing alcoholic liquor, which has been opened, or a seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed, while in or upon any of the following places:

(1) Public street, sidewalk or parking lot.

(2) School and school grounds.

(3) Private parking areas that are open to public travel.

(4) City parks.

Provided, however, possession of an open container of alcoholic liquor in the park, street, or any other public place shall be permitted where a permit therefor has been received from the council. (Ord. 3001 § 2, 2006; Ord. 2244 § 18, 1978)


5.24.190 Drinking in public places.

No person shall drink or consume alcoholic liquor in or upon a street, alley, mall, park, parking lot or structure, motor vehicle, public grounds or other public place unless such place has been licensed for that purpose by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission. Provided, however, consumption of alcoholic liquor in the park, street, or any other public place shall be permitted where a permit therefor has been received from the council. (Ord. 3001 § 2, 2006; Ord. 2244 § 19, 1978)


5.24.200 Repealed.

Repealed by Ord. 2351. (Ord. 2244 § 20, 1978)


5.24.210 Responsibility of licensee for employees.

Each licensee is responsible and liable to prosecution for any violation of any provision of this chapter pertaining to his licensed premises and for any act or omission of any servant, agent or employee of such licensee in violation of any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 2244 § 21, 1978)


5.24.220 Penalty.

Violation of any provision of this chapter is punishable by a fine not exceeding $500.00, or by imprisonment not to exceed 180 days, or both. (Ord. 2244 § 22, 1978)


5.24.230 Liquor Commission to be notified.

When a conviction is obtained against any licensee of the Commission, or a conviction is obtained against any person where the violation was committed on a licensed premises, the municipal court shall notify the Commission of such conviction. (Ord. 2244 § 23, 1978)


Chapter 5.28 LIQUOR LICENSE REVIEW

Sections:

5.28.010    Title and purpose.

5.28.020    Definitions.

5.28.030    License application.

5.28.040    City administrator’s duties.

5.28.050    Hearing procedure.

5.28.060    Standards and criteria.

5.28.070    Reconsideration of applications.

5.28.080    Penalty.


5.28.010 Title and purpose.

This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “liquor license review ordinance” and may also be referred to herein as “this chapter.”

The purposes of this chapter are to establish the principle criteria which shall be considered by the council, and its designee, the city administrator, in making recommendations to the Oregon Liquor Control Commission, concerning the granting, denying, modifying, changing, or renewing of all liquor licenses for premises within the city limits and to establish a process to be utilized for the investigation of such license applicants for the purpose of making such recommendation that is fair, effective, and efficient. This chapter is necessary to ensure that all premises licensed to sell and dispense liquor in any form meet the high expectations of this community that all such businesses are conducted in a lawful manner that does not unreasonably disturb the peace and tranquility of this city and its neighborhoods. (Ord. 2724 § 1, 1996)


5.28.020 Definitions.

For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

(1) City Administrator. As used in this chapter, “city administrator” means the person holding the position of city administrator or any officer or employee of the city of St. Helens delegated or assigned any or all of the tasks of the city administrator herein.

(2) “Application” means the written forms provided by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission that serves as a written request to the city administrator to grant, modify, or renew a liquor license.

(3) “Commission” means the Oregon Liquor Control Commission.

(4) “Temporary sales license (TSL)” means a license obtained from the Commission that gives a person authority to sell alcoholic beverages on premises that the Commission has not otherwise licensed, and for which a recommendation by the city must be obtained. (Ord. 3056 § 1, 2007; Ord. 2724 § 2, 1996)


5.28.030 License application.

Any person or business requesting a city recommendation to the Commission on a liquor license application shall apply upon suitable forms furnished by the Commission. The city administrator shall accept liquor license applications only when the following conditions are met:

(1) An applicant for an initial license or modification of a current license provides legible copies of the following forms supplied by the Commission: liquor license application forms, individual history forms, and business information forms. An applicant for a TSL provides the temporary sales application form supplied by the Commission.

(2) The applicant has obtained a valid city business license when applicable.

(3) The application is complete.

(4) The applicant has provided any relevant additional information the city administrator requests to determine the qualifications of the applicant.

(5) The application is accompanied by the appropriate fees, as established by resolution of the city council. If the applicant for a TSL can demonstrate it is organized and operating as a nonprofit organization, no application fee shall be required. (Ord. 3056 § 2, 2007; Ord. 2724 § 3, 1996)


5.28.040 City administrator’s duties.

(1) Temporary Sales License Applications. In the case of TSL applications, the city administrator shall make a recommendation after evaluating the bases provided in Oregon liquor laws. The city administrator may attach reasonable conditions upon the recommendation that are consistent with the purposes of this chapter and Oregon liquor laws. Where the city administrator approves a TSL application, the city administrator shall note that on the TSL application and notify the applicant of the recommendation. Where the city administrator recommends denial, or restrictions otherwise adverse to the applicant, the recommendation shall be supported by sufficient findings, and it may be appealed to the city council in accordance with the procedures in SHMC 5.28.050.

(2) All Other License Applications. The city administrator shall maintain a record of all applications. The city administrator shall coordinate and conduct an investigation of each application for the purpose of determining what recommendation shall be made by the city administrator to the council. The city administrator may require the applicant to supply additional information that is relevant to determine if there is a sufficient basis for an unfavorable recommendation to the Commission as provided by Oregon liquor laws. Upon completion of the review, the city administrator shall make a recommendation to the city council and the hearing procedure of SHMC 5.28.050 shall apply. Where the city administrator recommends denial, or restrictions otherwise adverse to the applicant, the recommendation shall be supported by sufficient findings. (Ord. 3056 § 3, 2007; Ord. 2724 § 4, 1996)


5.28.050 Hearing procedure.

(1) Prior to city council consideration of a liquor license application, a councilor may review such application and the investigation materials gathered by the city administrator, but only to the extent that disclosure of such application and investigation materials is not prohibited by law. When the city administrator recommends approval of an application, the matter will be scheduled as a consent agenda item at the next regular council meeting.

(2) A public hearing concerning an application shall be scheduled upon the request of a councilor, a member of the public, or by the applicant if the city administrator’s recommendation is adverse to the applicant.

(3) Notice of public hearing before the council shall be given in the following manner:

(a) The notice shall contain the business name of the applicant, the location of the business, the nature of the license applied for, and the time and location at which the hearing will take place.

(b) Notice will be mailed to the applicant or applicant’s agent at the address shown on the application not less than seven days before the date set for the hearing.

(c) Notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city not less than five days before the date set for the hearing.

(4) The public hearing shall be conducted as follows:

(a) The city administrator shall present the city administrator’s report, and any other written or oral evidence that is supportive of the city administrator’s recommendation.

(b) The applicant may present evidence and/or witnesses in support of the application.

(c) Interested members of the public shall be given an opportunity to present evidence or testimony bearing upon the application, whether such evidence is supportive or adverse to the application.

(d) The applicant shall be afforded an opportunity to rebut evidence presented in opposition to the application.

(e) Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the type of evidence on which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of their serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any law or rule that might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in civil action in courts of competent jurisdiction in this state. Evidence of past transactions and occurrences shall not be excluded solely on the basis of having occurred in the past and may be relied upon by the council in making its recommendation. However, irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. (Ord. 3056 § 4, 2007; Ord. 2724 § 5, 1996)


5.28.060 Standards and criteria.

The council may make an unfavorable recommendation to the Commission if it finds sufficient basis for such a recommendation under Oregon liquor laws. (Ord. 3056 § 5, 2007; Ord. 2724 § 6, 1996)


5.28.070 Reconsideration of applications.

(1) After having made a recommendation other than favorable on any license application, the council shall not consider any new application for the same location by the same or substantially the same applicant for a period of at least six months, except as otherwise provided herein.

(2) If the city administrator reasonably believes that the conditions, which caused the council to make a recommendation, other than a favorable recommendation, have substantially changed, and no court or administrative appeal of such license is pending, then the city administrator may reconsider and/or resubmit such application to the council. (Ord. 2724 § 7, 1996)


5.28.080 Penalty.

Violation of any of the terms of this chapter is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. Each day that a violation is shown to exist shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2724 § 8, 1996)


Chapter 5.30 MARIJUANA BUSINESS REGULATIONS 

Sections:

5.30.010    Purpose.

5.30.015    Definitions.

5.30.020    License required – Fee.

5.30.025    License requirements.

5.30.030    Repealed.

5.30.035    Characteristics of license.

5.30.040    Penalties.

5.30.045    Repealed.

5.30.050    Repealed.

5.30.055    Repealed.

5.30.060    Repealed.

5.30.065    Repealed.

5.30.070    Repealed.

5.30.075    Repealed.


5.30.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to minimize any adverse public safety and public health impacts that may result from allowing marijuana related businesses in the city. (Ord. 3202 § 1 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 3196 § 1 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 3177 § 1, 2014)


5.30.015 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise:

(1) “Marijuana” means all parts of the plant of the Cannabis family Moraceae, whether growing or not; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant or its resin, as may be defined by Oregon Revised Statutes as they currently exist or may from time to time be amended. It does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination.

(2) “Marijuana related business” means any commercial or public use or structure where marijuana is produced, processed, distributed, transferred, sold, or consumed. 

(3) “Person” means natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or any group or combination acting as a unit, including the United States of America, the state of Oregon and any political subdivision thereof, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them.

(4) “Retail” means any medical marijuana dispensary registered under ORS 475.314 or marijuana retailer licensed under Section 22, Chapter 1, Oregon Laws 2015. (Ord. 3202 § 1 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 3196 § 1 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 3177 § 1, 2014)


5.30.020 License required – Fee.

(1) In addition to obtaining a business license pursuant to Chapter 5.04 SHMC, all marijuana related businesses operating in the city shall possess a valid marijuana related business license.

(2) License Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a marijuana related business within the city without first obtaining the appropriate business license and maintaining compliance with this chapter.

(3) Fees for licenses required by this chapter shall be set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 3202 § 1 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 3196 § 1 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 3177 § 1, 2014)


5.30.025 License requirements.

A marijuana related business shall provide to the city:

(1) A detailed description of the type, nature, and extent of the proposed business operations; and

(2) A detailed description of the proposed accounting and inventory systems for the business; and

(3) Payment of the fee required by SHMC 5.30.020. (Ord. 3202 § 1 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 3196 § 1 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 3177 § 1, 2014)


5.30.030 Community impact agreement for retail marijuana related businesses.



Repealed by Ord. 3230.  (Ord. 3202 § 1 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 3196 § 1 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 3177 § 1, 2014)


5.30.035 Characteristics of license.

(1) Nontransferable. A license issued pursuant to this chapter is nontransferable.

(2) Term. A license issued pursuant to this chapter shall remain in effect until such time as:

(a) The person who obtained the license ceases to operate the marijuana related business;

(b) The person who obtained the marijuana related business license ceases to possess a valid authorization from the Oregon Liquor Control Commission or Oregon Health Authority to legally operate in the state of Oregon;

(c) The person who obtained the marijuana related business license ceases to comply with the provisions of Chapter 5.04 SHMC or this chapter; or

(d) Federal or state statutes, regulations, or guidelines are modified, changed, or interpreted in such a way by state or federal law enforcement officials so as to prohibit operation of a business under this chapter.

(3) The city may revoke a marijuana related business license upon a finding that the license is no longer in effect, pursuant to subsection (2) of this section. An aggrieved person may appeal the city’s decision to city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city recorder within 10 days of the city’s decision to revoke the license. (Ord. 3230 § 2, 2018; Ord. 3202 § 1 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 3196 § 1 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 3177 § 1, 2014)


5.30.040 Penalties.

A violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a class C misdemeanor. (Ord. 3202 § 1 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 3196 § 1 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 3177 § 1, 2014)


5.30.045 Appeal.

Repealed by Ord. 3196. (Ord. 3177 § 1, 2014)


5.30.050 Refunds.

Repealed by Ord. 3196. (Ord. 3177 § 1, 2014)


5.30.055 Actions to collect.

Repealed by Ord. 3196. (Ord. 3177 § 1, 2014)


5.30.060 Violation.

Repealed by Ord. 3196. (Ord. 3177 § 1, 2014)


5.30.065 Confidentiality.

Repealed by Ord. 3196. (Ord. 3177 § 1, 2014)


5.30.070 Audit of books, records, or persons.

Repealed by Ord. 3196. (Ord. 3177 § 1, 2014)


5.30.075 Forms and regulations.

Repealed by Ord. 3196. (Ord. 3177 § 1, 2014)


Chapter 5.32 DISMANTLER CERTIFICATES

Sections:

5.32.010    Dismantler certificates.


5.32.010 Dismantler certificates.

The following procedures and criteria are hereby established for review of requests for local approval of a dismantler certificate and renewal of a dismantler certificate under ORS 822.140(2):

(1) Decision-Maker. The local approval of a dismantler certificate is a decision vested in the city council. The city council hereby expressly delegates the initial decision on the dismantler certificate to the city administrator, or his/her designee. The city council retains jurisdiction over any appeal of the administrator’s decision.

(2) Application. The applicant shall submit to the city administrator an official DMV form application for local approval of a dismantler certificate. The applicant may submit supporting materials demonstrating compliance with the criteria for local approval.

(3) Timing. New applications may be submitted at any time. Renewal applications should be submitted at least one month prior to the requested certificate year.

(4) Administrator’s Report, Decision, and Notice of Decision. The city administrator shall prepare a report which will serve as the record of the administrator’s decision. The report shall set forth the applicable criteria and relevant substantial evidence related to the criteria. The administrator and his/her authorized representatives may inspect the property for purposes of determining compliance with the applicable criteria. Within seven days of receipt of the application, the administrator shall make a decision to grant or deny the certificate based on compliance with the applicable criteria. Conditional approvals are not authorized or recognized by the state. A notice of decision shall be forwarded to the applicant, council, local ODOT representatives, surrounding property owners within 100 feet of the subject property and to any person requesting a copy.

(5) Notice of Appeal and Scheduling. Any party receiving a notice of decision may appeal the administrator’s decision to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the administrator within 10 calendar days after the date the decision was signed by the administrator. The notice shall state with particularity the basis for the appeal including specific reference to the criteria in the ordinance or statute which the party believes has or has not been met. An appeal must be accompanied by a $100.00 deposit to cover the cost of the hearing. Any unexpended funds shall be returned to the party posting the deposit. Appeal requirements are jurisdictional. Upon receipt of an appeal notice, the city administrator shall schedule a quasi-judicial hearing before the city council. The hearing shall be held by the council at the next available regular or special council meeting where the notice requirements of this section can be met, or such later time for good cause shown. In no case shall the hearing be held in less than seven days or more than 21 days after the submission of the application, unless a different time frame is agreed to in writing by the applicant. Notwithstanding any other requirement of this section, the local dismantler certificate decision shall be scheduled and considered concurrently with any other hearing concerning the property which is the subject of the request for the dismantler certificate or renewal.

(6) Notice of Appeal Hearing. The applicant, ODOT, and surrounding property owners within 100 feet of the subject property and any person requesting notice shall be sent letter notice of the appeal hearing. No less than seven days before the appeal hearing, the applicant shall post in a conspicuous location on the property a notice of hearing provided by the city. The content of the notice shall apprise all interested parties of the criteria and procedures applicable. If the hearing is combined with any other hearing, the more restrictive notice and hearing requirements shall be followed. Nothing herein shall prohibit the city from providing additional notice, including publication in a newspaper of record.

(7) De Novo Appeal Hearing. The purpose of the hearing shall be to afford procedural due process to the participants. Any hearing procedure which affords notice and an opportunity for participants to be heard shall be adequate. Land use hearing procedures may be used to provide procedural due process. All participants are encouraged to submit testimony, evidence and argument in writing prior to the hearing date to facilitate review and consideration of the evidence. Participation in the hearing is not required, written participation is adequate.

(8) Hearing Decorum. Standard rules for public hearings shall be followed. All participants are required to strictly follow the rules of the hearing as outlined by the chair. In no event shall a participant be permitted to be disruptive or be permitted to present irrelevant, redundant or inflammatory matters designed to intimidate or harass the other participants, staff or the council. Individuals or groups who repeatedly fail to abide by the orders of the chair may be removed or arrested and charged with the crime of criminal trespass.

(9) Criteria for Administrator and Council Decision.

(a) The criteria for local approval of a dismantler certificate shall be the criteria identified in ORS 822.140.

(b) The “approves the location” criterion referred to in the first clause of ORS 822.140(2)(d) and the compliance with “local regulations” criterion in the second clause of ORS 822.140(2)(d) refers to compliance with local land use approval requirements. Specifically, for an original dismantler certificate, the location of the dismantling business shall first be approved by the city through normal local land use processes. For an original certificate and for the renewal of a certificate, the location shall also remain in compliance with any and all conditions and/or restrictions of that land use approval.

(c) The “approves the location” criterion does not require the reapproval every year of the property pursuant to land use approval processes. Rather, after the original approval of the location, the property shall be reviewed for compliance with any and all approval conditions and for changed circumstances. Failure to obtain, maintain or continue (such as abandonment of a nonconforming use) a local land use approval for the location or failure to comply with approval conditions shall require a finding that the location is not approved and not in compliance with local regulations and shall result in denial of the request for a local dismantler certificate.

(10) Decision on Appeal. The council’s decision shall be reduced to writing, shall contain findings of fact and conclusions of law, and be supported by competent substantial evidence in the record. A written copy of the decision shall be provided to all participants.

(11) Appeal. The appeal of the council’s decision shall be by writ of review or to the land use board of appeals depending upon the procedure, content, and scope of the hearing. The decision shall include a recitation of appeal rights. (Ord. 3186 § 5, 2015; Ord. 2832 § 2, 2000; Ord. 2808 § 2, 1999)


Chapter 5.36 TAX RELIEF FOR ENTERPRISE ZONE INVESTMENTS

Sections:

5.36.010    Policy.

5.36.020    Qualified investment.

5.36.030    Eligible enterprises.

5.36.040    Local benefits.

5.36.050    Regulatory assistance.


5.36.010 Policy.

The city of St. Helens hereby find and declares that the health, safety, and welfare of the people of this city are dependent upon the continued encouragement, development, growth and expansion of employment, business, industry and commerce within this city. Therefore, it is the purpose of this chapter to stimulate employment, business and industrial growth by providing local assistance to qualified businesses and industries consistent with the state of Oregon designation of the St. Helens/Columbia City enterprise zone. (Ord. 2500 § 1, 1986)


5.36.020 Qualified investment.

To qualify for local tax and regulatory relief, new development and expansions within the city must have obtained certification from the county assessor of Columbia County, in accordance with Oregon laws. (Ord. 3059 § 1, 2007; Ord. 2500 § 2, 1986)


5.36.030 Eligible enterprises.

Businesses that meet the requirements for enterprise zones as provided by Oregon law shall qualify for tax and regulatory assistance under this chapter if they are:

(1) New businesses starting up; or

(2) Existing businesses that increase the average number of full-time employees within the zone by at least 10 percent over the preceding year. (Ord. 3059 § 2, 2007; Ord. 2500 § 3, 1986)


5.36.040 Local benefits.

Eligible enterprises with a qualified investment qualify for the following local tax and fee benefits:

(1) All city permits associated with the qualified investments shall be reduced by 50 percent of the permit fee to be charged at the time the permit is issued.

(2) Business license fees shall be reduced by 50 percent for the first calendar year of business; 40 percent for the second calendar year of business; 30 percent for the third calendar year of business; 20 percent for the fourth calendar year of business; and 10 percent for the fifth calendar year of business after the new capital expenditures of the qualified investment.

(3) City sewer and water fees for unincorporated lands served by the city of St. Helens shall be based on rates for businesses inside the city.

(4) No surplus water agreement shall be required for unincorporated lands served by the city and water service shall not be interruptible so long as the user’s annexation agreement is not violated. (Ord. 2534, 1987)


5.36.050 Regulatory assistance.

All city departments are hereby directed to cooperate to ensure that eligible enterprises with qualified investment receive the following considerations:

(1) Processing of all permit applications for qualified investments ahead of all others.

(2) Submission of any ordinance with a direct economic impact on local businesses to the port of St. Helens and St. Helens chamber of commerce for 30 days for review and comment prior to final adoption unless an emergency is identified and formally declared.

(3) Personal staff assistance for potential developers of qualified investments and cooperation with the staffs of Columbia City and Columbia County to facilitate the processing of any permits.

(4) Facilitating the extension of urban services into unincorporated areas when the city’s planning interest can be protected by a delayed annexation agreement. (Ord. 2500 § 5, 1986)


Chapter 5.38 RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA TAX

Sections:

5.38.010    Purpose.

5.38.015    Definitions.

5.38.020    Tax imposed.

5.38.025    Amount and payment, deductions.

5.38.030    Marijuana retailer responsible for payment of tax.

5.38.035    Penalties and interest.

5.38.040    Appeal.

5.38.045    Refunds.

5.38.050    Actions to collect.

5.38.055    Violation.

5.38.060    Confidentiality.

5.38.065    Audit of books, records, or persons.

5.38.070    Forms and regulations.

5.38.075    Intergovernmental agreement.


5.38.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to impose a three percent tax upon the retail sale of marijuana items by marijuana retailers in the city of St. Helens. (Ord. 3207 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016)


5.38.015 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise:

(1) “Consumer” means a person who purchases, acquires, owns, holds or uses marijuana items other than for purposes of resale.

(2) “Director” means the finance director for the city of St. Helens or his or her designee.

(3) “Retail sale price” means the price paid for a marijuana item, excluding tax, to a marijuana retailer by or on behalf of a consumer of the marijuana item.

(4) “Marijuana item” has the meaning given that term in ORS 475B.015(16).

(5) “Person” means natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or any group or combination acting as a unit, including the United States of America, the state of Oregon and any political subdivision thereof, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them.

(6) “Marijuana retailer” means any person who is required to be licensed or registered or has been licensed or registered by the state of Oregon to provide marijuana items to consumers for money, credit, property or other consideration.

(7) “Retail sale” or “sale” means the exchange, gift or barter of a marijuana item by any person to a consumer.

(8) “Tax” means either the tax payable by the marijuana retailer or the aggregate amount of taxes due from a marijuana retailer during the period for which the marijuana retailer is required to report collections under this chapter.

(9) “Taxpayer” means any person obligated to account to the director for taxes collected or to be collected, or from whom a tax is due, under the terms of this chapter. (Ord. 3207 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016)


5.38.020 Tax imposed.

A tax is hereby levied and shall be paid by every marijuana retailer exercising the taxable privilege of selling marijuana items as defined in this chapter. The director is authorized to exercise all supervisory and administrative powers with regard to the enforcement, collection, and administration of the marijuana tax. (Ord. 3207 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016)


5.38.025 Amount and payment, deductions.

In addition to any fees or taxes otherwise provided for by law, every marijuana retailer engaged in the sale of marijuana items in the city of St. Helens shall pay a tax of three percent of the retail sale price paid to the marijuana retailer of marijuana items or the maximum allowed by state law, whichever is greater. The tax shall be collected at the point of sale of a marijuana item by a marijuana retailer at the time at which the retail sale occurs and remitted by each marijuana retailer that engages in the retail sale of marijuana items. (Ord. 3207 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016)


5.38.030 Marijuana retailer responsible for payment of tax.

(1) Every marijuana retailer shall obtain a business license and a marijuana-related business license from the city of St. Helens pursuant to Chapters 5.04 and 5.30 SHMC. The marijuana retailer will indicate on the license application whether the marijuana retailer is licensed by or registered with the state of Oregon to provide marijuana items to consumers for money, credit, property or other consideration.

(2) Every marijuana retailer shall, on or before the last day of the month following the end of each calendar quarter (in the months of April, July, October and January) make a return to the director, on forms provided by the city, specifying the total sales subject to this chapter and the amount of tax collected under this chapter. The marijuana retailer may request or the director may establish shorter reporting periods for any marijuana retailer if the marijuana retailer or director deems it necessary in order to ensure collection of the tax and the director may require further information in the return relevant to payment of the tax. A return shall not be considered filed until it is actually received by the director.

(3) At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the director.

(4) Nondesignated payments shall be applied in the order of the oldest liability first, with the payment credited first toward any accrued penalty, then to interest, then to the underlying tax until the payment is exhausted. Crediting of a payment toward a specific reporting period will be first applied against any accrued penalty, then to interest, then to the underlying tax. If the director, in his or her sole discretion, determines that an alternative order of payment application would be in the best interest of the city in a particular tax or factual situation, the director may order such a change. The director may establish shorter reporting periods for any marijuana retailer if the director deems it necessary in order to ensure collection of the tax. The director also may require additional information in the return relevant to payment of the liability. When a shorter return period is required, penalties and interest shall be computed according to the shorter return period. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by marijuana retailers pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment is made to the director. A separate trust bank account is not required in order to comply with this provision.

(5) Every marijuana retailer must keep and preserve in an accounting format established by the director records of all sales made by the marijuana retailer and such other books or accounts as may be required by the director for a period of three years or until all taxes associated with the sales have been paid, whichever is longer. The city shall have the right to inspect all such records at all reasonable times. (Ord. 3207 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016)


5.38.035 Penalties and interest.

(1) Any marijuana retailer who fails to remit any portion of any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of 10 percent of the amount of the tax, in addition to the amount of the tax.

(2) If the director determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections (1) and (3) of this section.

(3) In addition to the penalties imposed, any marijuana retailer who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.

(4) Every penalty imposed, and such interest as accrues for violation of this chapter, are separate from, and in addition to, the tax imposed on the sale of marijuana items.

(5) All sums collected pursuant to the penalty provisions in this section shall be distributed to the city of St. Helens general fund to offset the costs of auditing and enforcement of this tax. (Ord. 3207 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016)


5.38.040 Appeal.

Any marijuana retailer aggrieved by any decision of the director with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal pursuant to the city administrator within 30 days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The city administrator shall hear and consider any records and evidence presented bearing upon the director’s determination of amount due, and make findings affirming, reversing or modifying the determination. The city administrator’s decision may be appealed to city council within 30 days of the serving or mailing of the determination. The findings of the city council shall be final and conclusive. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. (Ord. 3207 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016)


5.38.045 Refunds.

(1) Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once, or has been erroneously collected or received by the city under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in subsection (2) of this section, provided a claim in writing, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the director within one year of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the director.

(2) The director shall have 20 calendar days from the date of receipt of a claim to review the claim and make a determination in writing as to the validity of the claim. The director shall notify the claimant in writing of the director’s determination. Such notice shall be mailed to the address provided by claimant on the claim form. In the event a claim is determined by the director to be a valid claim, in a manner prescribed by the director a marijuana retailer may claim a refund, or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted, the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously collected or received. The marijuana retailer shall notify director of claimant’s choice no later than 15 days following the date director mailed the determination. In the event claimant has not notified the director of claimant’s choice within the 15-day period and the marijuana retailer is still in business, a credit will be granted against the tax liability for the next reporting period. If the marijuana retailer is no longer in business, a refund check will be mailed to claimant at the address provided in the claim form.

(3) No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant established the right by written records showing entitlement to such refund and the director acknowledged the validity of the claim. (Ord. 3207 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016)


5.38.050 Actions to collect.

Any tax required to be paid by any marijuana retailer under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the marijuana retailer to the city. Any such tax collected by a marijuana retailer which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the marijuana retailer to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city of St. Helens for the recovery of such amount. In lieu of filing an action for the recovery, the city of St. Helens, when taxes due are more than 30 days delinquent, can submit any outstanding tax to a collection agency. So long as the city of St. Helens has complied with the provisions set forth in ORS 697.105, in the event the city turns over a delinquent tax account to a collection agency, it may add to the amount owing an amount equal to the collection agency fees, not to exceed the greater of $50.00 or 50 percent of the outstanding tax, penalties and interest owing. (Ord. 3207 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016)


5.38.055 Violation.

(1) A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a Class C misdemeanor. It is a violation of this chapter for any marijuana retailer or other person to:

(a) Fail or refuse to comply as required herein;

(b) Fail or refuse to furnish any return required to be made;

(c) Fail or refuse to permit inspection of records;

(d) Fail or refuse to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the director;

(e) Render a false or fraudulent return or claim; or

(f) Fail, refuse or neglect to remit the tax to the city by the due date.

(2) The conviction of any person for a violation of any provision of this chapter shall not operate to relieve such person from paying any fee or penalty thereupon for which such person shall be liable, nor shall the payment of any such fee be a bar to, or prevent any prosecution in, the St. Helens municipal court, of any complaint for the violation of any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 3207 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016)


5.38.060 Confidentiality.

Except as otherwise required by law, it shall be unlawful for the city, any officer, employee or agent to divulge, release or make known in any manner any financial information submitted or disclosed to the city under the terms of this chapter. Nothing in this section shall prohibit:

(1) The disclosure of the names and addresses of any person who is operating a licensed establishment from which marijuana items are sold or provided; or

(2) The disclosure of general statistics in a form which would not reveal an individual marijuana retailer’s financial information; or

(3) The disclosure of information to any state agency related to the licensing or registration of the marijuana retailer or when required to carry out any part of this chapter; or

(4) Presentation of evidence to the court or other tribunal having jurisdiction in the prosecution of any criminal or civil claim by the director or an appeal from the director for amount due the city under this chapter; or

(5) The disclosure of information when such disclosure of conditionally exempt information is ordered under public records law procedures; or

(6) The disclosure of records related to a business’ failure to report and remit the tax when the report or tax is in arrears for over six months or the tax exceeds $5,000. The city council expressly finds and determines that the public interest in disclosure of such records clearly outweighs the interest in confidentiality under ORS 192.501(5). (Ord. 3207 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016)


5.38.065 Audit of books, records, or persons.

(1) The city, for the purpose of determining the correctness of any tax return, or for the purpose of an estimate of taxes due, may examine or may cause to be examined by an agent or representative designated by the city for that purpose, any books, papers, records, or memoranda, including copies of marijuana retailer’s state and federal income tax return, bearing upon the matter of the marijuana retailer’s tax return. All books, invoices, accounts and other records shall be made available within the city limits and be open at any time during regular business hours for examination by the director or an authorized agent of the director.

(2) If the examinations or investigations disclose that any reports of marijuana retailers filed with the director pursuant to the requirements herein have shown incorrectly the amount of tax accruing, the director may make such changes in subsequent reports and payments, or make such refunds, as may be necessary to correct the errors disclosed by its examinations or investigations.

(3) The marijuana retailer shall reimburse the city for reasonable costs of the examination or investigation if the action disclosed that the marijuana retailer paid 95 percent or less of the tax owing for the period of the examination or investigation. In the event that such examination or investigation results in an assessment by and an additional payment due to the city, such additional payment shall be subject to interest at the rate set by resolution of council from the date the original tax payment was due.

(4) If any taxpayer refuses to voluntarily furnish any of the foregoing information when requested, the director may immediately seek a subpoena from the St. Helens municipal court to require that the taxpayer or a representative of the taxpayer attend a hearing or produce any such books, accounts and records for examination.

(5) Every marijuana retailer shall keep a record in such form as may be prescribed by the director of all sales of marijuana items. The records shall at all times during the business hours of the day be subject to inspection by the director or authorized officers or agents of the director.

(6) Every marijuana retailer shall maintain and keep, for a period of three years, all records of marijuana items sold. (Ord. 3207 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016)


5.38.070 Forms and regulations.

The director is hereby authorized to prescribe forms and promulgate rules and regulations to aid in the making of returns, the ascertainment, assessment and collection of said marijuana tax and in particular and without limiting the general language of this chapter, to provide for:

(1) A form of report on sales and purchases to be supplied to all vendors;

(2) The records which marijuana retailers are to keep concerning the tax imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 3207 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016)


5.38.075 Intergovernmental agreement.

The city council may enter into an IGA with the state of Oregon whereby a state department or agency is responsible for the administration, collection, distribution, or enforcement of the tax authorized by this chapter, either in full or in part. The terms of that agreement shall apply in lieu of and shall supersede conflicting provisions of this chapter but shall not be construed as repealing any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 3207 § 1 (Exh. A), 2016)


Title 6 ANIMAL CONTROL

Chapters:

6.04    Animal Control


Chapter 6.04 ANIMAL CONTROL

Sections:

6.04.010    Definition of terms.

6.04.020    Owner’s duties.

6.04.030    Public duties.

6.04.040    Prohibited activities.

6.04.050    Cruelty to animals.

6.04.060    Dangerous or aggressive animals.

6.04.065    Declassification of aggressive dogs.

6.04.070    Animal fighting.

6.04.080    Animal facility licensing.

6.04.090    Impounding procedures.

6.04.100    Penalties.


6.04.010 Definition of terms.

(1) “Aggressive dog” means any dog that has been found to have engaged in any of the behaviors specified in SHMC 6.04.060(1)(a).

(2) “Animal” means any nonhuman mammal, bird, reptile, amphibian or fish.

(3) “Animal facility,” as used in this chapter, means any site, as identified by a mailing address, where any animals are kept, that meets the definitions outlined in SHMC 6.04.080.

(4) At-Large. For purposes of this chapter, “at-large” means not on a leash as required herein, when an animal is off or outside the premises belonging to the owner or person having custody or control of the animal. Dogs in designated dog park areas are not considered “at-large.”

(5) City. Whenever the word “city” is used in this chapter it shall mean the city of St. Helens, Oregon.

(6) County. Whenever the word “county” is used in this chapter it shall mean the county of Columbia, Oregon.

(7) Court. Whenever the word “court” is used in this chapter, without a further qualifying description, it shall mean the municipal court of the city of St. Helens, Oregon.

(8) “Dangerous animal” means any animal, other than a dog, that constitutes a physical threat to human beings or domestic animals.

(9) “Dangerous dog” means any dog that has been found to have engaged in any of the behaviors specified in SHMC 6.04.060(1)(b).

(10) “Dogfight” means a fight, arranged by any person, between two or more dogs, the purpose or probable result of which fight is the infliction of injury by one dog upon another.

(11) “Equipment” used for training or handling of a fighting dog includes harnesses, treadmills, cages, decoys, pens, houses, feeding apparatuses, training pens, breaking sticks, leashes, collars and other devices that may be used to train or restrain a dog, when owned or possessed by a person convicted of involvement in animal fighting.

(12) “Euthanized” means put to death in a humane manner by a licensed veterinarian or certified euthanasia technician.

(13) “Exhibition of fighting” means a public or private display of combat between two or more animals in which the fighting, killing, maiming or injuring of animals is a significant feature. “Exhibition of fighting” does not include demonstrations of the hunting or tracking skills of an animal or the lawful use of animals for hunting, tracking or self-protection.

(14) “Exotic animal” means any lion, tiger, leopard, cheetah, ocelot or any other cat not indigenous to Oregon, except the species Felis catus (domestic cat); any monkey, ape, gorilla or other nonhuman primate; any wolf or any canine not indigenous to Oregon, except the species Canis familiaris (domestic dog); any bear except the black bear (Ursus americanus); any venomous or poisonous reptile, any reptile of the order Crocodilia (crocodiles, alligators and caimans), or any snake of the family Pythonidae or Boinae capable of obtaining eight feet or more in length.

(15) “Feral animal” means any animal that has escaped from domestication and become wild, or dog or cat that is born in the wild and has not been domesticated.

(16) “Fighting dog” means a dog that is intentionally bred or trained to be used in, or that is actually used in, a dogfight. A dog does not constitute a fighting dog solely on account of its breed.

(17) “Good animal husbandry” includes, but is not limited to, the dehorning of cattle, the docking of horses, sheep or swine, and the castration or neutering of livestock, according to accepted practices of veterinary medicine or animal husbandry.

(18) “Livestock” includes, but is not limited to, any horse, mule, burro, llama, cow, goat, sheep, swine, or poultry such as roosters, geese and turkeys, regardless of age.

(19) “Minimum care” means care sufficient to preserve the health and well-being of an animal and, except for emergencies or circumstances beyond the reasonable control of the owner, includes, but is not limited to, the following requirements:

(a) Food of sufficient quantity and quality to allow for normal growth or maintenance of body weight.

(b) Open or adequate access to potable water in sufficient quantity to satisfy the animal’s needs. Snow or ice is not an adequate water source.

(c) In the case of pet or domestic animals, access to a barn, house or other enclosed structure sufficient to protect the animal from wind, rain, snow or sun and which has adequate bedding to protect against cold and dampness.

(d) Veterinary care deemed necessary by a reasonably prudent person to relieve distress from injury, neglect or disease.

(e) Pet or domestic animals shall not be confined to an area without adequate space for exercise necessary for the health of the animal or which does not allow access to a dry place for the animal to rest. The air temperature in a confinement area must be suitable for the animal involved. Confinement areas must be kept reasonably clean and free from excess waste or other contaminants which could affect the animal’s health.

(20) “Owner” means any person, firm, association or corporation that has a possessory property right in an animal or who harbors, cares for, exercises control over or knowingly permits an animal to remain on the premises occupied by that person, firm, association or corporation.

(21) “Officer” means any person employed by the city of St. Helens as a police officer, code enforcement officer, or animal control officer.

(22) “Pet” or “domestic animal” means any animal that is owned or possessed by a person, that lives and breeds in a tame condition and can be handled by an owner to the extent that minimum care is provided.

(23) “Physical control device” means a sufficiently strong collar connected to a leash or tether made of chain links, or other material as strong, or fenced or enclosed in a structure so as to prevent the escape of an animal by breaking of the device.

(24) “Physical injury” means impairment of physical condition or substantial pain.

(25) “Possess” means to have physical possession or otherwise to exercise dominion or control over property. The act of providing food and water for feral animals is not sufficient grounds to claim possessory rights.

(26) “Serious physical injury” means physical injury, which creates a substantial risk of death or which causes serious and protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily organ.

(27) “Targeted grazing” means the use of goats to accomplish a defined vegetation or landscape goal.

(28) “Wildlife” means any undomesticated wild mammal or reptile that is wild by nature. (Ord. 3187 §§ 1, 2, 2015; Ord. 3108 § 1, 2009; Ord. 3040 § 1, 2007; Ord. 2959 § 2, 2005; Ord. 2733, 1996; Ord. 2725 § 1, 1996)


6.04.020 Owner’s duties.

(1) Dog Licensing.

(a) A dog shall be licensed according to the laws of the county and it shall be unlawful for any person to own or have custody of a dog not so licensed.

(b) An officer shall consider a dog not displaying a valid and current license as probable cause that the dog is unlicensed unless the owner shows a valid and current license to the officer, or the officer is able to ascertain the validity of the license through county records. 

(c) If a dog has been impounded for license violation and is later found to have been licensed properly at the time of the impoundment, then that dog shall be released to the owner without fine or fees, unless the dog was also impounded for another violation of this chapter.

(d) The provisions of this section do not apply to animals owned by a licensed research animal facility, or a not-for-profit or government operated or licensed animal shelter. 

(2) Disease Control.

(a) No owner shall permit any animal or bird that is afflicted with a communicable disease to come in contact with another animal, bird or human that is susceptible to the affliction.

(b) No owner shall permit the body of an animal to remain upon the public streets or private property for a period of time longer than is reasonably necessary to remove such carcass.

(c)(i) Any owner or person having custody or control of an animal shall immediately remove excrement or other solid waste deposited by the animal on public or private property. Nothing in this chapter authorizes a trespass by an animal or its owner onto private property of another or the creation of an unsanitary condition on private property of another or on public property.

(ii) Excrement shall be removed from primary enclosures and areas as often as necessary to prevent contamination, reduce disease hazards and minimize odors.

(d) No owner shall cause or allow any stable or place where any animal is, or may be kept, to become unclean or unwholesome. Storage of food supplies and bedding materials shall be designed to prevent vermin infestation.

(e) An animal that is placed under quarantine by the city shall be kept separated from any other animals or people other than the owner’s family or pets for a period of not less than 10 days.

(f) Whenever any animal bites a person, the owner of said animal shall immediately notify the police department. The police department shall order the animal held on the owner’s premises or shall have it impounded for a period of not less than 10 days if it has been determined that there is no proof of proper rabies inoculation which is current.

(g) No person shall own, keep or harbor any dog over six months of age unless the dog is vaccinated for rabies.

(3) Animal Housing and Restraint.

(a) Housing structures shall be adequately constructed and maintained in good repair to protect animals and the public from injury, safely confine any animal housed therein and prevent entry of other animals that may be dangerous to the animals the enclosure is meant for.

(b) Where applicable, housing structures for animals shall be dry and adequately sealed to prevent cold air and moisture from entering the enclosure.

(c) Outdoor facilities shall provide protective shading and adequate shelter areas designed to minimize harmful exposure to weather conditions for those animals not acclimatized to the environment.

(d) The primary enclosure for animals shall be of sufficient size to permit each animal housed therein to stand freely, sit, turn about and lie in a comfortable normal position.

(e) When restraining devices are used in connection with a primary enclosure intended to permit movement outside the enclosure, such devices shall be adequate in strength, installed in a manner to prevent entanglement with the devices of other animals or objects and shall be fitted to the animal by a harness or well-fitted collar, other than a choke type collar, and shall not be shorter than three times the length of the animal as measured from the tip of its nose to the base of its tail. (Ord. 3178 § 2, 2014; Ord. 3166 § 1, 2013; Ord. 3038 §§ 1, 2, 2007; Ord. 2959 § 3, 2005; Ord. 2899 § 2, 2003; Ord. 2725 § 2, 1996)


6.04.030 Public duties.

(1) Aiding Injured Animals. Any person operating a vehicle, as defined by the Motor Vehicle Act of the state of Oregon, who runs over, strikes, injures, maims or kills any domestic animal shall immediately stop and notify the owner of the animal, if known, or notify any law enforcement agency with jurisdiction in the area of the incident, and remain at the scene until such time as an officer arrives.

(2) Refusing to Assist an Officer. A person commits the offense of refusing to assist an officer if, upon lawful command by an officer known by the person to be an officer, the person unreasonably refuses or fails to assist in effecting an authorized action or prevent another from effecting an authorized action, pursuant to this chapter.

(3) Interference with an Officer. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or hinder an officer while that officer is enforcing this chapter. (Ord. 3040 § 3, 2007; Ord. 2725 § 3, 1996)


6.04.040 Prohibited activities.

(1) Chasing or Harassing Wildlife. Except as the Oregon Wildlife Commission by rule may provide otherwise, no person shall chase, harass, molest, worry, keep, or disturb any wildlife in the city limits except in lawfully angling for, hunting or trapping such wildlife. Ducks, geese and other waterfowl in the city limits are considered wildlife unless registered through the city by business license or conditional use permit by a person or organization as owned property.

Nothing in this section shall prohibit an officer, or a representative of the city, from humanely removing wildlife, for the protection of the public, or for the protection of wildlife.

(2) Animals At Large. It shall be unlawful for an owner to permit, either by negligence or by intention, any animal to run at large, except domestic cats or birds. Notwithstanding this general rule, dogs shall be allowed to be off leash for play and exercise purposes in the area designated as the McCormick Park pet off-leash area by Resolution No. 1564, so long the rules of the off-leash area are being observed.

(3) Public Nuisances. It shall be unlawful to keep or maintain within the city any animal which is a nuisance. An animal is a nuisance as described if it:

(a) Causes continuous noise lasting for a minimum period of 15 minutes or intermittent noise lasting for a minimum period of 30 minutes by excessive barking or noise making, for which the listener can clearly hear the content of the sound produced by the animal from inside any neighboring building, vehicle or residence;

(b) Chases vehicles;

(c) Damages or destroys property of a person other than the owner or custodian of the animal;

(d) Scatters garbage;

(e) Molests, attacks or interferes with persons or other domestic animals on property other than the owner’s property.

(4) Removal of Animal. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or cause the removal of any animal from the city for which the owner has been cited for violation of dangerous animal, aggressive animal, animal abuse, animal neglect, animal abandonment, or animal fighting until a final ruling has been made on the case by the court. The court may grant exception to this subsection if the owner of the animal can show just cause for such a request.

(5) Animal Restrictions and Prohibitions.

(a) The following are prohibited except as set forth in subsections (5)(b), (5)(c) and (5)(d) of this section:

(i) Beekeeping. No person shall possess, maintain or keep bees in the city limits.

(ii) Dogs. No single-family residence shall contain more than three adult dogs and one litter of puppies under six months of age.

(iii) Exotic Animals. No person shall possess, maintain or keep any exotic animal in the city limits.

(iv) Hens and Ducks. No single-family residence shall possess, maintain or keep more than three adult hens or ducks, or any combination thereof, and six chicks or ducklings, or any combination thereof, under nine weeks of age.

(v) Livestock. No person shall possess, maintain or keep any livestock in the city limits.

(vi) Rabbits. No single-family residence shall possess, maintain or keep more than three adult rabbits and one litter of rabbit kits (bunnies) under nine weeks of age.

(vii) Wildlife. No person shall possess, maintain or keep any wildlife in the city limits.

(b) Except for subsections (5)(a)(i), (5)(a)(v) and (5)(a)(vii) of this section, an owner may request an animal facility license for the keeping of such animals in the manner as set forth in SHMC 6.04.080.

(c) Persons owning and keeping roosters, dogs or rabbits in the city in numbers exceeding the provisions of subsection (5)(a) of this section on August 1, 2007, shall be allowed to continue the same without an animal facility license subject to the following:

(i) No such animal in excess of the otherwise allowed number shall be replaced or returned following death or dispossession of the animal.

(ii) Such person can provide documented evidence of such animals as of the above date.

(iii) This subsection (5)(c) shall apply only to roosters, dogs and/or rabbits not exceeding five in number.

(d) The temporary keeping of goats for the sole purpose of targeted grazing of vegetation is an accessory use to the primary use on a unit of land and requires a special use permit. The duration of targeted grazing on any one property one-half acre or less in area is limited to not more than 21 consecutive days. Properties more than one-half acre in area shall be divided into penned areas of one-half acre or less. The duration of targeted grazing is limited to not more than 21 consecutive days for each penned area. Goats may not return to a treated area for 30 days following a targeted grazing treatment. No more than three targeted grazing treatments per calendar year may occur on any one property one-half acre or less in size or on any one penned area in the case of properties greater than one-half acre in size.

(6) Pets in City Parks. Pets are permitted in city parks (unless otherwise posted) only if they are on a leash that is 16 feet or less in length or in an appropriate container. Electronic leashes or training collars that have no visible, physical connection between the animal and its human supervisor will not be considered acceptable under this section. Pets shall be kept under supervision at all times and not allowed to run at large or to commit any nuisance or harass the public in any way. Notwithstanding this provision, dogs shall be allowed to be off leash for play and exercise purposes in the area designated as the McCormick Park pet off-leash area by Resolution No. 1564, so long the rules of the off-leash area are being observed. (Ord. 3206 § 1, 2016; Ord. 3187 § 3, 2015; Ord. 3149 § 1, 2011; Ord. 3099, 2008; Ord. 3058 § 1, 2007; Ord. 3040 § 4, 2007; Ord. 2959 § 4, 2005; Ord. 2733, 1996; Ord. 2725 § 4, 1996)


6.04.050 Cruelty to animals.

(1) Animal Abuse in the Second Degree.

(a) A person commits the crime of animal abuse in the second degree if, except as otherwise authorized by law, the person intentionally, knowingly or recklessly causes physical injury to an animal.

(b) Any practice of good animal husbandry is not a violation of this section.

(2) Animal Abuse in the First Degree. Except as provided for by ORS 167.315 through 167.330, concerning aggravated animal abuse in the first degree:

(a) A person commits the crime of animal abuse in the first degree if, except as otherwise authorized by law, the person intentionally, knowingly or recklessly:

(i) Causes serious physical injury to an animal; or

(ii) Cruelly causes the death of an animal.

(b) Any practice of good animal husbandry is not a violation of this section.

(3) Animal Neglect in the Second Degree. A person commits the crime of animal neglect in the second degree if, except as otherwise authorized by law, the person intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or with criminal negligence fails to provide minimum care for an animal in such person’s custody or control.

(4) Animal Neglect in the First Degree. A person commits the crime of animal neglect in the first degree if, except as otherwise authorized by law, the person intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or with criminal negligence:

(a) Fails to provide minimum care for an animal in such person’s custody or control; and

(b) Such failure to provide care results in serious physical injury or death to the animal.

(5) Animals Confined in Vehicles.

(a) No animal shall be confined within or on a motor vehicle at any location under such conditions as may endanger the health or well-being of the animal, including but not limited to a dangerous temperature, lack of food or water or attention or a confinement with a dangerous animal.

(b) Any officer is authorized to remove any animal from a motor vehicle at any location when the officer reasonably believes it is confined in violation of this section and no owner of the vehicle or animal can be reasonably located. Any animal so removed shall be delivered to an animal control shelter after the removing officer leaves written notice of the removal and delivery, including the officer’s name, in a conspicuous secure location on or within the vehicle.

(6) Illegal Killing. No person shall kill a pet or domestic animal not owned by that person without the permission of the owner, unless it is necessary for the protection and safety of people, other animals, or the humane euthanasia of a sick or injured animal. No person shall knowingly place food of any description containing poison or other injurious ingredients in any area reasonably likely to be accessible to any animal except certain vermin, such as rats or mice, for the sake of pest control. No person shall set any traps that are designed to kill, injure or maim except for certain vermin for the sake of pest control.

(7) Treatment of Livestock. Unless gross negligence can be shown, the provisions of subsections (1) through (5) of this section shall not apply to the treatment of livestock being transported by owner or common carrier, animals involved in rodeos or similar exhibitions or commercially grown poultry.

(8) Animal Abandonment.

(a) A person commits the crime of animal abandonment if the person intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or with criminal negligence leaves a domesticated animal at a location without providing for the animal’s continued care.

(b) It is no defense to the crime defined in subsection (8)(a) of this section that the defendant abandoned the animal at or near an animal shelter, veterinary clinic or other place of shelter if the defendant did not make reasonable arrangements for the care of the animal.

(9) Forfeiture and Costs. In addition to and not in lieu of any other sentence it may impose, the court may require a defendant, convicted under subsections (1) through (5) and (8) of this section, to forfeit any rights of the defendant in the animal subjected to abuse, neglect or abandonment, and to repay the reasonable costs incurred by any person or agency prior to judgment in caring for each animal subjected to abuse, neglect or abandonment.

(10) Forfeiture of Impounded Animals.

(a) If any animal is impounded pursuant to this section, and is being held by an animal shelter or other animal care agency pending outcome of criminal action charging a violation of this section, prior to final disposition of the criminal charge, the animal shelter or other animal care agency may file a petition in the criminal action requesting that the court issue an order forfeiting the animal to the animal shelter or animal care agency prior to final disposition of the criminal charge. The petitioner shall serve a true copy of the petition upon the defendant and the prosecuting attorney.

(b) Upon receipt of a petition pursuant to subsection (10)(a) of this section, the court shall set a hearing on the petition. The hearing shall be conducted within 14 days of the filing of the petition, or as soon as practicable.

(c) At a hearing conducted pursuant to subsection (10)(b) of this section, the petitioner shall have the burden of establishing probable cause to believe that the animal was subjected to abuse, neglect or abandonment in violation of this section, or of ORS Chapter 167 for aggravated animal abuse. If the court finds that probable cause exists, the court shall order immediate forfeiture of the animal to the petitioner, unless the defendant, within 72 hours of the hearing, posts a security deposit or bond with the court clerk in an amount determined by the court to be sufficient to repay all reasonable costs incurred, and anticipated to be incurred, by the petitioner in caring for the animal from the date of initial impoundment to the date of trial.

(d) If a security deposit or bond has been posted in accordance with subsection (10)(c) of this section, and the trial in the action is continued at a later date, any order of continuance shall require the defendant to post an additional security deposit or bond in an amount determined by the court that shall be sufficient to repay all additional reasonable costs anticipated to be incurred by the petitioner in caring for the animal until the new date of trial.

(e) If a security deposit or bond has been posted in accordance with subsection (10)(d) of this section, the petitioner may draw from that security deposit or bond the actual reasonable costs incurred by the petitioner in caring for the impounded animal from the date of initial impoundment to the date of final disposition of the animal in the criminal action.

(11) Placement Preference. If an animal is forfeited according to the provisions of this section, in placing the animal with a new owner, the agency to which the animal was forfeited shall give placement preference to any person or persons who had prior contact with the animal, including but not limited to family members and friends of the former owner whom the agency determines are capable of providing necessary, adequate and appropriate levels of care for the animal. (Ord. 2725 § 5, 1996)


6.04.060 Dangerous or aggressive animals.

(1) Classification of Levels of Dangerousness of Dogs.

(a) A dog shall be classified as aggressive if it bites, causes physical injury, or otherwise threatens or endangers the safety of any person or domestic animal while:

(i) It is at-large; or

(ii) It is off the property of the owner and on a physical control device; or

(iii) It is on the property of the owner but not restrained or contained in a manner that would reasonably prevent incidental contact by any person; or

(iv) It is in or on a motor vehicle and not restrained or otherwise physically prevented from reaching any area outside the perimeter of the vehicle.

(b) A dog shall be classified as dangerous if:

(i) It causes the serous physical injury or death of any person; or

(ii) While at-large or off the property of the owner it kills any domestic animal; or

(iii) An aggressive dog causes physical injury to any person after the owner has received notice of the aggressive dog classification because of causing physical injury to a person.

(c) A dog shall not be classified as dangerous or aggressive, even if the dog has engaged in these behaviors, upon a determination that the behavior was caused by abuse or torment of the dog, or criminal activity on the part of any victim.

(d) No dog shall be found to be dangerous or aggressive if it is a dog trained for law enforcement purposes and is on duty under the control of a peace officer.

(e) Notwithstanding the mandatory aggressive dog classification set forth in subsection (1)(a) of this section, no dog shall be determined to be aggressive if an officer makes written findings that such classification is inappropriate based upon mitigating circumstances documented by the officer. This exception to classification is limited to cases not involving physical injury, as defined in this chapter, as relates to a human being.

(2) Identification of Dangerous or Aggressive Dogs – Appeals – Restrictions Pending Appeal.

(a) An officer shall determine whether any dog has engaged in the behaviors specified in subsection (1) of this section. The determination shall be based upon an investigation that includes observation of the dog’s behavior by an officer, or by other witnesses who personally observed the behavior. Observations must be in writing attesting to the observed behavior.

(b) The officer shall give the dog’s owner written notice by certified mail or personal service that includes (i) the dog’s specific behavior; (ii) the dog’s classification as a dangerous or aggressive dog; and (iii) additional restrictions applicable because of the dog’s classification. The owner may appeal the officer’s decision to the court by filing with the court clerk, within 10 days of the date the notice was mailed or the owner was personally served, a written request for a hearing.

(c) The court shall hold a public hearing on any appeal from the officer’s decision to classify a dog as aggressive. The owner and any other person having relevant evidence concerning the dog’s behavior as specified in subsection (1) of this section shall be allowed to present testimony. The court shall determine whether behavior specified in subsection (1) of this section was exhibited by the dog in question. The court shall issue an order containing the court’s determination, which shall be final.

(d) Pending appeal, the owner shall comply with the restrictions specified in the notice. Failure to comply with the specified restrictions pending the completion of all appeals shall be a violation of this section.

(e) If the officer finds that a dog is a dangerous dog, the dog shall be impounded pending the completion of all appeals. If the officer’s decision is upheld on appeal, the dog’s owner shall be liable for the cost of the dog’s impoundment.

(3) Regulation of Aggressive Dogs. In addition to complying with all other requirements of this section, the owner of an aggressive dog shall comply with the following by:

(a) Restraining the dog to prevent it from interfering with the public’s legal access to the owner’s property or from reaching any public sidewalk or road or adjoining property;

(b) Notifying the police department in writing where the dog is kept and renotify within 10 days of any change; and

(c) Posting warning signs supplied by the police department at the location the dog is kept, in a conspicuous place visible from the public sidewalk, the road adjoining the property, or the boundary line of the property where access is provided to the property.

(d) The requirements of this section shall apply to any person who is transferred ownership or who keeps an aggressive dog.

(4) Euthanasia for Dangerous Dogs. Any dangerous dog causing serious physical injury to a person shall be euthanized. The court may order that any dangerous animal be euthanized in addition to penalties for separate chapter violations.

(5) Dog Owner Regulations. It is unlawful for any person to:

(a) Be an owner of a dangerous dog;

(b) Fail to comply with the requirements applicable to aggressive dogs.

(6) Dangerous Animals Generally.

(a) Except as permitted by SHMC 6.04.040(5) and 6.04.080, it shall be unlawful to keep any animal that is dangerous in the city.

(b) Except as outlined in SHMC 6.04.080(1)(b), it shall be unlawful to maintain any dangerous animal outside of its licensed facility area.

(c) It shall be unlawful to allow any dangerous animal in public without being properly contained and restrained.

(d) The court may order that a dangerous animal be euthanized in addition to penalties for separate chapter violations. The city may hold the animal until a determination has been made by the court. (Ord. 3108 § 2, 2009; Ord. 2959 § 5, 2005; Ord. 2725 § 6, 1996)


6.04.065 Declassification of aggressive dogs.

(1) An owner or keeper of an aggressive dog may file a petition with the city recorder requesting an order declassifying a dog as aggressive if the following conditions have been met:

(a) The dog has been classified for one year without further incident; and

(b) There have been no violations of the animal control regulations; and

(c) All other conditions ordered at the time of classification have been met.

(2) The city recorder shall forward such petition to an officer who may condition declassification on the following provisions:

(a) The owner or keeper provides the officer with written certification of satisfactory completion of obedience training for the dog classified;

(b) The officer may require the dog owner or keeper to provide written verification that the classified dog has been spayed or neutered; or

(c) Any other condition that is designed to prevent the dog from engaging in behavior specified in SHMC 6.04.060(1) or (2).

(3) Any decision of the officer not to declassify under this section may be appealed to the municipal court in the manner provided for appeals of classification decisions. (Ord. 3108 § 3, 2009; Ord. 3040 § 5, 2007)


6.04.070 Animal fighting.

(1) Involvement in Animal Fighting.

(a) A person commits the crime of involvement in animal fighting if the person:

(i) Owns or trains an animal with the intention that the animal engage in an exhibition of fighting; or

(ii) Promotes, conducts, participates in or is present as a spectator at an exhibition of fighting or preparations thereto; or

(iii) Keeps or uses, or in any way is connected with or interested in the management of, or receives money for the admission of any person to any place kept or used for the purpose of an exhibition of fighting; or 

(iv) Knowingly suffers or permits any place over which the person has possession or control to be occupied, kept or used for the purpose of an exhibition of fighting.

(b) For purposes of this subsection (1), “animal” does not include dogs.

(c) Nothing in this section applies to or prohibits any customary practice of breeding or rearing game cocks even though those cocks may be subsequently used in cock fighting exhibitions outside the state of Oregon.

(2) Participation in Dogfighting. Except as provided for by ORS 167.365, concerning dogfighting:

(a) A person commits the crime of participation in dogfighting if the person knowingly:

(i) Attends or otherwise offers to sell equipment for the training and handling of a fighting dog.

(ii) Advertises or otherwise offers to sell equipment for the training and handling of a fighting dog.

(3) Seizure of Fighting Dogs – Procedure.

(a) Pursuant to ORS 133.525 through 133.703, a judge may order the seizure of alleged fighting dogs owned, possessed or kept by any person.

(b) The judge issuing an order for the seizure of a dog, as provided in subsection (3)(a) of this section, may require the dog to be impounded at an animal shelter if the judge believes it to be in the best interest of the animal and the public to so order. The governmental unit, the agency of which executed the seizure of the dog, shall be responsible for the costs of impoundment at the animal shelter, but the governmental unit is entitled to receive reimbursement of this costs from the owner, possessor or keeper of the impounded dog. If the owner, possessor or keeper of the dog is subsequently convicted of dogfighting under ORS 167.365, the court may order the defendant to pay the costs of animal shelter as restitution in the case.

(c) In lieu of ordering such dogs seized under subsection (3)(a) of this section to be impounded at an animal shelter, the court may order the dogs impounded on the property of their owner, possessor or keeper. If dogs are ordered impounded on the property of their owner, possessor or keeper, the court shall order such person to provide all necessary care for the dogs and to allow regular and continuing inspection of the dogs by any persons designated by the court, or the agents of such persons. The court shall further order the person not to sell or otherwise dispose of any of the dogs unless the court authorizes such sale or disposition, or until the seized dogs are released as evidence by the law enforcement agency that seized them, or restored to the person by the court pursuant to an order under ORS 133.643.

(4) Forfeiture of Rights in Fighting Dogs or Property – Public Nuisance – Destruction of Dogs.

(a) In addition to and not in lieu of any other penalty it may impose upon a person convicted of dogfighting ORS 167.365 or participating in dogfighting under subsection (3) of this section, the court shall, as a part of the judgment, order to be forfeited to the city the person’s rights in any fighting dogs or property proved to have been used by the defendant as an instrumentality in the commission of the crime.

(b) A fighting dog is a public nuisance, regardless of whether or not a person has been convicted of animal fighting with respect to the dog, and a dog proved by a preponderance of the evidence to be a fighting dog in a forfeiture proceeding shall be forfeited to the county to be destroyed.

(c) When the court orders a fighting dog to be forfeited, the dog shall be destroyed by a method consistent with such state law regulating methods to be used for destruction of animals. No forfeited fighting dog shall be released or given to any person or agency other than for purposes of destruction in accordance with this subsection. (Ord. 2725 § 7, 1996)


6.04.080 Animal facility licensing.

An animal facility shall require a license from the city, and no such animal facility may lawfully be operated except upon application and payment of prescribed fees for the license. It shall be unlawful for any person to own or have custody of any animals as defined in SHMC 6.04.040(5)(b).

(1) License Issuance.

(a) Issuance of an animal facility license shall require compliance with land use regulations and permits as required by federal law, state statutes, and city ordinances.

(b) Exhibitions or parades of wildlife, dangerous animals, livestock or exotic animals may be conducted only upon securing a special date-specific permit from the city and complying with any directions set forth by the St. Helens police department.

(2) License Approval. Approval, denial or revocation of animal facility licenses shall be under the authority of the city council.

(3) Facility Inspection. An officer shall inspect any animal facility for which the license is sought, to determine whether the facility and its operation complies with all applicable provisions of this chapter and other applicable state and federal laws. The officer shall issue a written review of the site including any written statements from neighbors whose property borders the site.

(4) Facility Requirements. In addition to any requirements outlined in subsection (3) of this section, an officer inspecting the facility must be convinced that the animals housed in the facility will not represent a threat to the safety of the public. The officer may require any animals currently housed within to be removed for the city in a timely and reasonable manner, until such time that an animal facility license is approved.

(5) License Application. Application for an animal facility license shall be made upon forms furnished by the city and shall include all information required therein and shall be accompanied by the review of the animal facility site by an officer and payment of the required fee. Fees may be refunded if the animal facility license is denied, but not if the license is issued and later revoked. A refund request shall be in writing to the city recorder. An inspection to verify that your property is in compliance with this chapter may be conducted.

(6) Proof of Liability Insurance. An applicant for a license must demonstrate satisfactory proof to respond in damages for bodily injury or death of any person or for damage to any property, which may result from the keeping, owning or control of the animal. The city council may require posting of an adequate bond or proof of liability insurance to remain in effect during any license period.

(7) Licensing Term. An animal facility license shall be valid for two years, beginning on the date the animal facility license is approved by the city council.

(8) Licensing Display. A copy of the license shall be conspicuously displayed on the facility premises. The original must be presented upon request by an officer.

(9) License Inspection. A holder of a license may be inspected at any time during their licensing period and shall keep available for inspection by any city representative or officer a record of the name, address and telephone number of the owner of each animal kept at the facility, the date each animal was received, the purpose for the animal being kept, the name and address of the person from whom the animal was purchased or received, and a description of each animal including age, breed, sex and color, and the animal’s veterinarian, if known.

(10) Animal Identification. Any animals removed from the licensed animal facility must bear identification either directly on the animal, if not contained, or on the animal’s container.

(11) License Revocation. An animal facility license may be denied or revoked by the city council for failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter, or for furnishing false information on an application for a license. If any application for a license is denied, or revoked, the applicant may appeal the denial or revocation to the court. The court’s determination shall be final.

(12) License Exceptions. The provisions of this section do not apply to animals owned by a licensed research animal facility, housed by a government operated or licensed animal shelter, or a retail pet store business. (Ord. 3179 § 2, 2014; Ord. 3130 §§ 2, 3, 2010; Ord. 2733, 1996; Ord. 2725 § 8, 1996)


6.04.090 Impounding procedures.

(1) Any animal which is:

(a) Running at-large;

(b) A public nuisance;

(c) In violation of land use restrictions;

(d) Diseased or in hazardous environment;

(e) Dangerous or aggressive;

(f) Involved in animal fighting;

(g) Subject to abuse, neglect or abandonment;

(h) Improperly housed or restrained;

(i) In violation of quarantine restrictions;

(j) Not permitted in the city limits;

(k) Chasing or harassing wildlife;

(l) Sick, injured, or dead;

(m) In violation of city parks regulations;

(n) A feral animal; or is

(o) Unlicensed;

as provided herein is or may be in violation of this chapter and may be impounded by an officer and placed in an animal facility. Wildlife or feral cats, which may not be in violation of this chapter, may be humanely removed to an animal facility, for relocation, medical treatment by a qualified veterinarian, or for euthanasia by a qualified euthanasia technician, when it is in the best interest of the animals for their protection, or for the protection of private or public property.

(2) Impoundment Notice. Whenever an animal is impounded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, in case the owner or custodian of the animal is known to the person doing the impounding, that person shall forthwith give notice of the impounding by personal service or by registered or certified mail upon the owner or custodian. If after reasonable search the owner or person having custody of such animal cannot be found and notified of the impoundment, such notice shall be conspicuously posted on such premises and within 72 hours after the impoundment such notice shall be sent by certified mail to the address, if any, at which the animal was impounded.

(3) Entry onto Private Land or Premises. An officer, in the course of their duties in enforcing this chapter, shall have the privilege of entering onto private land without permission, but shall not enter into any dwelling or building without permission, authorization or search warrant. If there is probable cause to believe that any animal is being subjected to treatment in violation of SHMC 6.04.050, Cruelty to animals, and is inside a dwelling or enclosure where entry is not allowable or permissible, an officer, after obtaining a search warrant in the manner authorized by law, may enter the premises where the animal is being held, provide food and water and impound such animal.

(4) Appeal. An animal owner may petition the court for the release of his animal and the court shall thereupon set a time and place for hearing the petition and notify the impounding officer. Upon a hearing, the court shall have full power to determine whether the animal was wrongfully impounded and whether the animal should be returned to the owner and upon what terms.

(5) Fees. Impoundment fees and associated charges shall be established by resolution of the city council. Impoundment fees and other charges are due and payable to the city prior to release of the animal to the owner. All fees that are to be collected for the impounding of an animal shall be collected regardless of whether or not the animal is claimed by its owner. An owner who has been properly notified of an impoundment and who fails to acknowledge the notification by paying all necessary fees for the impoundment shall be considered to have legally abandoned the animal.

(6) Liability. No officer, euthanasia technician or employee of the city or county shall be held criminally liable for impounding, releasing, handling or euthanizing an animal pursuant to this chapter provided the officer or employee acts in good faith and without malice. (Ord. 2904 § 2, 2004; Ord. 2725 § 9, 1996)


6.04.100 Penalties.

(1) Separate Violations. Each day’s violation of a section of this chapter constitutes a separate offense.

(2) Violation of sections:

	(a)	SHMC 6.04.020(1)	Licensing of Dogs

	(b)	SHMC 6.04.020(2)	Disease Control

	(c)	SHMC 6.04.020(3)	Animal Housing and Restraint

	(d)	SHMC 6.04.040(2)	Animals At-Large

	(e)	SHMC 6.04.040(3)	Public Nuisances

	(f)	SHMC 6.04.040(4)	Removal of Animal

	(g)	SHMC 6.04.040(5)	Land Use Restrictions

	(h)	SHMC 6.04.040(6)	Pets in City Parks

	(h)	SHMC 6.04.060(5)(b)	Aggressive Dogs Compliance

	(i)	SHMC 6.04.060(6)	Dangerous Animals Generally

	(j)	SHMC 6.04.080	Animal Facility Licensing

are class C violations.

(3) Violation of section:

	 	SHMC 6.04.030(1)	Aiding Injured Animals

is a class B traffic infraction.

(4) Violation of sections:

	(a)	SHMC 6.04.060(5)(a)	Dangerous Dogs

	(b)	SHMC 6.04.050(5)	Animals Confined in/on Vehicles

	(c)	SHMC 6.04.050(6)	Illegal Killing

	(d)	SHMC 6.04.050(7)	Treatment of Livestock

are class C misdemeanors.

(5) Violation of sections:

	(a)	SHMC 6.04.050(1)	Animal Abuse 2nd Degree

	(b)	SHMC 6.04.050(3)	Animal Neglect 2nd Degree

	(c)	SHMC 6.04.050(8)	Animal Abandonment

are class B misdemeanors.

(6) Violation of sections:

	(a)	SHMC 6.04.030(2)	Refusing to Assist an Officer

	(b)	SHMC 6.04.030(3) 	Interference with an Officer

	(c)	SHMC 6.04.040(1)	Chasing or Harassing Wildlife

	(d)	SHMC 6.04.050(2)	Animal Abuse 1st Degree

	(e)	SHMC 6.04.050(4)	Animal Neglect 1st Degree

	(f)	SHMC 6.04.070(1)	Involvement in Animal Fighting

	(g)	SHMC 6.04.070(2)	Participation in Dog Fighting

are class A misdemeanors. (Ord. 2959 § 6, 2005; Ord. 2725 § 10, 1996)


Title 7       (Reserved)

 


Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY Amended Ord. 3239

Chapters:

8.04    Solid Waste

8.06    Pollution Control

8.08    Large Assemblies

8.12    Nuisances

8.14    Property Maintenance, Abandoned Buildings

8.16    Noise Regulations

8.20    Water Purity

8.24    Park Regulations

8.28    City Docks Amended Ord. 3239

8.32    Smoking, Tobacco and Marijuana Use Control

8.36    Outdoor Burning

8.40    Abandoned and Discarded Vehicles

8.44    Drop Boxes and Other Waste Receptacles


Chapter 8.04 SOLID WASTE*

Sections:

8.04.010    Title and jurisdiction.

8.04.020    Purpose and policy.

8.04.030    Definitions.

8.04.040    Collection of solid waste.

8.04.050    Exceptions.

8.04.060    Specific prohibition on transportation of solid waste.

8.04.070    Public responsibility.

8.04.080    Franchise.

8.04.090    License fee.

8.04.100    Rate determination.

8.04.110    Penalty.

8.04.120    City enforcement.

*    Prior legislation: Ords. 2496 and 2559.


8.04.010 Title and jurisdiction.

This chapter shall be known as “the city of St. Helens solid waste management ordinance,” may be so pleaded, shall be referred to herein as “this chapter,” and shall apply to the incorporated area of the city of St. Helens. (Ord. 2322 § 1, 1980)


8.04.020 Purpose and policy.

The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the people of the city of St. Helens by adopting standards and regulations and providing for the issuance of franchises to assure the safe, sanitary, efficient and economical storage, collection, transport and disposal of solid waste. (Ord. 2322 § 2, 1980)


8.04.030 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, the word “shall” is mandatory and not directory and the term “this chapter” shall be deemed to include future amendments made to this chapter and the following specific definitions shall apply:

(1) “Collection service” means the collection and transportation of solid waste for compensation, under a franchise granted by the city of St. Helens, from the point of generation to a disposal site.

(2) “Compensation” means any direct or indirect payment made by the person producing or last using solid waste or recyclable materials for its removal.

(3) “Disposal site” means land or facilities authorized under ORS Chapter 459 for the handling and disposal of solid waste, including but not limited to landfills, transfer stations and resource recovery facilities.

(4) “Franchise” means the authority granted by the city council to provide solid waste service under SHMC 8.04.080.

(5) “Hazardous waste” means any waste that is:

(a) Defined as hazardous waste by or pursuant to ORS Chapter 459; or 

(b) Defined as hazardous waste by another governmental agency or unit having jurisdiction; or

(c) Found to be hazardous to service workers, to service equipment, or to the public by the franchise holder.

(6) “Person” means any individual, public or private corporation, industry, partnership, association, firm, trust, estate, city, county, special district or local government unit and any other legal entity.

(7) “Recyclable material” means materials, which still have useful physical or chemical properties so that the material can be reused or recycled, including those which have been separated.

(8) “Resource recovery facility” means a facility where energy or materials are recovered from solid waste.

(9) “Solid waste” means any solid or semi-solid material including garbage, refuse, rubbish, and trash which is unwanted or discarded by the last user or producer or is illegally stored or deposited so as to create a public nuisance, except those materials classified as hazardous waste under and pursuant to the provisions of ORS 466.005. (Ord. 3060 § 1, 2007; Ord. 2438 § 1, 1983; Ord. 2322 § 3, 1980)


8.04.040 Collection of solid waste.

(1) Unless exempted as provided by this chapter, no person shall provide solid waste collection service or provide for the collection or transport of recycled materials for compensation or offer to provide or advertise for the performance of such service unless said person has a franchise issued by the city of St. Helens.

(2) Specific Exemptions. Subsection (1) of this section does not apply to the following:

(a) The transportation by a person of solid waste produced by such person to a lawful disposal site or market. In the case of a nonowner-occupied property, the solid waste is produced and owned by the occupant and not by the landlord, property owner, or agent of such landlord or property owner.

(b) The collection, transportation and reuse of repairable or cleanable discards by private charitable organizations regularly engaged in such business or activity including but not limited to Salvation Army, St. Vincent De Paul, Goodwill and similar organizations.

(c) The collection, transportation, and reuse or recycling of separated recyclable material or the operation of a collection center for recyclable materials by a religious, benevolent, or fraternal organization, which organization was not organized for nor is operated for any solid waste management purpose and which organization is using the activity for fund raising, including but not limited to scouting and religious organizations.

(d) The collection, transportation or redemption of returnable beverage containers under ORS 459A.700 to 459A.740. 

(e) The generator, producer or source who transports and disposes of solid waste created as an incidental part of regularly carrying on the business of auto dismantling, janitorial service, gardening or landscaping service. “Janitorial service” does not include primarily or solely accumulating or collecting solid wastes created, generated or produced by a property owner or occupant.

(f) The purchase of separated recyclable material at fair market value.

(g) The pumping, collecting, transportation and disposal of sewage sludge, septic tank and chemical toilet pumpings or pulp mill sludge. (Ord. 3186 § 6, 2015; Ord. 3060 § 2, 2007; Ord. 2438 § 2, 1983; Ord. 2322 § 4, 1980)


8.04.050 Exceptions.

The council may authorize exceptions to provisions of this chapter, provided the following requirements have been met:

(1) Applicant shall obtain an application form and file a completed application with the city recorder.

(2) Upon 30 days’ written notice to the applicant and the city’s franchise holder, a public hearing shall be held before the common council.

(3) The recorder shall provide information and recommendations to the council to assist it in reaching a determination.

(4) The council shall hold a public hearing and make findings. A decision as to whether an exception shall be granted will be based on carrying out this chapter and upon all other applicable standards, which may include, but need not be limited to, the following: 

(a) The need for the proposed service.

(b) The ability of the city’s franchise holder to provide the required service unless the service was otherwise being supplied on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

(c) There are unnecessary, unreasonable hardships or practical difficulties which can be relieved only be granting an exception.

(d) The granting of the application will not be materially detrimental or have substantial impact on service, consumer rates, or the city’s franchise holder.

(e) The applicant has the necessary equipment, experience, finances and personnel to provide adequate service.

(f) An order by resolution shall be drawn setting forth the findings and the decision of the council. Said order shall be distributed to said applicant and the city’s franchise holder. The order may specify any conditions or limitations deemed necessary by the council to carry out the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 2322 § 5, 1980)


8.04.060 Specific prohibition on transportation of solid waste.

(1) No person while transporting or conveying solid waste within the city of St. Helens, Oregon, shall permit any portion thereof to become spread, scattered, lodged or left within or upon any street in said city.

(2) No solid waste shall be transported or conveyed upon or over a street within the city of St. Helens except the same shall be conveyed and transported in a covered, watertight and drip proof vehicle equipped with a metal-lined container, or in metal-covered barrels; provided however, that innocuous nondecaying substances may be conveyed in suitable conveyances with adequate provisions against litter by covering and lashing.

(3) All collection service solid waste shall be transported to any county-approved transfer station within Columbia County to the extent that it is accepted by the transfer station. (Ord. 2533 § 2, 1987; Ord. 2322 § 6, 1980)


8.04.070 Public responsibility.

In addition to and not in lieu of compliance with ORS Chapter 459, and other applicable laws and regulations:

(1) No person shall place hazardous waste for collection or disposal by the city’s franchise holder without notice to the franchise holder. This shall not apply to minor quantities of wastes generated at or by a single-family residential unit. The generator is liable for any damages to persons or property by illegal disposal of such hazardous wastes.

(2) No unauthorized person shall place material in or remove material from a solid waste collection container or box without permission of the owner of the container or box. For the purpose of this section, the city’s franchise holder is the “owner” of containers or boxes supplied by the franchise holder.

(3) No unauthorized person shall remove solid waste placed out for collection and resource recovery by the franchise holder or a person exempted by SHMC 8.04.040(2) and operating solely within the exemption.

(4) The franchise holder is not required to service an underground container unless the person responsible for it places the can above ground prior to time of collection.

(5) Residential cans and recycling bins have to be placed curbside (within five feet of the curb next to where the driveway enters to the public road, or in the case of streets that have no curb, within five feet of the main traveled street next to where the driveway enters the public street) by 6:00 a.m. on the designated pickup day, unless other arrangements have been made with the franchisee for walk-in service. No can, bin, or container shall be placed upon a public road. Cans, bins, and containers shall be placed on as level a surface as possible.

(6) Each customer shall provide safe access to the solid waste container or wastes without risk or hazard to franchise holder’s employees, the public or the city’s franchise holder. No solid waste containers shall be placed in such a location as to require climbing up or down stairways. 

(7) No container designed for mechanical pickup shall exceed safe loading weights or volumes as established by the city’s franchise holder to protect service workers, the customer, the public and the collection equipment.

(8) The franchisee shall not be required to provide service to any customer, other than curbside (within five feet of the public street) unless the customer has arranged additional service. The franchisee may charge an additional fee for walk-in service, defined as providing service at a residence that does not place the special can by the curbside or uses a can different from that provided by the franchisee. The cost of such service shall be based on the time and distance the franchisee must spend to provide the service. Walk-in service shall be charged for such service unless the customer is elderly or infirm and receiving licensed in-home care or has a certified disability and no other member of the household can place the can curbside.

(9) Stationary compacting devices for solid wastes shall comply with federal and state safety standards and provide adequate protection to user.

(10) No person shall block access to any container or drop box or roll off box supplied by the city’s franchise holder. Franchise holder may charge extra for return service to such blocked container or drop box or roll off box.

(11) Every person who generates or produces waste shall remove or have removed all putrescible wastes at least every seven days. More frequent removal may be required by the city where a facility or service involves the public health. All wastes shall be removed at sufficient frequency as to prevent health hazards, nuisances or pollution.

(12) The producer or generator of waste shall clean both cans and containers and shall keep the area around such cans or containers free of accumulated wastes. The franchise holder shall provide periodic maintenance to containers supplied by franchise holder.

(13) Solid waste cans for manual pickup shall be round, tapered outward at the top to facilitate unloading, have proper handholds or bales, be rigid, not cracked or split and be water proof, rust proof and rodent proof. Such cans shall not exceed 32 gallons capacity nor 60 pounds gross loaded weight.

(14) For the purposes of rates, roll cans provided by the franchisee shall equate as a 35-gallon roll can as one can, a 65-gallon roll can as two cans, and a 95-gallon roll can as three cans. (Ord. 2777 §§ 1, 2, 3, 1998; Ord. 2322 § 7, 1980)


8.04.080 Franchise.

The city may grant exclusive or nonexclusive franchises for collection services and enforce the same under the terms of this chapter, or any other applicable ordinance. (Ord. 2438 § 3, 1983; Ord. 2322 § 8, 1980)


8.04.090 License fee.

The owner or proprietor of any solid waste collection business involving one or more vehicles which are used for the conveyance or transportation of solid waste upon any street within the city shall pay a franchise fee as agreed upon in a franchise agreement, and in the absence of such agreement, the business shall pay the applicable business license fee as set by resolution. (Ord. 3060 § 3, 2007; Ord. 2322 § 9, 1980)


8.04.100 Rate determination.

(1) Rates for service shall be those as set by resolution.

(2) Changes in rates shall be made by resolution. In determining the rates, the council shall give due consideration to current and projected revenue and expenses; actual and overhead expense; the cost of acquiring and replacement of equipment; the services of owner, family and management; the cost of providing for future, added or different service; a reasonable return to franchise holder for doing business; research and development; recycling and resource recovery; and such other factors as the council deems relevant.

(3) The council may consider rates charged by other persons performing the same or similar service in the same or similar areas under the same or similar service conditions.

(4) Nonscheduled services may be provided at the reasonable cost of providing the service giving consideration to the standards in subsection (2) of this section.

(5) If approved in the rate schedule, franchise holder may charge:

(a) A starting charge for a new service.

(b) A restart charge to any customer who has been previously terminated for failure to pay for service.

(c) Interest on past due accounts. (Ord. 2633, 1991; Ord. 2533 § 1, 1987; Ord. 2506 § 1, 1986; Ord. 2499 § 1, 1986; Ord. 2355 § 1, 1981; Ord. 2322 § 10, 1980)


8.04.110 Penalty.

Any person violating any of the terms, provisions or requirements of this chapter shall upon conviction thereof, or upon a plea of guilty, be punished by a fine of not more than $250.00 or by imprisonment of not more than 10 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 2322 § 11, 1980)


8.04.120 City enforcement.

The city shall enforce the provisions of this chapter by administrative, civil or criminal action or any combination as necessary to obtain compliance with this chapter. The council shall take such legislative action as is necessary to support this chapter and the franchise granted. The franchise holder may also enforce payment or protect its rights by appropriated civil action. (Ord. 2322 § 13, 1980)


Chapter 8.06       POLLUTION CONTROL

Sections:

8.06.010  Purpose.

8.06.020  Definitions.

8.06.030  Establishment of significant wetlands, riparian corridors and protection zones.

8.06.040  Prohibition on alteration of site without prior site-specific determination of significant wetland, significant riparian corridor and protection zone boundaries or sworn statement.

8.06.050  Prohibitions within significant wetlands, significant riparian corridor and protection zones.

8.06.060  Prohibition on alteration of site without prior sworn statement, verification of federal, state and local permit compliance.

8.06.070  Exempt activities and uses within a significant wetland, riparian corridor and protection zone.

8.06.080  Resource and protection zone exceptions or other land use approvals pursuant to CDC 1.091.

8.06.090  Claims requirement.

8.06.100  Enforcement/penalties.


8.06.010      Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to prevent pollution and contamination of the city’s drinking water supply and the pollution of waters of the state, to prevent commonly and traditionally recognized nuisances, i.e., pollution and contamination of the ground, the city drinking water supply and waters of the state, and to comply with federal law requiring the protection of endangered and threatened species. This chapter establishes prohibitions and restrictions for sensitive areas, such as significant wetlands and riparian corridors and associated protection zones.

The standards and restrictions of this chapter shall apply independently and in addition to other regulations of the city such as land use regulations contained in the St. Helens community development code, including Goal 5 regulations and the applicable standards of the underlying zoning classification of lands within significant wetlands, riparian corridors, and protection zones. (Ord. 2925 Att. A § 1, 2005)


8.06.020      Definitions.

The following definitions are in addition to definitions found in existing St. Helens city ordinances. In the event of a conflict the definitions herein control.

"Alter" or "alteration" means any human-induced physical change to the existing condition of land or improvements thereon including but not limited to clearing, grubbing, draining, removal of vegetation (chemical or otherwise), excavation, grading, placement of fill material, placement of structures or impervious surfaces or other construction. "Permit to be altered" means allowing or failing to prevent the alteration.

"City" means the city of St. Helens.

"Clearing" means the removal, redistribution or disturbance to vegetation, soil or substrate that may include trees, brush, grass, groundcover, or other vegetative matter from a site.

"Enhancement" means the actions performed to improve the condition or functions and values of a wetland area riparian corridor or fish and wildlife habitat area, or their associated protection zone. Enhancement actions include but are not limited to increasing plant diversity, increasing fish and wildlife habitat, installing environmentally compatible erosion controls, and removing invasive plant species. 

"Environmental assessment" means at a minimum that the property owner contract with a registered engineer and/or wetlands biologist as appropriate to determine the precise location of the top of bank, steep slopes, wetland, riparian corridor and protection zone on a property. A licensed surveyor must then conduct a boundary survey that shows the locations of the tops of bank, steep slopes, wetlands, riparian corridors, and the protection zone setback locations on the subject property. The EA and supporting field investigation shall be performed by a qualified biologist or other environmental professional with experience in performing wetland/riparian corridor identification, delineation and evaluation. Minimum requirements for an EA are set forth in SHMC 8.06.040.

"Filling" means the act of placing fill material in any amount, including the temporary stockpiling of fill material. 

"Fill material" means a deposit of earth or other natural or manmade material placed by artificial means.

"Mitigation" means actions designed to replace project-induced sensitive area losses or impacts, including, but not limited to, restoration, creation or enhancement.

"Mitigation plan" means a plan that outlines the activities that will be undertaken to alleviate project impacts to sensitive areas.

"Nonnative species" means a plant species which is not indigenous to the local area.

"Noxious, invasive and/or nonnative vegetation" means Poison Oak, Tree-of-heaven, Garlic Mustard, Lesser Celandine, Canada Thistle, Common Thistle, Western Clematis, Traveler’s Joy, Field Morning-glory, Lady’s-nightcap, Pampas Grass, Hawthorn, except native species, Scot’s Broom, Queen Anne’s Lace, South American Waterweed, Common Horsetail, Giant Horsetail, Crane’s Bill, Robert Geranium, English Ivy, St. John’s Wort, English Holly, Yellow Flag, Duckweed, Water Lentil, Fall Dandelion, Purple Loosestrife, Eurasian Watermilfoil, Reed Canarygrass, Annual Bluegrass, Water Smartweed, Climbing Bindweed, Giant Knotweed, English, Portuguese Laurel, Himalayan Blackberry, Evergreen Blackberry, Tansy Ragwort, Blue Bindweed, Hairy Nightshade, Common Dandelion, Common Bladderwort, Periwinkle (large leaf), Periwinkle (small leaf), Spiny Cocklebur, Bamboo, and Blackberry.

Power Assisted Equipment or Machinery.

(1)  "Non-power assisted equipment" means equipment or machinery operated by hand or operated by electricity or battery power.

(2)  "Power assisted equipment" means equipment or machinery other than non-power assisted equipment.

"Protection zone" means the wetland/riparian protection zone of varying width, located adjacent to all significant wetlands and all significant riparian corridors and established in SHMC 8.06.030(3).

"Resource" or "resources" means significant wetlands and/or significant riparian corridors as distinguished from protection zone, which extends upland from the resource area.

"Restoration" means efforts performed to re-establish the functional values and characteristics of a critical area that have been destroyed or degraded by past alterations (e.g., filling, grading or draining).

"Riparian area" or "significant riparian area" means the area adjacent to a river, lake, or stream, consisting of the area of transition from an aquatic ecosystem to a terrestrial ecosystem. These areas are part of significant riparian corridors identified in the PHS riparian area report to the city, designated in SHMC 8.06.030(2).

"Significant riparian corridor" or "riparian corridor" means the resource identified in the PHS riparian area report to the city, designated in SHMC 8.06.030(2). A riparian corridor includes the water areas, fish habitat, adjacent riparian areas, and wetlands within the riparian area boundary.

"Significant wetland" means a wetland that has been identified by the city as a resource in SHMC 8.06.030(1).

"Site" means any legal parcel, lot, or right-of-way, or combination of contiguous lots or parcels under the applicant’s ownership.

"Top of bank" means the stage or elevation at which water overflows the natural banks of streams or other waters of this state and begins to inundate the upland. In the absence of physical evidence, the two-year recurrence interval flood elevation may be used to approximate the bank full stage. 

"Utility line" means pipe, conduit, cable or other similar instrument by which services are conveyed to the public or individual recipients. Such services shall include, but are not limited to, water supply, electric power, natural gas, communications and sanitary sewer.

"Wetland functions" are wildlife habitat, fish habitat, water quality, and hydrological control. (Ord. 2925 Att. A § 2, 2005)


8.06.030      Establishment of significant wetlands, riparian corridors and protection zones.

(1)  Wetlands. With the modifications and additions noted herein, the wetlands protected by this chapter shall be those identified in Exhibit 1, attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter.

(a)  The following significant wetlands are hereby established as Type I:

	D-6	J-3	MC-1

	D-10	M-7	MC-9

	D-11	M-8	MC-25

	D-16	M-10	UA-2

	D-17	M-11	UB-5A

	D-18	M-12	UB-5B

(b)  The following significant wetlands are hereby established as Type II:

	D-1	D-20	M-5	MC-16

	D-2	D-21	M-15	MC-17

	D-3	D-22	MC-2	MC-20

	D-4	F-2	MC-3	MC-21

	D-7	F-4	MC-5	MC-22

	D-8	J-6	MC-8	MC-26

	D-19	M-3	MC-10	UB-6

(2)  Riparian Corridors. With the modifications and additions noted herein, the significant riparian corridors protected by this chapter shall be those identified in Exhibit 2, attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter.

(a)  Significant riparian corridors are established in waterways within the city limits of the city of St. Helens as follows: Scappoose Bay, Multnomah Channel, Columbia River, Milton Creek, McNulty Creek, and North Fork of McNulty Creek.

(b)  The following additional reaches or portions of streams together with their associated riparian areas are also listed as significant riparian corridors:

	R-MC-5b	R-MC-13R	R-MI-22

	R-MC-7R	R-MC-13L	R-MI-23R

	R-MC-7L	R-MC-15	R-MI-23L

	R-MC-8L	R-MC-16a	R-MI-24

	R-MC-10	R-MC-16b	R-MI-26a

	R-MC-12	R-MI-21	R-D-34

(c)  The significant riparian corridors, including those with associated riparian areas, are more specifically defined as those waterways identified as fish habitat by Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife and also those associated riparian areas identified by Pacific Habitat Services, Inc., report dated February 4, 2000, and amended March 24, 2000, as having two or more assessed functions that have been rated as High.

(3)  Protection Zone. There is hereby established a wetland/riparian protection zone (hereinafter "protection zone" or "PZ") adjacent to all significant wetlands and all significant riparian corridors to protect their integrity, function and value. The protection zone shall be measured from the wetland edge, the riparian corridor edge, or the top of the bank of the waterway when no riparian area is included in the corridor. The width of the protection zone shall vary according to the type of wetland/riparian corridor as listed below:

(a)  The required protection zone for Type I wetland shall extend 75 feet upland from the delineated wetland edge.

(b)  The required protection zone for Type II wetland shall extend 50 feet upland from the delineated wetland edge.

(c)  The required protection zone for riparian corridor streams with an annual average stream flow greater than 1,000 cubic feet per second shall extend 75 feet upland from the top of bank. This provision concerns all portions of Scappoose Bay, Multnomah Channel, and the Columbia River.

(d)  The required protection zone for riparian corridor streams with an average annual stream flow less than 1,000 cubic feet per second shall extend 50 feet upland from the top of bank or from the upland edge of the significant riparian area, whichever is greater. This provision concerns portions of Milton Creek, McNulty Creek and the North Fork of McNulty Creek as well as the following sections of streams and their associated riparian areas:

	R-MC-5b	R-MC-13R	R-MI-22

	R-MC-7R	R-MC-13L	R-MI-23R

	R-MC-7L	R-MC-15	R-MI-23L

	R-MC-8L	R-MC-16a	R-MI-24

	R-MC-10	R-MC-16b	R-MI-26a

	R-MC-12	R-MI-21	R-D-34

(Ord. 2925 Att. A § 3, 2005)


8.06.040      Prohibition on alteration of site without prior site-specific determination of significant wetland, significant riparian corridor and protection zone boundaries or sworn statement.

(1)  Except pursuant to an exemption or exception as referenced in this chapter, it is a violation of this chapter for any person to conduct land clearing, alteration, construction or use on a site within 200 feet of a resource, without having submitted to the city an environmental assessment (EA) prepared and certified by a qualified environmental professional showing the boundaries of the significant wetland, significant riparian corridor and protection zones on the property. The EA shall be prepared at the owner’s sole cost and expense. Assistance from state and federal agencies is encouraged. Alternatively, the property owner may submit a sworn statement from a qualified environmental professional that no significant wetlands, significant riparian corridors or protection zones exist on the site. Environmental assessments must comply with minimum requirements set forth in subsection (3) of this section.

(2)  It is a defense to violation of the above EA or sworn statement requirement if the owner produces a final city land use decision which waives the EA requirements pursuant to 1.091.015.C of the community development code.

(3)  The EA shall include at a minimum the following information: (1) vicinity map; (2) Exhibit 1 or Exhibit 2 identification of the site; (3) the wetland/riparian corridor boundary must be accurately drawn at an appropriate engineering scale of one inch equals 400 feet or larger. Existing features must be distinguished from proposed features. The map must show: (1) site boundary, property lines and roads; (2) property lines, rights-of-way, easements, etc.; (3) existing physical features of the site including buildings, fences, and other structures, roads, parking lots, utilities, water bodies, etc.; (4) contours at the smallest readily available intervals, preferably at two-foot intervals; (5) delineated boundaries of wetlands, tops of bank, steep slopes, and protection zone; (6) hydrologic mapping showing patterns of surface water movement into, through, and out of the site area; (7) location of all test holes and vegetation sample sites, numbers to correspond with flagging in the field and field data sheets; (8) an aerial photo with overlays displaying the site boundaries and wetland and protection zone/delineation may also be provided. Generally, an orthophotograph at a scale of one inch equals 400 feet or greater should be used. If an orthophotograph is not available, a smaller scale aerial photograph enlarged to one inch equals 400 feet may be used. In addition, the required EA narrative shall describe the following: (1) location information including legal description and address; (2) methodology used for delineation of wetlands, tops of bank, steep slopes, and protection zone; (3) general site conditions, including topography, acreage, and surface areas of wetlands and water bodies; (4) specific descriptions of plant communities, soils, and hydrology; and wetland field data sheets, numbered to correspond with sample site locations as staked and flagged in the field.

The EA may include an analysis of significant adverse impacts to the wetland and riparian corridor functions and values. The impact analysis is based on the resource functions and values identified in the Exhibit 1 and Exhibit 2 supporting reports. Potential impacts may include (but are not limited to) loss of flood storage potential, loss of wildlife habitat, loss of species diversity or quantity, changes in water quality, any increase in human intrusion, and impacts on associated wetland or water resources. To the extent that the wetlands and/or riparian corridors are part of a larger natural system such as a watershed, the evaluation must also consider the cumulative impacts on that system. An impact analysis shall include: identification, by characteristics and quantity, of the resources and the resource functions and values found on the site. The EA may also contain an evaluation of alternative locations, design modifications, or alternative methods of development that avoid significant adverse impacts to identified resource functions and values. Such measures to avoid or reduce impacts may include:

(a)  Limiting the degree or magnitude of the proposed activity;

(b)  Limiting the implementation of the proposed activity;

(c)  Using appropriate and best available technology;

(d)  Taking affirmative steps to avoid or minimize impacts; and

(e)  Design, siting, or construction of proposed activities so as to avoid potential impacts to wetlands, riparian corridors, and steep slopes.

The report may contain an analysis of recommended measures to avoid significant adverse impacts to wetlands/riparian corridors and their associated protection zones and an identification of impacts that cannot be avoided or reduced. The report may also contain recommended measures to mitigate unavoidable adverse impacts to wetlands/riparian corridors and their associated protection zones. A mitigation plan shall include, at a minimum: (1) a description of the resources and the resource functions and values to be restored, created, or enhanced on the mitigation site; (2) a plan showing proposed disturbance limits; location, species, and size of proposed plantings; location, size, and details of other proposed mitigation measures; storm water management and erosion control features; and construction management measures; (3) documentation of coordination with appropriate local, regional, special district, state, and federal regulatory agencies; (4) construction timetables; (5) operations and maintenance practices; (6) monitoring and evaluation procedures; and (7) remedial actions for unsuccessful mitigation. (Ord. 2925 Att. A § 4, 2005)


8.06.050      Prohibitions within significant wetlands, significant riparian corridor and protection zones.

(1)  Except as set forth in the exemption, exception, or other approval referenced in this chapter, no person or entity shall alter or allow, or permit or cause to be altered any real property designated as a significant wetland, significant riparian corridor, or a wetland/riparian protection zone.

(2)  Except as set forth in the exemption, exception, or other approval referenced in this chapter, no person or entity shall use or allow, or permit or cause to be used property designated as a significant wetland, significant riparian corridor, or wetland/riparian protection zone. (Ord. 2925 Att. A § 5, 2005)


8.06.060      Prohibition on alteration of site without prior sworn statement, verification of federal, state and local permit compliance.

(1)  Sworn Statement, Verification of Federal, State, and Local Permit Compliance. Except pursuant to an exemption or exception as referenced in this chapter, it is a violation of this chapter for any person to conduct land clearing, alteration, construction or use on a site (other than survey work or environmental testing) without having first executed and submitted to the city a sworn statement by the property owner, under penalty of perjury and false swearing, that the owner/developer has obtained all required federal, state, and local authorizations, permits and approvals for the proposed development, including any proposed use, or alteration of the site, including also any off-site improvements. The owner/developer shall be solely responsible for obtaining all approvals, permits, licenses, insurance, and authorizations from the responsible federal, state and local authorities, or other entities, necessary to use the property in the manner contemplated, including all authorizations necessary to perform land clearing, construction and improvement of property in the location and manner contemplated. This provision includes, specifically, a permit or statement from the National Marine Fisheries Service and/or Fish and Wildlife Service that the owner’s proposed use and/or development will not take or harm any "endangered or threatened species" as that term is defined in applicable federal statutes and administrative rules. The city of St. Helens has no duty, responsibility or liability for requesting, obtaining, ensuring, or verifying the owner/developer’s compliance with the applicable state and federal agency permit or approval requirements. Any permit or authorization granted by the city, including any exemption, exception, permit, approval or variance pursuant to the city of St. Helens ordinance, including the community development code, shall not in any way be interpreted as a waiver, modification, or grant of any state or federal agency permits or authorizations or permission to violate any state or federal law or regulation. The owner/developer shall be held strictly liable, and shall hold the city of St. Helens harmless for administrative, civil and criminal penalties for any violation of federal and state statutes, including but not limited to the Clean Water Act, Endangered Species Act and regulations implementing such laws. Nothing herein shall be interpreted as restricting or limiting the city from bringing an enforcement action pursuant to city ordinance. (Ord. 2925 Att. A § 6, 2005)


8.06.070      Exempt activities and uses within a significant wetland, riparian corridor and protection zone.

(1)  The following activities are exempt from the prohibitions in this chapter and do not require a permit or authorization from the city to be conducted or to continue in a significant wetland, riparian corridor or protection zone:

(a)  Public and private conservation areas for water, soil, open space, forest, and wildlife resources.

(b)  Nonimpact, nonalteration, nondevelopment recreational uses such as but not limited to sport fishing, bird watching, scientific or educational study.

(c)  Noxious Vegetation Control.

(i)  Alteration or removal of noxious, invasive and/or nonnative vegetation with electric or handheld (non-power assisted) equipment.

(ii)  Alteration or removal of noxious, invasive and/or nonnative vegetation by state-licensed governmental, utility and transportation carrier personnel when performed with power or non-power assisted equipment or chemical control, provided any chemicals used are authorized and approved for such use by the Oregon Department of Agriculture or DEQ, and provided the alteration or removal is performed only in existing rights-of-way or on other public property and is limited to areas previously altered by such means.

(d)  Planting of native vegetation with non-power assisted equipment.

(e)  Minimal site investigative work required by a city, state, or federal agency, such as surveys, soil logs, percolation tests, and other similar tests.

(f)  Emergency Activities. Emergency repair or other remedial actions performed by governmental or public utility workers or authorized contractors or volunteers which must be undertaken immediately, or for which there is insufficient time for full compliance with this chapter, when it is necessary to:

(i)  Prevent an imminent threat to public health or safety; or

(ii)  Prevent imminent danger to public or private property; or

(iii)  Prevent an imminent threat of serious environmental degradation.

(g)  Hazard Prevention – Tree Removal or Flood Prevention. Emergency remedial action to remove a tree or portion thereof or sandbagging for flood prevention by a property owner which must be undertaken immediately, or for which there is insufficient time for full compliance with this chapter when it is necessary to:

(i)  Prevent an imminent threat to public health or safety; or

(ii)  Prevent imminent danger to public or private property; or

(iii)  Prevent an imminent threat of serious environmental degradation.

(h)  Legally Established Nonconformities. It is a defense to a violation of the prohibitions of this chapter if the activity is a "legally established nonconformity" as that term is defined and detailed in Ordinance 2890 (1.091.035(A)(8)); provided, however, that without a binding nonconformity determination from the city pursuant to the land use processes of the community development code, a property owner may be subject to enforcement action if the use or structure is not in compliance with the nonconformities article.

(i)  Preexisting Approvals and Vested Rights. It is a defense to a violation of the prohibitions of this chapter if the activity is a "preexisting approval or vested development" as that term is defined and detailed in Ordinance No. 2890 (1.091.035(a)(9)(b)); provided, however, that without a binding vested rights determination from the city pursuant to the land use processes of the community development code, a property owner may be subject to enforcement action. 

(j)  Dredging and channel maintenance conducted under permit from the state of Oregon.

(k)  Placement of signs, markers, or other similar navigation aids by a public agency.

(l)  Activities conducted to protect, conserve, enhance, and maintain public recreational, scenic, historical and natural uses of public lands, including, but not limited to, installation and maintenance of educational and interpretative signage and trail improvements, including elevated boardwalks no greater than necessary to comply with ADA requirements, on public property by volunteers or city employees or contractors.

(m)  Alterations of buildings or structures that do not increase building coverage.

(n)  Measures taken by private property owners or governmental agencies to abate identified public health or safety hazards, public nuisances, and code violations as part of informal or formal resolution of violation proceedings. (Ord. 2925 Att. A § 7, 2005)


8.06.080      Resource and protection zone exceptions or other land use approvals pursuant to CDC 1.091.

It is a defense to violation of the prohibitions in this chapter if the owner produces a final city land use decision which grants an exception or other approval pursuant to Ordinance 2890 (Chapter 1.091, including but not limited to Sections 1.091.040, 1.091.045, 1.091.050, 1.091.055, and such other general requirements of the community development code as are applicable), and the owner or other person is acting in accordance with the approval, including all conditions. (Ord. 2925 Att. A § 8, 2005)


8.06.090      Claims requirement.

(1)  Takings. The regulations of this chapter shall not be construed or applied so as to prevent all reasonable use of property and constitute a taking of property without just compensation. Any property owner who believes the regulations in this chapter as applied or facially constitute a taking shall petition the city council for relief as part of a timely appeal of any city action in which this chapter is applied. Any relief granted in an individual case shall constitute the minimum necessary to allow reasonable use of and to avoid a taking of the affected property. (Ord. 2925 Att. A § 9, 2005)


8.06.100      Enforcement/penalties.

A violation of the prohibitions contained in this chapter, including activities conducted inconsistent with exemptions or exceptions to the prohibitions contained herein shall be considered an "A" violation with the penalties defined for that term in ORS Chapter 153 adopted by reference by the city. Notwithstanding this penalty, knowing or intentional violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be class C misdemeanor offenses with the penalties defined for that term in ORS Chapter 161 adopted by reference by the city. Restoration shall be required in addition to any other sanction. A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be considered a separate offense for each day the violation continues. In addition to city police, city employees designated as enforcement officers, pursuant to city nuisance code or other health and safety ordinance, may issue citations to municipal court for the violations described herein. (Ord. 2925 Att. A § 10, 2005)


Chapter 8.08 LARGE ASSEMBLIES

Sections:

8.08.010    Purpose.

8.08.020    Definitions.

8.08.030    Permit required.

8.08.040    Exemptions.

8.08.050    Permit applications.

8.08.060    Standards for issuance.

8.08.070    Permit provisions – Restrictions.

8.08.080    Characteristics of permit.

8.08.090    Inspection.

8.08.100    Revocation of permit.

8.08.110    Indemnity.

8.08.120    Appeal.

8.08.130    Offenses.

8.08.140    Penalties.

8.08.150    Additional remedy.


8.08.010 Purpose. 

This chapter is enacted primarily for the purpose of regulating public assemblies, which can create potentially hazardous and nuisance conditions such as excessive traffic, noise, problems of solid waste disposal, sanitation concerns, a need for increased fire and police protection, and other conditions that pose a threat to public health, safety and welfare. The public’s interest is served by ensuring that public assembly permits are issued according to specific and objective standards that make public areas accessible to all. (Ord. 3065 § 1, 2008)


8.08.020 Definitions.

(1) “Applicant” means any person, group, company, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or organization of any kind seeking a public assembly permit.

(2) “Assembly” includes all assemblies of the public of 50 or more people gathered either indoors or outdoors at a city park or upon public property within, or owned by, the city of St. Helens.

(3) “Building department” means the city of St. Helens building department.

(4) “Chief of police” means and refers to the police chief of the city of St. Helens, or any agent, employee, or designee authorized to perform the duties of this chapter by the chief of police.

(5) “City” means the city of St. Helens, Oregon.

(6) “City administrator” means the person holding the position of city administrator or any agent, employee, or designee authorized to perform the duties of this chapter by the city administrator. 

(7) “City council” means the St. Helens city council.

(8) “City recorder” means the person holding the position of city recorder.

(9) “Fire chief” means the person holding the position of fire chief for the Columbia River Fire and Rescue District, or any agent, employee, or designee authorized to perform the duties of this chapter by the fire chief.

(10) “Hearings officer” means the city council, or an outside party not affiliated with the city that is hired or selected to conduct an appeals proceeding.

(11) “Person” means any person, group, company, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or organization of any kind.

(12) “Planning department” means the city of St. Helens planning department.

(13) “Public property” means and refers to all property owned by or under the control of a public body.

(14) “Structures” means a building, tent, stadium, or enclosure. (Ord. 3065 § 2, 2008)


8.08.030 Permit required. 

It shall be unlawful for any person to allow, promote, conduct or cause to be advertised an assembly without a valid public assembly permit when said person believes or has reason to believe that 50 or more persons will attend the event. Criminal or civil liability for failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall rest with all persons who are responsible for failing to obtain permits under this provision. (Ord. 3065 § 3, 2008)


8.08.040 Exemptions. 

This chapter shall not apply to the following:

(1) Any regular organized and supervised school district activity or program that takes place on school property;

(2) Any activity of a municipal corporation or governmental agency; and

(3) Recognized boating and yachting organization activities specifically exempted in Chapter 8.28 SHMC. (Ord. 3065 § 4, 2008)


8.08.050 Permit applications.

(1) The applicant for a public assembly permit shall provide the information required on the city’s public assembly permit application at least 30 days prior to the date the permit is requested to be effective. The application shall be signed by the applicant, include all necessary attachments, and include the nonrefundable permit application fee as set by resolution of the city council. Incomplete applications shall not be processed.

(2) Prior to submitting the public assembly permit application, the applicant must obtain written approval from the appropriate agencies and/or departments that satisfactory arrangements have been made by the applicant to comply with the standards for issuance pursuant to SHMC 8.08.060. No permit shall be issued unless the respective agencies and/or departments have approved the application as to each condition.

(3) The applicant shall provide any supplemental information requested by any agency and/or department required for the agency and/or department to make a recommendation as to whether the application should be approved or denied. (Ord. 3065 § 5, 2008)


8.08.060 Standards for issuance.

A public assembly permit application may be reviewed and issued by the city administrator after a finding by him that the applicant has complied with the standards for issuance enumerated in this section.

(1) Fire Protection Standards and Medical Services. The applicant must submit a sketch of the assembly location that includes the location of all fire protection devices and any medical supplies or services that will be available during the event. No permit shall be granted unless the fire chief has approved: (a) fire protection devices and equipment available at, in or near structures where more than 10 persons may congregate during the event, and (b) the applicant’s plans for medical service and/or the availability and location of medical supplies at the assembly. The fire chief may require an assembly to have an ambulance and/or a first aid station staffed by individuals trained in first aid techniques when he/she deems it necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.

(2) Public Safety. The applicant must submit written plans for public safety at the assembly to the chief of police for his approval. The chief of police shall determine the number of traffic control and crowd control personnel reasonably necessary to protect the health, peace, safety and welfare of the public and shall notify the applicant of his determination. The applicant shall contract for, or otherwise provide, traffic control and crowd control personnel to meet the requirements set by the chief of police. The applicant shall submit the names and background information for all traffic control and crowd control personnel to the chief of police for his investigation. All such personnel must meet the following minimum standards in order to be approved as suitable by the chief of police. All public safety personnel must:

(a) Not have any felony convictions or misdemeanor convictions involving moral turpitude;

(b) Have received reasonable minimum training in law enforcement, have on-the-job experience in law enforcement, or experience in flagging for traffic control.

All of said policing personnel must wear an appropriate identifying uniform and must be on duty during the entire assembly unless a relief schedule has been planned and approved by the chief of police that maintains the minimum strength requirements set for the assembly. It shall be the duty of the policing personnel to report any violation of the law to the chief of police and to take whatever action that can be reasonably expected of them to enforce the law. 

(3) Sanitary Facilities. The applicant must submit a sketch of the assembly location and detailed information showing the type, number and location, or proposed location, of all toilets, washing facilities, water supply facilities, food preparation and food service facilities. The city administrator shall review and approve the proposed sanitation and related facilities to ensure that reasonable minimum standards will be met by the applicant. The applicant must provide the following:

(a) Containers for refuse and solid waste storage at a minimum ratio of one 30-gallon container for solid waste disposal for each 16 persons or fraction thereof anticipated or one cubic yard of container capacity for each 125 persons or fraction thereof anticipated; 

(b) One permanent or chemical toilet for each 115 persons or fraction thereof anticipated; and

(c) If food is to be sold at the event, someone overseeing the sale of the food must have a food handler’s permit, and if food is purchased from a caterer to be supplied at the event, the caterer must have a food handler’s permit. If the food preparation and/or disbursement situation warrants further approval by the appropriate governmental authority, as determined by the city administrator, the applicant shall get such approval in writing.

The approval given by the city administrator may indicate the number, type and location of toilets, washing, and water supply facilities when appropriate. All documents and approvals mentioned herein shall be submitted with the application.

(4) Insurance. The applicant must submit proof of insurance with the application for approval. The insurance policy shall name the city, its officers, employees, and agents as additional insured parties and the policy shall contain liability insurance coverage in the amount of $1,000,000. The insurance policy shall protect against loss from liability on account of bodily injury and property damage arising from the event. 

(5) Temporary Buildings or Structures. The applicant shall submit plans approved by the planning department and/or building department, whichever is applicable, when any type of structure is required. Preliminary approval may be granted by the planning department and/or building department structures upon specific plans proposed and submitted by the applicant. All such structures shall be in existence five or more days before the assembly for which an application is submitted and shall be subject to inspection by the building department. Should the actual structure fail to meet the standards approved in the proposed plans, such preliminary approval shall be withdrawn, and all permits granted subject to such approval shall be withdrawn.

(6) Parking Facilities. The applicant shall provide the chief of police with a scale drawing showing that adequate parking facilities have been made available within or adjacent to the location for which the permit is requested. Such parking facilities shall provide parking space for one vehicle for every four persons expected or reasonably expected to attend said event. If buses are to be used to transport the public to the assembly, it shall be shown that public parking as described above is available at any site within the city from which buses are scheduled to pick up persons to transport them to the assembly.

(7) Multiple Applicants. No public assembly permit application for the same time and location will be granted if an application has already been received for that date and location, unless multiple applicants can reasonably be accommodated. (Ord. 3065 § 6, 2008)


8.08.070 Permit provisions – Restrictions.

(1) Hours of Operation. No assembly shall be conducted in or upon public property during the time between 30 minutes after sunset on the first day, and 30 minutes before sunrise on the next day, unless otherwise specified in the permit.

(2) Intoxicating Liquor. No person sponsoring an assembly, nor any person having control thereof, shall permit anyone to bring intoxicating liquor into, or upon the premises of the assembly, nor permit intoxicating liquor to be consumed on the premises unless specifically allowed in the permit. If intoxicating liquor is to be sold at the assembly, the applicant must apply for and enter into a concession agreement with the city.

(3) Disputes. When a dispute arises between the parties as to the number of persons anticipated to attend the assembly, the decision of the city administrator shall be final and controlling.

(4) Conditions, Rules and Regulations. The applicant, its agents, and employees shall comply with all applicable federal, state, county, and local laws, as well as with any conditions, rules, and regulations included in this chapter and the public assembly application. (Ord. 3065 § 7, 2008)


8.08.080 Characteristics of permit.

(1) Nontransferable. A permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be transferred or assigned without the city administrator’s consent to the transfer or assignment.

(2) Revocable. A license issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked as provided in SHMC 8.08.100. (Ord. 3065 § 8, 2008)


8.08.090 Inspection. 

The chief of police and the city administrator shall have the right to go upon the public premises or public facilities for which the permit has been granted for the purpose of inspection and enforcement of this chapter and all federal, state, and local laws. (Ord. 3065 § 9, 2008)


8.08.100 Revocation of permit. 

If any assembly is not being operated in accordance with the rules and regulations set forth herein, the city shall have the right to revoke the permit, and the applicant or other responsible individual shall be subject to such other punishment as the law and this chapter provides. (Ord. 3065 § 10, 2008)


8.08.110 Indemnity.

(1) The applicant shall indemnify and save the city harmless of and from any and all damages or claims of any kind or nature caused directly or indirectly from the applicant’s use of the public property for the assembly.

(2) Should the assembly necessitate the deployment of additional personnel by the city, such added expense shall be recoverable from the applicant. (Ord. 3065 § 11, 2008)


8.08.120 Appeal. 

Any person aggrieved by the city administrator’s decision to deny or revoke their public assembly permit may appeal such action to a hearings officer through the following procedures: 

(1) A person appealing the city administrator’s action shall, within 10 days of such action and notice, file a written notice of appeal with the city recorder. The written notice shall include: the name and address of the appellant, the nature of the decision being appealed, the reason(s) the original decision is alleged to be incorrect, and the result the appellant desires on appeal. 

(2) The city recorder shall fix the time for the appeal to be heard by the hearings officer, place the hearing of the appeal upon the calendar of the hearings officer, and notify the appellant of the time fixed no less than five days prior to that time. 

(3) The appellant shall pay a nonrefundable appeals fee to facilitate the appeal.

(4) The appellant shall be entitled to appear personally and by counsel and to present such facts and arguments as may tend to support his appeal. 

(5) The hearings officer shall take such action upon the appeal as he sees fit and such action by the hearings officer shall be final. 

(6) The action of the city administrator shall be stayed pending the outcome of an appeal properly filed pursuant to this section. 

(7) Failure to strictly comply with the applicable appeal requirements, including but not limited to the required elements for the written notice of appeal, time for filing, and payment of the applicable appeal fee, as listed in the miscellaneous fee schedule, shall constitute jurisdictional defects resulting in the summary dismissal of the appeal.

If the appellant loses on appeal, the appellant will be held financially responsible for the cost to the city of the appeal, including but not limited to the hiring of the hearings officer. (Ord. 3065 § 12, 2008)


8.08.130 Offenses.

The following rules and regulations shall govern and control the use of all public property:

(1) No fire shall be built, lit or maintained within a city park or upon public property except in a camp stove or a fireplace provided, maintained or designated for such purpose; excepting however, that gasoline, alcohol or oil camp stoves may be used in established camp sites or picnic areas where other stoves are provided. No fire shall be left unattended, and all fires shall be extinguished by the user before leaving the park or public property.

(2) No person shall erect signs, markers or inscriptions of any type in a park or upon public property of the city without permission of the city administrator.

(3) No person, while in a city park or upon public property, may operate a concession, either fixed or mobile, or engage in the business of soliciting, selling or peddling any liquids or eatables for human consumption, or distribute circulars, or hawk, peddle or vend any goods, wares or merchandise without permission of the city administrator.

(4) No dogs or other pets shall be allowed in a city park or upon public property unless said animals are confined in a vehicle or kept on a leash. No animals shall be allowed in any city buildings except for the following exemptions:

(a) Service dogs;

(b) Dogs participating in the “Read to Dogs” program at the library; and

(c) Dogs being licensed at City Hall.

(5) No bottles, cans, ashes, waste, paper, garbage or other rubbish shall be left in a city park or upon public property except in the receptacles designated for that purpose.

(6) Automobiles, trailers or other vehicles shall be parked only in designated parking areas.

(7) No person shall set up or use a public address system or use any noise-producing machine, vehicle, device or instrument in a city park or upon public property without the permission of the chief of police as required in SHMC 8.16.050 and payment of the amplification fee.

(8) No person shall ride, drive, lead or keep a horse or other animal in a city park or upon public property except upon such roads, trails or areas designated for that purpose.

(9) No person shall ride, drive or operate any motorcycle, motor bike, motor scooter or trail bike in a city park or upon public property except upon such roads, trails or areas designated for that purpose. (Ord. 3065 § 13, 2008)


8.08.140 Penalties.

A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or the rules, regulations, or restrictions in the permit or permit application shall constitute a Class C misdemeanor. (Ord. 3065 § 14, 2008)


8.08.150 Additional remedy. 

Failure to comply with the terms and conditions of this chapter, the permit, or the permit application shall constitute a public nuisance and shall be subject to all criminal, civil and equitable remedies as such. The conviction of any person for a violation of any provision of this chapter shall not operate to relieve such person from paying any fee or penalty thereupon for which such person shall be liable, nor shall the payment of any such fee be a bar to, or prevent any prosecution in, the St. Helens municipal court, of any complaint for the violation of any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 3065 § 15, 2008)


Chapter 8.12 NUISANCES

Sections:

Article I. Definitions

8.12.010    Definitions.

Article II. Animals

8.12.020    Repealed.

8.12.030    Repealed.

8.12.040    Repealed.

Article III. Nuisances Affecting the Public Health

8.12.050    Nuisances affecting the public health.

Article IV. Nuisances Affecting the Public Safety

8.12.060    Abandoned ice boxes.

8.12.070    Attractive nuisances.

8.12.080    Obstructions in passageways.

8.12.082    Sidewalk vendors.

8.12.090    Trees, shrubs and weeds.

8.12.100    Scattering rubbish and debris.

8.12.110    Repealed.

8.12.120    Fences.

8.12.130    Surface waters, drainage.

8.12.140    Snow and ice removal.

8.12.150    Junk.

8.12.160    Radio and television interference.

8.12.170    Superseded.

8.12.180    Repealed.

8.12.190    Regulating fires.

8.12.200    Notices and advertisements.

8.12.210    General nuisance.

8.12.212    Visual clearance area.

Article V. Abatement Procedure

8.12.220    Abatement procedures.

8.12.230    Summary abatement.

8.12.240    Special abatement.

8.12.250    General abatement.

8.12.260    Citation procedure.

8.12.270    Separate violations.

8.12.280    Penalties.

8.12.290    Inspections – Right of entry.

Article I. Definitions


8.12.010 Definitions.

(1) As used in this chapter, except where the context indicates otherwise, the following shall mean:

(a) “Person in charge of property” means any owner, agent, lessee, contract purchaser, or other person having the possession or control of property.

(b) “City” means the city of St. Helens.

(c) “Council” means the governing body of the city.

(d) “Nuisance” means any violation of any provision of this chapter.

(e) “Person” means every natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation.

(f) “Premises” means real property located in the city, including submerged lands, regardless of the ownership form, together with any and all buildings and structures located thereon, including floating structures, as well as more transient personal property where nuisance material or conditions may accumulate or occur such as vehicles, barges, or open storage vessels located on the property.

(g) “Public place” means any building, place or accommodations, whether publicly or privately owned, open and available to the public.

(h) “Temporary parklet” means the use of a vehicle space (e.g., on-street parking space) or curb extension for public use, social interaction, and passive or active recreation. Temporary parklets in an on-street parking space are typically comprised of a platform, barriers to traffic, and seating, yet creativity in incorporating landscaping, art, and other elements is encouraged, given safety requirements are met. The duration of temporary parklets and the design vary accordingly. See SHMC 18.12.190.

(2) As used in this chapter, the singular includes the plural and the masculine includes the feminine. (Ord. 3181 § 4 (Att. C), 2015; Ord. 2974 § 1, 2005; Ord. 2146 § 1, 1976)

Article II. Animals


8.12.020 Repealed.

Repealed by Ord. 2760. (Ord. 2146 § 2, 1976)


8.12.030 Repealed.

Repealed by Ord. 2294. (Ord. 2146 § 3, 1976)


8.12.040 Repealed.

Repealed by Ord. 2760. (Ord. 2146 § 4, 1976)

Article III. Nuisances Affecting the Public Health


8.12.050 Nuisances affecting the public health.

The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting the public health, and no person shall permit such nuisances to exist or be maintained upon the property of which he is in charge:

(1) Privies. Any open vault or privy maintained within the city, except those privies used in connection with construction projects or temporarily authorized by the city and constructed in accordance with the Oregon State Health Division regulations.

(2) Debris on Private Property. All accumulations of debris, trash, garbage, rubbish, manure and other refuse located on private property or sidewalks abutting thereon, and which has not been removed within a reasonable time and which is unsightly or which affects the health, safety or welfare of the city.

(3) Stagnant Water. Any pool of water, which is without a proper inlet or outlet and which, if not controlled, would be a breeding place for mosquitoes and other similar insects.

(4) Water Pollution. The pollution of any body of water or stream or river by sewage, industrial wastes or other substances placed in or near such water in a manner that will cause harmful material to pollute the water.

(5) Food. All decayed or unwholesome food which is offered for human consumption.

(6) Odor. Any premises which are in such state or condition as to cause a nuisance or offensive odor, which are in an unsanitary condition, or upon which animal or vegetable products or substances are rendered, heated, steamed or burned in such manner as to cause or permit the escape of offensive odors. (Ord. 2146 § 5, 1976)

Article IV. Nuisances Affecting the Public Safety


8.12.060 Abandoned ice boxes.

No person shall leave in any place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded ice box, refrigerator or similar container which has an airtight door with a snap lock or lock or other mechanism which may not be released for opening from the inside without first removing such snap lock or door from such ice box, refrigerator or similar container. (Ord. 2146 § 6, 1976)


8.12.070 Attractive nuisances.

(1) No person in charge of any premises shall permit:

(a) To remain unguarded upon said premises any machinery, automobile bodies or parts thereof, equipment, structures, buildings or other devices having the characteristic of an attractive nuisance or which is liable to attract children.

(b) The piling of any lumber, logs or piling in such a manner as to be attractive and dangerous to children and which is accessible to children.

(c) To remain unguarded or accessible to children any pit, quarry, cistern, well, swimming pool, or other excavation.

(2) The provisions of this section shall not apply to authorized construction projects; provided, that during the course of construction reasonable safeguards are maintained to prevent injury or death to playing children. (Ord. 2449 § 1, 1983; Ord. 2146 § 7, 1976)


8.12.080 Obstructions in passageways.

(1) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to identify objects prohibited from being placed in the sidewalks, streets, and other public rights-of-way, and to ensure that any objects not prohibited that are placed on sidewalks, streets, and other public rights-of-way are appropriately located, are compatible with surrounding allowed uses, and are conducive to the public health, safety, and welfare. Another purpose of this section is for enhancement and beautification of the commercial areas.

(2) Definitions and General Notes.

(a) “Sidewalk furniture” includes items placed in the public sidewalk by businesses for incidental use by their customers while patronizing said business, and includes but is not limited to:

(i) Chairs.

(ii) Flower boxes.

(iii) Tables.

(iv) Umbrellas.

(v) Lights.

(vi) Heaters.

(vii) Street clocks.

(viii) Trash cans and ashtrays.

(ix) Shelving for merchandise.

(x) Devices to hang merchandise.

(xi) Any other fixture or furnishing deemed to be similar by the council-designated person.

(b) Sidewalk furniture does not include signs which are regulated by another ordinance.

(c) Objects and furniture used by street vendors are covered by another ordinance.

(d) Public utilities, authorized public agencies, and other organizations recognized by the city council are not restricted by this section.

(e) No advertising on sidewalk furniture, benches or planters.

(f) Sidewalk furniture shall not interfere with parking of vehicles in street rights-of-way unless permitted as part of a “temporary parklet” through permitting procedures referred to in subsection (6) of this section. Interference shall be determined by the city engineer and city manager/administrator and shall generally mean that vehicles that have access to painted lines and/or wheel stops shall be allowed to use them.

(3) Planter Boxes. Planter boxes may be allowed on sidewalks and passageways lying within street rights-of-way in accordance with the following:

(a) “Planter box” is defined as a container with a display of landscape plant material, excluding city-approved and/or installed street trees.

(b) A planter box shall be clean and the plants well-maintained.

(c) It is the responsibility of the permittee to position the planter box to provide an unobstructed passageway on the sidewalk in compliance with Americans with Disabilities Act Administrative Guidelines (ADAAG).

(d) A planter box shall be located in the planter/landscape strip, in a curb extension, or against the building within the front yard setback as established by zone in Chapter 17.32 SHMC.

(e) A planter box shall be positioned to not obstruct any entrances or exits to buildings or to legally parked vehicles.

(f) A planter box shall not be placed on a corner, except on a corner with a curb extension and located in a manner consistent with the city’s visual clearance area requirements in Chapter 17.76 SHMC or SHMC 8.12.212.

(g) There shall be no fee or permit required for a planter box.

(4) Merchandise. Merchandise, owned by the merchant abutting the area where displayed, may be displayed on sidewalks and passageways lying within street rights-of-way in accordance with the following:

(a) Shelves used to display merchandise of any character, including but not limited to groceries, vegetables, and products, must be a stable status, must not block normal flow of users and must at least comply with American with Disabilities Act Administrative Guidelines (ADAAG).

(b) Shelves must be removed no later than sunset each evening and cannot be set up again until at least sunrise the next morning.

(i) Merchandise may be displayed on sidewalks in front of/abutting a properly approved and licensed commercial enterprise or business in commercial zones as long as they meet the following standards:

(A) Location shall not interfere with pedestrian rights to travel on the city sidewalk; and

(B) Merchandise shall be secured against being blown away; and

(C) Merchandise shall not be more than six feet from the building frontage, except when permitted as part of a “temporary parklet” in a curb extension or in an on-street parking space pursuant to permit procedures referred to in subsection (6) of this section; and

(D) Merchandise shall be removed from the sidewalk during hours when business is closed.

(ii) There shall be no fee required for display of merchandise on the sidewalk.

(iii) The provisions of this section do not apply to the delivery of merchandise or equipment. No person may permit such delivered merchandise or equipment to remain on a street or sidewalk beyond a reasonable time.

(5) Tables, Chairs, and Equipment Associated with the Serving of Food and Beverages. Tables, chairs, and equipment associated with the serving of food and beverages are permitted on sidewalks and passageways and in on-street parking spaces lying within street rights-of-way in accordance with the following requirements and permitting procedures referred to in subsection (6) of this section:

(a) The tables, chairs, and equipment are for the purpose of serving food and beverages and for the comfort of patrons to a particular business.

(b) The business is required to keep the area occupied by the tables, chairs, and equipment clean and well-maintained.

(c) All tables, chairs, and other equipment associated with the serving of food and beverages must be stored next to the building daily at the close of the business for which they are associated and at least five feet of unobstructed sidewalk must be maintained from sunset to sunrise, or if the area where the furniture is located is well-lit and secure and does not present a danger to the public or block required accessways and pathways, then it can remain in place at all times (not permanently attached to the public sidewalks but can be secured against theft in a temporary manner, such as a lock and/or chain).

(d) It is the responsibility of the permittee to position the table and chairs to provide an unobstructed passageway at all times on the sidewalk in compliance with Americans with Disabilities Act Administrative Guidelines (ADAAG).

(e) Umbrellas, heaters, and such tall equipment shall not interfere with pedestrians below a height of seven feet on a sidewalk.

(f) The smoking rules still apply as to proximity to the entrance of a business.

(g) Short fences, not over three feet in height, may be used to delineate seating areas for restaurants and such users of tables and chairs in the rights-of-way where the furniture is not required to be moved inside each sunset.

(h) These rules shall not override more restrictive rules such as building codes and federal or state laws.

(6) Permit Requirements. Use of sidewalks and passageways lying within street rights-of-way described in this section shall be in accordance with the following:

(a) Before use of a sidewalk area, a use of public passageway permit application with the required fee, as set by resolution of the city council, must be submitted to the council-designated person. The permit fee shall apply to all furniture for a single business at one location and shall not be charged on each individual component. The permit shall be valid for one year and shall expire on the last day of a year. A permit is not required for a planter box or approved bench.

(b) The permittee is liable in damages to a person injured upon a sidewalk because of the permittee’s fault or negligence in the placement or condition of obstructions placed upon such sidewalk by the permittee.

(c) The permittee is responsible for compliance with Americans with Disabilities Act Administrative Guidelines (ADAAG) concerning the placement or condition of obstructions placed upon such sidewalk by the permittee.

(d) Additional guidance for designing and permitting temporary park-let in on-street parking spaces is provided in SHMC 18.12.190. This is separate from the use of public passageway permit noted previously in this subsection. Generally, the use of public passageway permit applies to use of sidewalks and passageways and the temporary parklet permit applies to use of on-street parking spaces.

(7) Other Obstructions. No person may deposit earth, gravel, debris or any other materials of any nature on a street or sidewalk, except as otherwise authorized by the regulations of the city.

(8) Recreational Equipment. No person may place any recreational equipment on, in or over a street, sidewalk, or other public right-of-way. For the purposes of this subsection, recreational equipment shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

(a) Basketball backboards, hoops, nets and any related supporting apparatus;

(b) Soccer, lacrosse, hockey, or any other goal post or goal structure;

(c) Skateboard, bicycle, rollerblade or other sports-related ramps or structures; and

(d) Any other recreational equipment or apparatus that prevents, interrupts, and obstructs the travel or free passage of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, or that otherwise interferes with the provision of city services, including, but not limited to, the unimpeded operation of the storm water collection system or street sweeping.

(9) Enforcement. In addition to any other method of enforcement available to the city, the provisions of this section may be enforced by the issuance of citations by code enforcement officers duly appointed pursuant to St. Helens codes. (Ord. 3181 § 4 (Att. C), 2015; Ord. 3162 § 1, 2012; Ord. 3080 § 1, 2008; Ord. 3039 § 2, 2007)


8.12.082 Sidewalk vendors.

(1) Conducting a Business on City Sidewalks Is Unlawful without a Permit. No person shall conduct business as herein defined on any city sidewalk without first obtaining a permit from the city administrator and paying the required fee. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell any goods or services on any sidewalk within the city of St. Helens except as provided by these rules.

(2) Definitions.

(a) “City administrator” means the person holding the position of city administrator or any agent, employee, or designee authorized to perform the duties of this section by the city administrator.

(b) “Commercial zone” means abutting property which is zoned commercial pursuant to SHMC Title 17, Community Development Code, or any other zone which may be created as a successor zone to such existing commercial zones.

(c) “Conduct business” means the act of selling or attempting to sell services, or edible or nonedible items for immediate delivery.

(d) “Permit operating area” means the sidewalk from the midpoint of one block face to the midpoint of an adjacent block face.

(e) “Sidewalk” means that portion of the right-of-way between the curb lines or the lateral lines of a roadway (paved improvement) and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.

(f) “Special event” means an event specifically approved by an individual ordinance or permit granting use of street and sidewalk areas within a specifically defined area for a period of time not exceeding 10 days.

(3) Items for Sale.

(a) All items or services to be sold must:

(i) Be vended from a regulation size vending cart;

(ii) Not lead to or cause congestion or blocking of pedestrian traffic on the sidewalk;

(iii) Involve a short transaction period to complete the sale or render the service;

(iv) Not cause undue noise or offensive odors;

(v) Be easily carried by pedestrians.

Requests to have an item or service considered for approval shall be submitted in writing to the city administrator, who shall determine whether the item or service conforms to the above criteria. If the item or service conforms to the above criteria, it shall be listed as approved for sale by sidewalk vendors. If the item or service does not conform, it shall be listed as prohibited for sale by sidewalk vendors. The decision of the city administrator, if adverse to the applicant’s request, may be appealed to the council.

(4) Permit Fee. Each application for a permit to conduct business on a sidewalk shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth by resolution. The application fee is nonrefundable and additional to the permit fee. The permit fee, as set by resolution, shall be collected prior to issuance of the permit. Permits renewed prior to expiration do not require an application fee. Permits renewed after the expiration will be treated like a new application. Application for a permit to conduct business on a sidewalk shall be made at the office of the city administrator on a form deemed appropriate by the city administrator. Such application shall include but not be limited to the following information:

(a) Name and address of the applicant.

(b) The number and expiration date of applicant’s city business license.

(c) Type of items sold or services rendered. Individual applications shall be accepted for one type of product or service only.

(d) A valid copy of all necessary permits required by state or local health authorities.

(e) A signed statement that the permittee shall hold harmless the city of St. Helens, its officers and employees and shall indemnify the city of St. Helens, its officers and employees for any claims for damage to property or injury to persons which may be occasioned by any activity carried on under the terms of the permit. Permittee shall furnish and maintain such public liability, food products liability, and property damage insurance as will protect permittee, property owners, and city from all claims for damage to property or bodily injury, including death, which may arise from operations under the permit or in connection therewith. Such insurance shall provide coverage of not less than $100,000 for bodily injury for each person, $300,000 for each occurrence and not less than $300,000 for property damage per occurrence. Such insurance shall be without prejudice to coverage otherwise existing therein, and shall name as additional insured the city of St. Helens, their officers and employees, and shall further provide that the policy shall not terminate or be canceled prior to the completion of the contract without 30 days’ written notice to the city administrator of the city of St. Helens.

(f) Means to be used in conducting business including but not limited to a description of any mobile container or device, to be used for transport or to display approved items or services.

(g) A separate application shall be required for each mobile container or device to be used for transportation or display.

(h) The proposed location for conducting business and the written consent of the property owner(s) adjacent to the permit operating area, along with a signed statement that permittee shall hold harmless the adjacent property owner(s) for any claims for damage to property or injury to persons which may be occasioned by any activity carried on or under the permit. This consent and hold harmless statement must be submitted on a form deemed appropriate by the city administrator. No application shall apply to more than one location. No application will be accepted for a permit operating area within which a current permit has been issued or an application is pending.

(i) No food vendor application will be accepted for a permit operating area where a restaurant or fruit and vegetable market, with direct access to the sidewalk, is adjacent or within 100 feet on the same block. No application will be accepted for a flower vendor for a permit operating area where a flower shop, with direct access to the sidewalk, is adjacent or within 100 feet on the same block. The above requirement may be waived if the application is submitted with the written consent of the proprietor of the restaurant, fruit and vegetable market or flower shop. The consent must be submitted on a form deemed appropriate by the city administrator.

(5) Location Selection.

(a) Permit operating areas which have not been issued a current permit shall be available only upon receipt of the written consent of the property owner(s) adjacent to the permit operating area.

(b) No vendor or vending business may obtain permits for adjacent permit operating areas on the same block.

(c) The city administrator may establish an additional permit operating area on a block face which exceeds 300 feet in length.

(6) Location Review. Upon receipt of an application for a permit the city administrator shall review the proposed permit operating area to determine if the said area is suitable for sidewalk vending. In making this determination, the city administrator shall consider the following criteria:

(a) The permit operating area must be within a commercial zone.

(b) The use of the permit operating area for sidewalk vending must be compatible with the public interest in use of the sidewalk areas as public right-of-way. In making such determination the city administrator shall consider the width of sidewalk, the proximity and location of existing street furniture, including, but not limited to, signposts, lamp posts, parking meters, bus shelters, benches, phone booths, street trees, and newsstands, as well as the presence of bus stops, truck loading zones, taxi stands, or hotel zones to determine whether the proposed use would result in pedestrian or street congestion.

(c) The city administrator shall inform the applicant whether the proposed permit operating area is suitable or unsuitable. In the event the applicant is dissatisfied with the city administrator’s decision regarding a certain application, the applicant may appeal the decision to the councilor in charge. The decision of the councilor, if adverse to the applicant or any notified party, may be appealed to the city council. Appeals to the council shall be in writing and submitted with the appeal fee as set forth by resolution, to cover staff’s time in preparing a report. Appeals shall be heard at the council’s work session as time permits.

(7) Payment for Written Consent Is Unlawful. No person or corporation shall either pay or accept payment for written consent required for the issuance or continued operation of a sidewalk vending permit.

(8) Design Review. The applicant for a sidewalk vendor permit shall submit detailed scale drawings of the device to be used, material specifications, and an isometric drawing of at least two views showing all four sides of the vending device. Vending devices shall be measured by the city administrator prior to the issuance of a permit or the renewal of a permit to ensure compliance with this section.

(9) Fire Marshal Inspection. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the fire marshal shall inspect and approve any mobile device or pushcart to assure the conformance of any cooking or heating apparatus with the provisions of the city fire code.

(10) Application Time Limit. The applicant must complete all reviews, inspections and present all required documents to the city administrator within 60 days from date of location approval. Failure to meet this requirement shall result in cancellation of the application and forfeiture of the application fee. The city administrator may extend this time limit, upon written request, if there is a reasonable need.

(11) Form and Condition of Permit. The permit issued shall be in a form deemed suitable by the city administrator. In addition to naming the permittee and other information deemed appropriate by the city administrator, the permit shall contain the following conditions:

(a) Each permit will expire at midnight on the three hundred sixty-fifth day after the permit was issued.

(b) The permit issued is not transferable in any manner.

(c) The permit is valid only when used at the permit operating area designated on the permit. The permit operating area may be changed by submitting a new letter of consent accompanied by an additional application fee.

(d) The permit is valid for one cart only.

(e) The location within the permit operating area may be changed, either temporarily or permanently, by written notice of the city administrator.

(f) The permit is subject to the further restrictions of this section.

(g) The permit as it applies to a given permit operating area may be suspended by the council for a period up to 10 days when an ordinance providing for a community event shall so provide.

(12) Renewal of Permits. Permits must be renewed prior to expiration, and a renewal application must be completed and signed by the applicant, and submitted to the city administrator at least 30 days prior to expiration. Application shall be on a form deemed suitable to the city administrator, accompanied by a permit fee. Applications received after their expiration shall be processed as new applications. The city administrator shall review each application to determine that:

(a) Any required consent has not been withdrawn.

(b) The applicant has a currently effective insurance policy in the minimum amount provided in subsection (4)(e) of this section.

(c) All required permits are current.

(d) The cart size is in conformance with this section. If the city administrator finds that the application meets all the above requirements, a new permit may be issued.

(13) Restrictions.

(a) Any person conducting business on the sidewalks of the city of St. Helens with a valid permit issued under this section may transport and/or display approved items or services upon any mobile device or pushcart, under or subject to the following conditions:

(i) The operating area shall not exceed 24 square feet of sidewalk which shall include the area of the mobile device or pushcart and, when externally located, the operator and trash receptacle.

(ii) The length of the mobile device or pushcart shall not exceed six feet.

(iii) The height of the mobile device or pushcart, excluding canopies, umbrellas, or transparent enclosures, shall not exceed five feet.

(b) No person may conduct business on a sidewalk in any of the following places:

(i) Within 10 feet of the intersection of the sidewalk with any other sidewalk except that the city administrator may waive this restriction in writing for any location upon finding that construction of extra-width sidewalks makes such use consistent with the standards established by subsection (6) of this section.

(ii) Within eight feet of the adjacent property line.

(iii) Within 10 feet of the extension of any building entrance or doorway, to the curb line.

(iv) Within 10 feet of any handicapped parking space or access ramp.

(c) All persons conducting business on a sidewalk must display in a prominent and visible manner the permit issued by the city administrator under the provisions of this section and conspicuously post the price of all items sold.

(d) All persons conducting business on a sidewalk must pick up any paper, cardboard, wood or plastic containers, wrappers, or any litter in any form which is deposited by any person on the sidewalk or street within 25 feet of the place of conducting business. Each person conducting business on a public sidewalk under the provisions of this section shall carry a suitable container for placement of such litter by customers or other persons.

(e) All persons conducting business on a sidewalk shall obey any lawful order of a police officer to move to a different permitted location to avoid congestion or obstruction of the sidewalk or remove their vending cart entirely from the sidewalk if necessary to avoid such congestion or obstruction.

(f) No person shall conduct business as defined herein at a location other than that designated on their permit.

(g) No permittee shall make any loud or unreasonable noise of any kind by vocalization or otherwise for the purpose of advertising or attracting attention to their wares.

(h) No permitted cart or device shall be left unattended on a sidewalk nor remain on the sidewalk between midnight and 6:00 a.m.

(i) No permittee shall conduct business in violation of the provisions of any ordinance providing for a special event.

(14) Special Event Designation. The special event designation allows vendors to conduct business on city sidewalks at special events that the city administrator shall so designate, subject to the following conditions:

(a) Application shall be made to the city administrator on a form deemed appropriate by the city administrator. Each application shall apply to only one event or parade. Application is open to any vendor who possesses a valid sidewalk vending permit. Each application shall be accompanied by:

(i) A fee as set by resolution.

(ii) The proposed location for conducting business along with the temporary written consent of the property owner(s) adjacent to the permit operating area. This temporary consent must be on a form deemed appropriate by the city administrator. No application will be accepted for a permit operating area within which a permit has been issued or an application is pending.

(b) Application must be made at least five working days prior to an event to qualify for participation.

(c) All temporary locations shall be on side streets adjacent to the event or parade.

(d) Temporary locations are valid only for the date and hours specified by the city administrator.

(e) All other conditions of this section, except as herein stated, shall remain in effect.

(15) Denial, Suspension or Revocation of Permit.

(a) The city administrator may revoke or suspend the permit, or deny either the issuance or renewal thereof, of any person to conduct business on the sidewalks of the city of St. Helens if he finds:

(i) That such person has violated or failed to meet any of the provisions of this section;

(ii) That the cart operation has become detrimental to surrounding businesses and/or the public, due to either appearance or condition of the cart;

(iii) Any required permit has been suspended, revoked or canceled; or

(iv) The permittee does not have a currently effective insurance policy in the minimum amount provided in this section.

(b) Upon denial, suspension or revocation, the city administrator shall give notice of such action to the permit holder or applicant, as the case may be, in writing stating the action he has taken and the reasons therefor. If the action of the city administrator is a revocation based on subsections (15)(a)(iii) and (a)(iv) of this section, the action shall be effective upon giving such notice to the permittee; otherwise such notice shall contain the further provision that it shall become final and effective within 10 days. Any revocation effective immediately may also be appealed to the council by such filing within 10 days. Any revocation, suspension or denial may be appealed to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city administrator within 10 days of receipt of notification.

(16) Appeal. The city recorder shall place the appeal on the council calendar at the first convenient opportunity therefor and shall notify the city administrator thereof. At the hearing upon appeal, the council shall hear all witnesses including the city administrator or their representative who shall state the grounds for this action, and the applicant or person whose permit has been revoked or suspended may supply testimony in writing by witnesses or otherwise and may question witnesses on their own behalf or on behalf of the city. The council shall hear and determine the appeal and the decision of the council shall be final and effective immediately.

(17) Penalties. A violation of any of the provisions of this section or the rules, regulations, or restrictions in the permit or permit application shall constitute a Class C misdemeanor. In the event that any provisions of this section are violated by a firm or corporation, the officer or officers, or the person or persons responsible for the violation shall be subject to the penalty herein provided.

(18) Abatement. The placement of any cart or device on any sidewalk in violation of the provisions of this section is declared to be a public nuisance. The city administrator may cause the removal of any cart or device found on a sidewalk in violation of this section and is authorized to store such cart or device until the owner thereof shall redeem it by paying the removal and storage charges therefor to be established by the council. If further abatement is necessary, the city shall follow procedures as outlined in Article V, Abatement Procedure, of this chapter. (Ord. 3109 § 2 (Att. A), 2009)


8.12.090 Trees, shrubs and weeds.

(1) No person in charge of property shall permit upon such property, or upon the sidewalk, parking strip or sidewalk area abutting such property, or in adjacent streets or alleys, any noxious weed or growth, or any brush, ferns, shrubs, or grass that are, or constitute, a fire hazard, a menace to public health or safety, or are unsightly.

(2) Street Tree Regulations.

(a) Definitions.

(i) “City forester” means the engineering manager of the city of St. Helens, Oregon, or his/her authorized agent.

(ii) “Tree” means a woody perennial plant having a single elongated main stem generally with few or no branches on its lower part.

(iii) “Shrub” means a low growing usually several-stemmed woody plant.

(iv) “Bush” means a low growing and densely branched woody plant.

(v) “Public tree” means a tree, shrub or bush located in rights-of-way, public easements, or other such areas owned by the city.

(vi) “Private tree” means a tree, shrub or bush located on private property other than a dedicated right-of-way, utility easement or public areas and grounds.

(vii) “Street tree” means a tree, shrub or bush on land lying within a dedicated right-of-way along either side of a street, avenue, or otherwise within a dedicated utility easement.

(viii) “Noxious species” means one that is physically harmful or destructive to living beings or public utilities and public investments.



(ix) “Immediate danger” means a situation that represents a hazard to life or property without interval of time.

(x) “Public places” means a location owned by the public, a dedicated right-of-way or public way and easement generally dedicated for utilities.

(xi) “Public improvement” means a change made with public money or by public employees. It can also happen with private money or private employees then be dedicated for public ownership or use.

(xii) “Utility” means a service such as sewer, electricity, water, storm drainage, gas, telephone or television provided by either a publicly owned company or privately owned company. If publicly owned, it is a public utility, and if privately owned, it is a private utility.

(b) City Forester.

(i) Established. There is established in the department of public works of the city the office of city forester. The director of public works, or his/her authorized agent, shall serve as city forester in the administration and enforcement of this section.

(ii) Scope. The city forester shall have exclusive jurisdiction and supervision over all trees and other plants planted or growing in public places and authority over all trees and other plants planted or growing in private places as hereinafter set forth.

(iii) Preserve or Remove. The city forester shall have the authority to oversee the planting, trimming, spraying with general notice, preservation and removal of trees and other plants in public places to ensure safety or preserve the symmetry and beauty of such public places.

(iv) Order to Preserve or Remove. The city forester shall have the authority to order the spraying with general notice, trimming, preservation or removal of trees or other plants upon private property when it is found that such action is necessary to protect the public safety or to prevent the spread of disease or insects to public trees and places.

(v) Supervision. The city forester shall have the authority to supervise all work done under the terms of this section.

(c) Creation of a Tree Committee.

(i) Established. There is hereby established a tree committee, and it is composed of the appointed members of the planning commission or such citizens of the city that the council shall see fit to appoint. The number and terms shall be the same as for the planning commission.

(ii) Scope. The committee shall study, investigate and develop, and/or update annually and administer a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, replanting, removal or disposition of street trees and public trees. The plan shall be presented to the city council and, upon their acceptance and approval, shall constitute the official comprehensive city tree program of the city of St. Helens, Oregon. The committee, when requested by the city council or the city forester, shall consider, investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any special matter or question coming within the scope of its work.

(iii) Tree List. The official St. Helens tree list of acceptable species of trees, shrubs and bushes shall be maintained by the committee and made available to the public as set forth by resolution. No person, without the written permission of the city, shall plant a street tree of a species other than those included on the list or approved by the city forester. As much as possible, street tree plantings for any one street will be restricted to a single species.

(d) Removal of Trees.

(i) Permission. No person shall remove trees from public places without first obtaining written permission from the city forester. Permission to remove trees from private property is not required unless otherwise provided in the St. Helens Municipal Code and/or development code. It is, however, advisable and prudent in many cases.

(ii) Approval. The city forester shall issue written permission provided he/she finds that the desired action or treatment is necessary and that the proposed method and workmanship is satisfactory.

(iii) Stumps. At the discretion of the city forester all stumps of street and public trees may be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground. The costs of removing stumps shall be borne by the city of St. Helens if the city is responsible for the tree removal and by others if they choose to remove a tree with the city’s permission.

(iv) Dangerous or Nuisance Trees.

(A) The city or utility may prune a private tree when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a street light, interferes with the visibility of any traffic control device or sign, or interferes with the safe and continued function of overhead and underground utilities.

(B) The city or utility may cause the removal of all or part of any dead, dangerous or diseased public or street tree when the tree constitutes a hazard to life, property within the public rights-of-way or easements, or harbors insects or disease which constitutes a potential threat to other trees within the city’s rights-of-way or easements.

(C) The city or utility may remove or trim a tree described in this section or may require the property owner to remove or trim any such tree on private property directly impacting public rights-of-way or property, or in a dedicated right-of-way or utility easement abutting upon the owner’s property. Failure of the property owner to remove or trim the tree within 30 days after receiving notice by the city forester is a violation of this section; the city or utility may then remove or trim the tree and may assess the costs as a lien against the property. Normally, trees in rights-of-way that are deemed necessary to be removed will be done by the city or by others chosen by the city and at the city’s expense.

(e) Planting of Trees.

(i) Replacement. The city may require the replacement by the abutting land owner, at the land owner’s expense, of a new tree after permission has been granted for the removal of an existing street tree.

(ii) Permission.

(A) No person shall plant or set out any tree in a public place without first obtaining written permission from the city forester.

(B) Before permission is granted to plant, the applicant shall state the number of trees to be planted or set out; the location, grade, and variety of each tree; the method of planting, including the supplying of suitable soil; and such other information as the city forester shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination of whether permission should be granted.

(iii) Spacing. The spacing of street trees shall be in accordance with the species, size, and classes listed in the official St. Helens street tree list, except in special plantings approved by the city forester.

(iv) Distance from Curb and Sidewalk. The distance the trees may be planted from curbs, or curb lines and sidewalks, shall be in accordance with the official St. Helens street tree list.

(v) Distance from Corners, Fireplugs. and Street Lights. No street trees shall be planted closer than 30 feet from any street corner, measured back from the point of the intersecting curbs or curb lines. No street trees shall be planted closer than 10 feet to any fireplug or 30 feet to any street light measured from the base of the street light. Vision clearance shall be provided as described in St. Helens’s land development and planning ordinance.

(vi) Distance from Utilities. Except with permission of the city forester, no street trees other than those species listed as in the list of acceptable species may be planted under or within 10 lateral feet of any overhead utility wire, and no street tree may be planted over or within six lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line, transmission line or other private utility. All digging, even for planting trees, must be preceded by underground locates.

(vii) Soil. No tree shall be planted where the soil is too poor to ensure the growth of such tree unless the owner excavates a suitable hole of not less than 36 inches and replaces the material removed with suitable loam or soil.

(viii) Noxious Species. In no case shall any tree which is deemed to be a noxious species be permitted to be planted anywhere in the city or grow in a manner which damages utilities or creates any hazard to life or property.

(f) Care of Trees.

(i) Authority. The city may plant, prune, maintain and remove public and street trees, as may be necessary to ensure public safety, or to preserve or enhance the appearance of public lands. The city may remove or cause to be removed a tree or part of a tree which is in an unsafe condition, which by reason of its nature is injurious to public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect, or pest. This section does not prohibit the planting of street trees by abutting property owners, providing that the selection, location, and planting of such trees is in accordance with the list of acceptable species, other applicable regulations, and other sections herein.

(ii) Topping. Except as provided by this subsection, it shall be unlawful as a normal practice of any person, firm or city department to top any street tree, public tree, or other tree on public property. “Topping” is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs or stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes or certain trees under utility wires or obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this section by the determination of the city.

(iii) Clearance. The property owner adjacent to a tree overhanging a street right-of-way within the city shall prune the branches so that the branches do not obstruct the light from a street lamp or constrict the view of any street intersection. The owner shall maintain a clear space of 14 feet above the surface of the street, and eight feet above the surface of any sidewalk. The owner shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a threat to the public safety.

(iv) Cuts. All cuts above one inch in diameter must be waterproofed if current arborist practice calls for it to protect the viability of the particular tree.

(v) Disturbance. It is a violation of this section to dig in or otherwise injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any public area.

(vi) Abuse. It is a violation of this section to damage, cut, carve, injure the bark, transplant or remove any tree or plants in any public place unless otherwise allowed in this section.

(vii) Mutilation. No person shall abuse, destroy, or mutilate any street tree, in a dedicated public right-of-way, or any other public place, or attach or place any rope or wire (other than one used to support the tree itself), sign, poster, handbill, or other thing to, or on, any tree growing in a public place, or to allow any gaseous liquid or solid substance which is harmful to such trees to come into contact with their roots or leaves unless otherwise allowed herein or by other regulations.

(viii) Arborist. No person or firm shall engage in the business or occupation of pruning, treating, or removing street or public trees within the city without first applying for and procuring permission from the city. Before permission is granted, an arboriculturist shall file evidence of possession of liability insurance in the minimum amounts of $100,000 for bodily injury and $300,000 property damage indemnifying the city or any person injured or damaged resulting from the pursuit of the endeavors as described in this section. Bonding and insurance are not required of city employees or utility employees in pursuit of similar services requested of them as employees of the city or the utility.

(g) Duties of Private Property Owners. In consideration of the value and benefits derived from the beauty and enjoyment of the street trees, the property owners abutting dedicated rights-of-way and utility easements shall have the responsibility, control, and shall bear the cost of maintenance and care of the street trees abutting their property, and shall regularly inspect and remove defective conditions as necessary. For example, it shall be their duty to:

(i) Trim and maintain the trees consistent with this section.

(ii) Treat any trees or plant so diseased or insect-ridden as to constitute a hazard to other trees or plant materials.

(iii) Refrain from planting any kind or type of street trees or plants which do not appear on the official street tree list.

(h) Interference with the City. No person shall prevent, delay, or interfere with the city, a utility or any of their agents, while engaging in the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removal of any street trees, public trees, or private trees as authorized by this section.

(i) Service of Orders.

(i) When the city forester shall find it necessary to order the spraying with general notice, trimming, preservation or removal of trees or plants upon private property, as authorized in this section, he/she shall serve a written order to the owner, operator, occupant, or other person responsible for its existence to correct the dangerous condition.

(ii) Method of Service. The order required in this section shall be served in no less than one of the following ways:

(A) By making personal delivery of the order to the person responsible;

(B) By leaving the order with some persons of suitable age and discretion upon the premises;

(C) By affixing a copy of the order to the door of the entrance of the premises in violation;

(D) By mailing a copy of the order to the last known address of the owner of the premises by certified mail; or

(E) By publishing a copy of the order in a local newspaper of official record once a week for two successive weeks.

(j) Compliance. The order required in this section shall set forth a time limit for compliance dependent upon the hazard and danger created by the violation. In case of immediate danger to persons or public property, the city forester shall have the authority to require compliance upon service of the order.

(k) Appeal.

(i) A person to whom an order under this section is directed shall have the right within 14 days of the service of such order to appeal to the tree committee, which shall review such order at its next regular meeting or special meeting called for such purpose. Unless the order is revoked or modified by the tree committee, it shall remain in full force and be obeyed by the person to whom it is directed. Appeals of the tree committee decision must be made within 14 days after the decision. No person to whom an order is directed shall fail to comply with such order within 30 days after an appeal shall have been determined.

(ii) Decisions on appeals to the tree committee can be appealed to the city council upon application and payment of a fee set by council resolution. The city council will hold a public hearing within 60 days of a proper application. The hearing will be noticed to the property owners within 100 feet of the tree and in a local newspaper no less than two weeks before the hearing.

(l) Failure to Comply. When a person to whom an order is directed fails to comply within the specified time, the city forester shall remedy the condition or contract with others for such purpose and charge the cost thereof to the person to whom the order is directed. The person remedying the condition under a contract made under this section shall be authorized to enter premises for that purpose.

(m) Special Assessment. If the cost of remedying a condition is not paid within 90 days after receipt of a statement therefor from the city recorder or designee, such costs shall be levied against the property upon which the hazard exists as a special assessment. The levying of such assessment shall not affect the liability of the person to whom the order is directed to fine and imprisonment as provided in this section. Such special assessment shall be certified by the city forester to the city recorder, shall thereupon become and be a lien upon such property, and shall be recorded in the city lien docket by the city recorder.

(n) Penalty. Any person convicted of violating any provision of this section shall be punished by a fine of not more than $250.00.

(3) Except as provided in subsection (4) of this section, no owner or person in charge of property shall allow weeds or grasses to grow on his or her property or in adjacent streets or alleys in excess of 10 inches in height. If weeds or grasses are allowed to exceed 10 inches in height, the city may cut the vegetation if the owner or person in charge of the property fails to do so or requests the city to do so and the cost shall be charged to the owner or person in charge of said property or assessed against the property. “Weeds” and “grasses” shall mean, in addition to all plants commonly known by these terms, Russian thistles, Canadian thistles, Chinese thistles, cocklebur, poison oak, poison ivy, white mustard, silver saltbush, blackberries, any noxious weed or growth, or any brush, ferns, shrubs, or grass that are, or constitute, a fire hazard, a menace to public health or safety, or are unsightly. 

(4) It shall not be a violation of subsection (3) of this section for property owners to maintain native vegetation in its natural state either on their property or in common areas when required to do so pursuant to the requirements of the state law or city ordinance. Examples of such areas include jurisdictional and significant wetlands, associated buffer zones and other preservation areas set aside for conservation purposes. Nothing herein prohibits a property owner from preserving native vegetation in its natural state in excess of the requirements of state law or city ordinance, provided the owner prepares and implements a management plan for maintenance of the natural area.

(5) Weeds, grass and other noxious growth, and any obstructing or hazardous trees and shrubs as set forth in this section may be abated as provided in SHMC 8.12.220 through 8.12.260, except that it shall be the duty of the person in charge of the property to remove or abate any nuisance defined in this section within not more than 10 days from the date of the notice, and it shall be so stated in the notice. (Ord. 3223 § 1, 2018; Ord. 2993 § 2, 2006; Ord. 2816 § 1, 2000; Ord. 2565 § 1, 1989; Ord. 2526, 1987; Ord. 2146 § 9, 1976)


8.12.100 Scattering rubbish and debris.

(1) No person shall throw, dump or deposit upon any street, alley or other public place any injurious or offensive substance or any sort of rubbish, trash, debris, garbage or refuse or any substance which would mar the appearance, create a stench or detract from the cleanliness or safety of such public place, or would be likely to injure any animal, vehicle or person traveling upon such public way.

(2) No persons in charge of property shall place or deposit, upon their own property or the property of another, any material, debris, trash, waste, paper boxes, paper towels, or trimmings from any tree, shrub, grass or any other material capable of, or susceptible to, being displaced by action of wind or running water unless they make provisions to secure such materials in such a manner as to prevent such displacement.

(3) No such materials shall be placed, piled, or deposited so as to cause an unsightly appearance or condition, nor shall any such materials be placed, piled or deposited so as to provide a harboring for rats, mice or other rodents. (Ord. 2565 § 2, 1989; Ord. 2146 § 10, 1976)


8.12.110 Repealed.

Repealed by Ord. 2760. (Ord. 2146 § 11, 1976)


8.12.120 Fences.

(1) No person shall construct or maintain any barbed wire fence or allow barbed wire to remain as part of any fence, unless such wire is placed above the top of a fence, which is not less than six feet high.

(2) No person shall install, maintain or operate any electric fence within the city. (Ord. 2443, 1983; Ord. 2146 § 12, 1976)


8.12.130 Surface waters, drainage.

No person in charge of any building or structure shall suffer or permit rain water to fall from any such building or structure onto any street or sidewalk or to flow across such sidewalk or cause it to be discharged into any sanitary sewer; and every such person in charge of property shall at all times keep and maintain in a proper state of repair adequate drainpipes or a drainage system so that any overflow water accumulating on the roof or about such building will not be carried across or upon any sidewalk. (Ord. 2146 § 13, 1976)


8.12.140 Snow and ice removal.

No owner or person in charge of property, improved or unimproved, abutting on a public sidewalk shall permit:

(1) Snow to remain on the sidewalk for a period longer than the first two hours of daylight after the snow has fallen.

(2) Ice to cover or remain on a sidewalk, after the first two hours of daylight after the ice has formed. Such person shall remove ice accumulating on the sidewalk or cover the ice with sand, ashes or other suitable material to assure safe travel. (Ord. 2146 § 14, 1976)


8.12.150 Junk.

(1) Junk Definitions. The term “junk” shall include, but will not be limited to, old motor vehicle parts, old machinery, old machinery parts, old appliances and parts thereof, old iron or other metal, glass, paper, old lumber, old wood, waste material, discarded material or abandoned personal property of any nature.

(2) Keeping of Junk Prohibited. It is hereby determined and declared that the keeping of or allowing of junk to be on or remain out of doors on any public or private premises within the city, unless the same is completely enclosed within a building, is a nuisance and is unlawful. (Ord. 2565 § 3, 1989; Ord. 2146 § 15, 1976)


8.12.160 Radio and television interference.

(1) No person may operate or use an electrical, mechanical or other device, apparatus, instrument or machine that causes reasonably preventable interference with radio or television reception; provided, that the radio or television receiver interfered with is of good engineering design.

(2) This section does not apply to electrical and radio devices licensed, approved or accepted, and operated under the rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission. (Ord. 2146 § 16, 1976)


8.12.170 Superseded.

Superseded by Ord. 2405. (Ord. 2146 § 17, 1976)


8.12.180 Fireworks – Adoption of state fireworks laws.

Repealed by Ord. 3006. (Ord. 2760, 1997; Ord. 2146 § 18, 1976)


8.12.190 Regulating fires.

It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, without the permission of the St. Helens rural fire protection district or its authorized representative, to build an open outdoor fire upon any street or alley, or upon any lot or property of any character in the city or to permit one to be built or to permit such fire already built to continue.

(1) Definitions, Fire. The words “an open outdoor fire” as used in this section shall include any open outdoor fire within the ordinary definition and understanding of said words, and also any fire set for burning waste, debris, trash, rubbish or garbage in any outdoor trash burner or incinerator, or outdoor fireplace or barbecue pit. No provision of this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the building of a fire, for cooking purposes, in any device designed and constructed for this purpose.

(2) Permits, Open Fires. Any person desiring to burn any material at an outdoor fire shall first secure a permit from the St. Helens rural fire protection district, permitting the burning of such material and stating the conditions under which it may be burned. The holder of such permit shall be allowed to build such outdoor fire under the conditions of such permit only. Any deviation from the provisions of the permit shall be a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2146 § 19, 1976)


8.12.200 Notices and advertisements.

(1) No person shall affix or cause to be distributed any placard, bill, advertisement or poster upon any real or personal property, public or private, without first securing permission from the owner or person in control of private property. This section shall not be construed as an amendment to or a repeal of any regulation now or hereafter adopted by the city regulating the use of and the location of signs and advertising.

(2) No person shall, either as principal, agent or employee, scatter, distribute or cause to be distributed on the streets, sidewalks or other public places or upon any private property any placards or advertisements whatsoever.

(3) This section does not prohibit the distribution of advertising material during a parade or approved public gathering. (Ord. 2146 § 20, 1976)


8.12.210 General nuisance.

In addition to those nuisances specifically enumerated within this chapter, every other thing, substance or act which is determined by the common council to be injurious or detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare of the city is hereby declared to be a nuisance and may be abated as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2146 § 21, 1976)


8.12.212 Visual clearance area. 

(1) Definitions.

“Accessway” means an alley, driveway, lane, or any other surface upon which vehicular traffic may travel but does not include a parking lot, city street or a highway. 

“Affected property owner” means the record owner of the real property subject to a requirement to modify the condition or placement of a visual impairment as provided in subsection (2) or (3) of this section. 

“Clear vision area” has the same meaning as “visual clearance area”; see definition below. 

“Height,” as used in this section, shall be measured from the top of the curb at the intersection or, where no curb exists, from the centerline grade at the intersection.

“Intersection” means a crossing of two or more streets, a street and an accessway or a street and a railroad right-of-way, regardless of angle.

“Travel lane” means that portion of the street or accessway over which the majority of vehicular travel occurs, as determined by the public works director or designee.

“Visual clearance area” is the triangular area formed by the intersection of the edges of two travel lanes and a straight line joining said travel lanes through points 30 feet (35 feet in the case of designated arterials) from their intersection measured along the edges of said travel lanes. See illustration below. The terms “visual clearance area” and “clear vision area” are synonymous and may be used interchangeably. 

(2) No owner or person in charge of property, improved or unimproved, adjacent to the intersection of two streets, a street and a railroad, or a street and an accessway shall permit vehicles, hedges, plantings, fences, walls, wall structures, or other temporary or permanent visual obstructions exceeding three feet in height to remain in the visual clearance area except for utility poles or trees, provided all tree branches below eight feet in height are removed.

(3) If, in the opinion of the public works director, the crest of a hill or vertical curve conditions contribute to the obstruction of visual clearance areas at an intersection, the public works director may require further reductions in the height of hedges, plantings, fences, walls, wall structures, and other temporary or permanent visual obstructions, or elimination thereof. Notice of the decision of the public works director pursuant to this section shall be given by certified mail or personal service to the owner(s) of the affected property and by first class mail to all surrounding property owners of record within 300 lineal feet of the affected property. The decision of the public works director shall be final upon the fifteenth calendar day after mailing or personal service of the notice.

(4) A decision of the public works director pursuant to subsections (2) and (3) of this section may be appealed by an affected property owner by filing written notice of appeal within 10 calendar days of the decision to the city council, specifying the decision being appealed and the reasons for the appeal. The city council shall hear the appeal at a regularly scheduled council meeting within 30 days of receipt of the notice of appeal. Notice of the date and time of the appeal hearing shall be mailed to the owner(s) of the affected property and all surrounding property owners of record within 300 lineal feet of the boundaries of the affected property.

(5) Nuisance. Failure to maintain a visual clearance area in violation of this code is declared to be injurious and detrimental to public safety and is therefore a public nuisance and may be abated as provided in SHMC 8.12.220 through 8.12.290.

Visual Clearance Area at the Intersection of Travel Lanes
[IMAGE]


(Ord. 3133 § 1, 2010; Ord. 3113 § 1, 2009)

Article V. Abatement Procedure


8.12.220 Abatement procedures.

Violation of this chapter may be abated by summary abatement (SHMC 8.12.230), by general abatement (SHMC 8.12.250), or by citation (SHMC 8.12.260). These procedures are not exclusive, but in addition to any other remedy as provided in this code, or by law.

The council may delegate the remedy to be used for any class of nuisance. Such delegation shall be by resolution. (Ord. 2565 § 4, 1989; Ord. 2146 § 22, 1976)


8.12.230 Summary abatement.

The chief of police, or any other city official empowered under authority of law may proceed to summarily abate a health or other nuisance which unmistakably exists and from which there is imminent danger to human life or property. (Ord. 2760, 1997; Ord. 2565 § 4, 1989; Ord. 2146 § 23, 1976)


8.12.240 Special abatement.

The city code enforcement officer, the city planning administrator or any other city official empowered under authority of law may proceed to:

(1) Identify illegal notices and advertisements that are located within the city limits and within public rights-of-way; and

(2) Instruct the St. Helens public works department to remove the identified illegal notice or advertisement from the public right-of-way and to store them at the public works shop in an outdoor location for a period of no less than 30 days from time of notice sent out to the owner or installer of the notice or advertisement; and

(3) Notify the owner or installer of the illegal notices and advertisements of the city’s action and what action they can take to reclaim their property, and in those cases where the owner or installer is not readily identifiable, no notice will be sent; and

(4) Inform St. Helens public works that if the notice or advertisement is not retrieved in accordance with these procedures within 45 days after the notice is sent or after the day the property was removed from the right-of-way, whichever is later, then the public works director or designee, who shall not be liable for the conversion of property and may collect costs of removal, storage and sale or disposal, shall dispose of the property either by sending it to a solid waste disposal site or burning it in accordance with local and state laws; and

(5) Instruct the public works department that if the illegal notices or advertisements are reclaimed by the owner, installer or their representative, a per notice or advertisement handling fee as set forth in the most recent universal fee schedule adopted by council is due prior to release of the property. (Ord. 3219 § 4, 2017; Ord. 2811, 2000)


8.12.250 General abatement.

All nuisances defined herein may be abated in the manner provided by this chapter.

(1) Upon determination by the common council that a nuisance as defined in this chapter or any other ordinance of the city exists, or can reasonably be expected to come into existence within the next 30 days, the common council shall forthwith cause a notice to be posted on the premises liable for the abatement, directing the removal of such nuisance.

(2) At the time of posting, the city recorder shall cause a copy of such notice to be forwarded by certified mail, postage prepaid, to the person in charge of the property at the last known address of such person.

(3) The notice to abate shall contain:

(a) A description of the real property, by street address or otherwise, on which such nuisance exists.

(b) A direction to remove the nuisance within 30 days from the date of the notice, except that, in the case of weeds or grasses as defined in SHMC 8.12.090(3), the direction to remove or abate the nuisance shall be within not more than 10 days from the date of the notice, or for other nuisances where a specific time to remove or abate the nuisance is stated, the direction to remove or abate shall be as otherwise provided by this chapter.

(c) A description of the nuisance.

(d) A statement that unless such nuisance is removed, the city will remove the nuisance and the cost of removal shall be a lien against the property.

(e) Statement that the person in charge of the property may protest the action by giving notice to the city recorder within 10 days from the date of the notice; except that such protest must be made within five days in the case of weeds, grass and other noxious growth obstructing or hazardous trees or shrubs.

If the person responsible is not the owner, an additional notice shall be sent to the owner, stating that the cost of abatement not paid by the person responsible may be assessed to and become a lien on the property.

(4) The person posting and mailing the notice as provided herein shall, upon completion of the posting and mailing, execute and file a certificate stating the date and place of such mailing and posting.

(5) An error in the name or address of the person in charge of the property or the use of a name other than that of such person shall not make the notice void, and in such a case the posted notice shall be deemed sufficient.

(6) Within 30 days after the posting and mailing of the notice or 10 days in the case of weeds or grasses or, unless otherwise provided herein, the person in charge of the property shall remove and abate the nuisance or show that no nuisance exists.

(7) The person in charge who protests that no nuisance in fact exists shall file with the city recorder a written statement that shall specify the basis for contending that no nuisance exists.

(8) The statement shall be referred to the council as a part of council’s regular agenda at its next succeeding meeting. At the time set for the consideration of the abatement, such person may appear and be heard by the council, and the council shall thereupon determine whether a nuisance in fact exists, and such determination shall be entered in the official minutes of council. Council determination shall be required only in those cases where a written statement had been filed as provided herein.

(9) Upon council determination that a nuisance does in fact exist, the person in charge of the property shall, within 30 days after such council determination, remove or abate such nuisance; except that weeds, grass and other noxious growth and obstructing or hazardous trees or shrubs shall be abated within 10 days.

(10) If within the time fixed, as provided in this chapter, the nuisance has not been abated by the person in charge of the property, the common council shall cause the nuisance to be abated.

(11) The city recorder shall maintain an accurate record of the expense incurred by the city in abating the nuisance and shall include therein an overhead charge of five percent of the total cost for administration.

(12) The total cost, including the administrative overhead, shall thereupon be assessed to the property as hereinafter provided.

(13) A notice of the assessment shall be forwarded by registered mail, postage prepaid, to the person in charge of the property by the city recorder. The notice shall contain:

(a) The total cost, including the administrative overhead, of the abatement.

(b) A statement that if arrangements to pay the cost as indicated are not made within 30 days, the city will bring appropriate legal action and/or such costs will become a lien against the property.

(c) A statement that if the person in charge of the property objects to the cost of the abatement as indicated, he may file a notice of objection with the city recorder within 10 days from the date of the notice.

(14) Objection to the proposed assessment, if properly filed, shall be heard and determined by the council in its regular course of business.

(15) An assessment for the cost of abatement as determined by the council shall be made by resolution of the council and shall thereupon be entered in the docket of city liens; and upon such entry being made, it shall constitute a lien upon the property from which the nuisance was removed or abated.

(16) The lien shall be collected in the same manner as liens for street improvements are collected and shall bear interest at the rate of nine percent per annum. Such interest shall commence to run 30 days after the entry of the lien in the lien docket.

(17) An error in the name of the person in charge of the property shall not void the assessment, nor will a failure to receive the notice of the assessment render the assessment void but it shall remain a valid lien against the property. (Ord. 3183 § 1, 2015; Ord. 2760, 1997; Ord. 2565 § 4, 1989; Ord. 2146 § 25, 1976)


8.12.260 Citation procedure.

Where the citation procedures for abatement have been designated by the council for any class of nuisance, the city may proceed in the following manner:

(1) When such a nuisance has come to the attention of the city, and after investigation, there is reasonable cause to believe that such a nuisance exists, any police officer is authorized to issue a citation, to compel the appearance before the municipal court, of the person so cited.

(2) A person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00. (Ord. 2565 § 4, 1989; Ord. 2146 § 26, 1976)


8.12.270 Separate violations.

(1) Each day’s violation of a provision of this chapter constitutes a separate offense.

(2) The abatement of a nuisance is not a penalty for violating this chapter, but is an additional remedy. The imposition of a penalty does not relieve a person of the duty to abate a nuisance. (Ord. 2565 § 4, 1989; Ord. 2146 § 27, 1976)


8.12.280 Penalties.

A person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00. (Ord. 2760, 1997; Ord. 2146 § 28, 1976)


8.12.290 Inspections – Right of entry.

(1) Inspections. Any city police officer, the city code enforcement officer, planning director, building official, public works administrator, city administrator, or their authorized representatives, (hereinafter, “enforcement officer”) is hereby authorized to make such inspections and take such actions as may be required to enforce the provisions of this nuisance chapter.

(2) Right of Entry. When it may be necessary to inspect to enforce the provisions of this code, any enforcement officer having reasonable cause to believe that there exists, in a building or upon a premises, a condition which is contrary to or in violation of this nuisance code, or which otherwise makes the building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the enforcement officer, in accordance with administrative policy, may enter the building or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this code; provided, that if such building or premises be occupied that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such building or premises be unoccupied, the enforcement officer shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the enforcement officer shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry. (Ord. 2816 § 2, 2000)

Section 1. A new Chapter 8.14, Property Maintenance, Abandoned Buildings, providing maintenance standards and vacant or abandoned building registration requirements is hereby enacted and shall read as follows:


Chapter 8.14 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE, ABANDONED BUILDINGS

Sections:

8.14.010    Property maintenance, abandoned buildings.

8.14.020    General definitions.

8.14.030    Violations.

8.14.040    Unsafe structures and equipment.    

8.14.050    Emergency measures.

8.14.060    Demolition.

8.14.070    Minimum requirements and standards for premises, structures, and facilities.


8.14.010 Property maintenance, abandoned buildings.

(1) This chapter shall be known as “the City of St. Helens Property Maintenance and Abandoned Buildings Chapter,” may be so pleaded, shall be referred to herein as “this chapter,” and shall apply to all existing residential and nonresidential structures and all existing premises and constitute minimum requirements and standards for premises, structures, equipment and facilities, the responsibility of owners, persons in charge of premises and occupants, and for administration, enforcement and penalties. Where differences occur between provisions of this chapter, other provisions of the St. Helens Municipal Code (hereinafter “code” or “the code”) and applicable state law, the more restrictive provision shall govern.

(2) Existing Remedies. The provisions in this chapter shall not be construed to repeal, abolish or impair existing remedies of the city of St. Helens or its officers or agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any structure which is dangerous, unsafe or unsanitary.

(3) Historic Buildings. The provisions of this chapter shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures designated as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the building official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 3192 § 1, 2015)


8.14.020 General definitions.

“Abandoned building” means: 

(1) A building that is no longer used by its owner or other legally permitted occupant for a period of 90 days or more; or

(2) A building that has been damaged to the extent that it is no longer habitable or is unsafe to occupy as determined by an enforcement officer per SHMC 8.14.030(2), and repairs and restoration are not started within 90 days of the date the building was damaged, or are not diligently pursued once started.

“Anchored” means secured in a manner that provides positive connection.

“Approved” means approved by the building official.

“Basement” means that portion of a building which is partly or completely below grade.

“Bathroom” means a room containing a toilet or a bathtub or a shower.

“Bedroom” means any room or space used or intended to be used for sleeping purposes in either a dwelling or sleeping unit.

“Building official” means the official who is charged with the administration and enforcement of this chapter, or any duly authorized representative.

“Detached” means when a structural element is physically disconnected from another and that connection is necessary to provide a positive connection.

“Deterioration” means to weaken, disintegrate, corrode, rust or decay and lose effectiveness.

“Dwelling unit” means a single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.

“Easement” means that portion of land or property reserved for present or future use by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the property. The easement shall be permitted to be for use under, on or above a said lot or lots.

“Equipment support” means those structural members or assemblies of members or manufactured elements, including braces, frames, lugs, snuggers, hangers or saddles, that transmit gravity load, lateral load and operating load between the equipment and the structure.

“Exterior property” means the open space on the premises and on adjoining property under the control of owners or operators of such premises.

“Garbage” means the animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.

“Guard” means a building component or a system of building components located at or near the open sides of elevated walking surfaces that minimizes the possibility of a fall from the walking surface to a lower level.

“Habitable space” means space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces, and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces.

“Housekeeping unit” means a room or group of rooms forming a single habitable space equipped and intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating which does not contain, within such a unit, a toilet, lavatory and bathtub or shower.

“Imminent danger” means a condition which could cause serious or life-threatening injury or death at any time.

“Infestation” means the presence, within or contiguous to a structure or premises, of insects, rats, vermin or other pests.

“Inoperable motor vehicle” means a vehicle which cannot be driven upon the public streets for reason including but not limited to being unlicensed, wrecked, abandoned, in a state of disrepair, or incapable of being moved under its own power.

“Labeled” means equipment, materials or products to which have been affixed a label, seal, symbol or other identifying mark of a nationally recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency or other organization concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of the production of the above-labeled items and whose labeling indicates either that the equipment, material or product meets identified standards or has been tested and found suitable for a specified purpose.

“Let for occupancy” or “let” means to permit, provide or offer possession or occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building, premises or structure by a person who is or is not the legal owner of record thereof, pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or license, or pursuant to a recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of land.

“Neglect” means the lack of proper maintenance for a building or structure.

“Occupancy” means the purpose for which a building or portion thereof is utilized or occupied.

“Occupant” means any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having possession of a space within a building.

“Operator” means any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy.

“Owner” means any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding chapter to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court.

“Person” means an individual, corporation, partnership or any other group acting as a unit.

“Person in charge of premises” means any owner, agent, lessee, contract purchaser, or other person having the possession or control of premises or property.

“Premises” means a lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way, including any structures thereon.

“Public way” means any street, alley or similar parcel of land essentially unobstructed from the ground to the sky, which is deeded, dedicated or otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use.

“Rooming unit” means any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or living, but not for cooking purposes.

“Structure” means that which is built or constructed or a portion thereof.

“Tenant” means a person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not the legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit.

“Toilet room” means a room containing a toilet or urinal but not a bathtub or shower.

“Vacant building or structure” means a building or structure, or a substantial portion thereof, which has not been occupied by persons with a legal right to occupy for a period of 15 days or more. The term “vacant building” does not include buildings designed for storage or other intermittent uses. Evidence of a building being vacant includes two or more of the following: overgrown or dead vegetation; accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers or mail; nonpayment or disconnection of utilities; accumulation of trash, junk or debris; absence of furnishings; evidence of criminal mischief or criminal trespass; statements of neighbors that the building is vacant.

“Yard” means an open space on the same lot with a structure. (Ord. 3192 § 1, 2015)


8.14.030 Violations.

(1) It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to be in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.

(a) Violating any of the provisions of this chapter is a nuisance and shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00.

(b) Subsequent violation of the same provision of this chapter involving the same building by the same owner or person in charge of the premises shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.

(c) Each day’s violation of a provision of this chapter constitutes a separate offense and may be separately cited.

(d) Violation of this chapter may be abated by summary abatement (SHMC 8.12.230), by general abatement (SHMC 8.12.250), or by citation (SHMC 8.12.260). These procedures are not exclusive, but in addition to any other remedy as provided in this code, or by law.

(2) Enforcement Officers. Any city police officer, the city code enforcement officer, planner, building official, public works administrator, or city administrator (hereinafter “enforcement officer”) is hereby authorized to take such actions as may be required to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The abatement of a nuisance is not a penalty for violating the terms of this chapter, but is an additional remedy. The imposition of a penalty does not relieve a person of the duty to abate a nuisance.

(3) Right of Entry. Whenever it may be necessary to inspect to enforce the provisions of this code, any enforcement officer having reasonable cause to believe that there exists, in a building or upon a premises, a condition which is contrary to or in violation of this code, or which otherwise makes the building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the enforcement officer may enter the building or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this code; provided, that if such building or premises be occupied, credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such building or premises be unoccupied, the enforcement officer shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the enforcement officer shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry.

(4) Closing of Vacant Structures. If a structure is vacant and in violation of one of more of the provisions of this chapter, the building official may order the structure closed up so as not to be an attractive nuisance. Notification of the owner or person in charge of the property shall be as set forth in SHMC 8.12.250(1) through (3). Upon failure of the owner to close up the premises within the time specified in the order, the building official shall cause the premises to be closed and secured and the cost thereof shall constitute a lien upon the premises.

(5) Occupation of Closed Structures. Any occupied structure closed by order of the building official shall be vacated not later than the effective date of the order. Any person who shall occupy such premises after such effective date and any owner or person in charge of the premises who allows another to occupy such premises after the effective date of the order is in violation of this chapter.

(6) Authority to Disconnect Utilities. The building official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to a building, structure or system when necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property or when such utility connection has been made without approval. The building official shall notify the serving utility and, whenever possible, the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnection the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing as soon as practical thereafter.

(7) Transfer of Ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling unit or structure who has received a citation or upon whom a notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such dwelling unit or structure to another until the provisions of this chapter have been complied with, or until such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any citation or notice of violation issued by the enforcement officer and shall furnish to the enforcement officer a signed and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or notice of violation and fully accepting the responsibility without condition for making the corrections or repairs required by such compliance order or notice of violation.

(8) Registration of Vacant or Abandoned Buildings or Structures. A building owner or person in charge of the premises shall register the building with the city recorder in the event:

(a) Of an anticipated judicial foreclosure of the property, no earlier than the commencement of any of the actions described by ORS 18.904, 18.906 and 18.908 and not later than the date first set for the execution sale described in ORS 18.930;

(b) Of an anticipated nonjudicial foreclosure of the property under ORS 86.735 et seq. not later than the date of service or mailing of the notice of sale described in ORS 86.740; or

(c) The owner or person in charge of the premises receives written notice that the building has been deemed to be either a vacant building or an abandoned building.

(d) Each registration shall be made on a form approved by the city recorder and shall contain, at a minimum, the name and address of the owner and the person in charge of the premises; the name, address and contact information (including direct contact name and telephone number) of the lender in the case of a judicial or nonjudicial foreclosure affecting the property; and the name, mailing address, telephone number, and email address of a local individual or entity charged with responsibility for ensuring compliance with the obligations imposed by this chapter and payment of a registration fee set by council resolution. The registrant shall send notice of any change to registration information to the city recorder within 30 days of the change. (Ord. 3192 § 1, 2015)


8.14.040 Unsafe structures and equipment.

(1) General. When a structure or equipment is found by an enforcement official to be unsafe, unfit for human occupancy, or otherwise unlawful, such structure or equipment is in violation of this chapter and a nuisance which shall be abated as set forth in SHMC 8.12.220 through 8.12.290, Chapter 15.20 SHMC, or such other methods of code compliance or nuisance abatement as are provided by law or the code.

(2) Unsafe Structures. An unsafe structure is one that is found to be dangerous to the life, health, property or safety of the public or the occupants of the structure by not providing minimum safeguards to protect or warn occupants in the event of fire, or because such structure contains unsafe equipment or is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe or of such faulty construction or unstable foundation that partial or complete collapse is possible. Any structure or premises that has one or more of the conditions or defects described below shall be considered dangerous:

(a) Any door, aisle, passageway, stairway, exit or other means of egress that does not conform to the approved building code or fire code as related to the requirements for existing buildings;

(b) The walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway, exit or other means of egress is so warped, worn loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means of egress;

(c) Any portion of a building, structure or appurtenance that has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood, deterioration, neglect, abandonment, vandalism or by any other cause to such an extent that it is likely to partially or completely collapse, or to become detached or dislodged;

(d) Any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior thereof, that is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place, so as to be capable of resisting natural or artificial loads of one and one-half the original designed value;

(e) The building or structure, or part of the building or structure, because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction, the removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary for the support, or for any other reason is likely to partially or completely collapse, or some portion of the foundation or underpinning of the building or structure is likely to fail or give way;

(f) The building or structure is neglected, damaged, dilapidated, unsecured or abandoned so as to become an attractive nuisance to children who might play in the building or structure to their danger, becomes a harbor for vagrants, criminals or trespassers, or enables persons to resort to the building or structure for committing a nuisance or an unlawful act;

(g) Any building or structure has been constructed, exists or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to such building or structure provided by the approved building or fire code of the jurisdiction, or of any law or ordinance to such an extent as to present either a substantial risk of fire, building collapse or any other threat to life and safety;

(h) A building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, ventilation, mechanical or plumbing system, or otherwise, is determined by the building official to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease;

(i) Any building or structure, because of a lack of sufficient or proper fire-resistance-rated construction, fire protection systems, electrical system, fuel connections, mechanical system, plumbing system or other cause, is determined by the building official to be a threat to life or health; or

(j) Any portion of a building remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or whenever any building or structure is abandoned so as to constitute such building or portion thereof as an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public.

(3) Unsafe Equipment. Unsafe equipment includes any boiler, heating equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device, flammable liquid containers or other equipment on the premises or within the structure which is in such disrepair or condition that such equipment is a hazard to life, health, property or safety of the public or occupants of the premises or structure.

(4) Structure Unfit for Human Occupancy. A structure is unfit for human occupancy whenever the building official finds that such structure is unsafe, unlawful or, because of the degree to which the structure is in disrepair or lacks maintenance, is insanitary, vermin or rat infested, contains filth and contamination, or lacks ventilation, illumination, sanitary or heating facilities or other essential equipment required by this chapter, or because the location of the structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants of the structure or to the public.

(5) Unlawful Structure. An unlawful structure is one found in whole or in part to be occupied by more persons than permitted under this chapter, or was erected or altered in violation of law. (Ord. 3192 § 1, 2015)


8.14.050 Emergency measures.

(1) Imminent Danger. When, in the opinion of the building official, there is imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure which endangers life, or when any structure or part of a structure has fallen and life is endangered by the occupation of the structure, or when there is actual or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the proximity of any structure because of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors or the presence of toxic fumes, gases or materials, or operation of defective or dangerous equipment, the building official is hereby authorized and empowered to order and require the occupants to vacate the premises forthwith. The building official shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such structure a notice reading as follows: “This Structure Is Unsafe and Its Occupancy Has Been Prohibited.” It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such structure except for the purpose of securing the structure, making the required repairs, removing the hazardous condition or of demolishing the same.

(2) Temporary Safeguards. Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, whenever, in the opinion of the building official, there is imminent danger due to an unsafe condition, the building official shall order the necessary work to be done, including the boarding up of openings, to render such structure temporarily safe whether or not the legal procedure herein described has been instituted; and shall cause such other action to be taken as the building official deems necessary to meet such emergency.

(3) Emergency Repairs. For the purposes of this section, the building official shall employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the required work as expeditiously as possible.

(4) Cost of Emergency Repairs. Notice of the costs incurred in the performance of emergency work shall be forwarded by registered mail, postage prepaid, to the person in charge of the property by the city recorder. The notice shall contain: (a) the total cost, including the administrative overhead, of the abatement; (b) a statement that the cost as indicated, if not paid within 30 days, will result in the city bringing legal action under ORS 30.315(1)(a) in small claims court for collection and/or will become a lien against the property; (c) a statement that if the person in charge of the property objects to the cost of the abatement as indicated, a notice of objection may be filed with the city recorder within 15 days from the date of the notice, after which objection to the proposed assessment shall be heard and determined by the council in its regular course of business.

(5) An assessment for the cost of abatement as determined by the council shall be made by resolution of the council and shall thereupon be entered in the docket of city liens; and upon such entry being made, it shall constitute a lien upon the property from which the nuisance was removed or abated. The lien shall be collected in the same manner as liens for street improvements are collected and shall bear interest at the rate of nine percent per annum. Such interest shall commence to run 30 days after the entry of the lien in the lien docket. An error in the name of the person in charge of the property shall not void the assessment, nor will a failure to receive the notice of the assessment render the assessment void but it shall remain a valid lien against the property. (Ord. 3192 § 1, 2015)


8.14.060 Demolition.

The building official shall order the owner of any premises upon which is located any structure which is unsafe, unfit for occupancy or unlawful, and it is unreasonable to repair the structure, to demolish and remove such structure or to board it up and hold for future repair or demolition at the owner’s option. However, boarding the building up for future repair shall only be allowed for the period of one year, unless a written extension is issued by the building official. Permission to board up such structure under this section shall be revoked if vagrants or other trespassers breach the barrier and occupy the structure. (Ord. 3192 § 1, 2015)


8.14.070 Minimum requirements and standards for premises, structures, and facilities.

The owner and the person in charge of premises, whether those premises are currently occupied or not currently occupied, are equally responsible to maintain structures and exterior property in compliance with these requirements, except as otherwise provided. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant nor permit another person to occupy premises which do not comply with the requirements of this chapter. Persons in charge of a portion of a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit are responsible for keeping in a clean, sanitary and safe condition that part of the dwelling unit, rooming unit, housekeeping unit or premises which they occupy and control.

(1) Exterior Property Areas.

(a) All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition. The occupant shall keep that part of the exterior property which such occupant occupies or controls in a clean and sanitary condition.

(b) All premises shall be graded and maintained to prevent the erosion of soil and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any structure located thereon. Approved retention areas and reservoirs shall be considered to be in compliance with this section if the premises is kept in compliance with current approvals.

(c) All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair, and maintained free from hazardous conditions as further set forth in SHMC Title 12 and such other applicable sections of the code.

(d) All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth as set forth in SHMC 8.12.090.

(e) All structures and exterior property shall be kept free from rodent harborage and infestation as set forth in SHMC 8.12.100 and 8.40.020.

(f) Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans or blowers shall not discharge gases, steam, vapor, hot air, grease, smoke, odors or other gaseous or particulate wastes directly upon abutting or adjacent public or private property or that of another tenant.

(g) All accessory structures, including detached garages, fences and walls, shall be maintained structurally sound and in good repair. In addition, they shall be constructed in compliance with all applicable building codes referred to in SHMC Title 15 and situated in compliance with all applicable regulations set forth in SHMC Title 17.

(h) Except as otherwise provided in the code, all motor vehicles, operable or inoperable, shall be parked or stored in compliance with Chapters 8.40, 10.12 and 10.16 SHMC, and SHMC 10.04.140 through 10.04.220.

(i) No person shall willfully or wantonly damage, mutilate or deface any exterior surface of any structure or building on any private or public property by placing thereon any marking, carving or graffiti. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or person in charge of the premises to restore said surface to an approved state of maintenance and repair.

(j) Swimming pools, hot tubs and spas shall be located in compliance with SHMC Title 17 and maintained in compliance with Chapter 8.12 SHMC.

(2) Exterior Structure.

(a) All exterior surfaces, including, but not limited to, doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies, decks and fences, shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. All siding and masonry joints, as well as those between the building envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors and skylights, shall be maintained weather resistant and water tight. All metal surfaces subject to rust or corrosion shall be coated to inhibit such rust and corrosion, and all surfaces with rust or corrosion shall be stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust and corrosion. Oxidation stains shall be removed from exterior surfaces. Surfaces designed for stabilization by oxidation are exempt from this requirement.

(b) Buildings shall have approved address numbers placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of four inches (102 mm) in height with a minimum stroke width of one-half inch (12.7 mm).

(c) All structural members shall be maintained free from deterioration, and shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead and live loads.

(d) All foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and free from open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to prevent the entry of rodents and other pests.

(e) All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks, and loose or rotting materials; and maintained weatherproof and properly surface coated where required to prevent deterioration.

(f) The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not have defects that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the structure. Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in good repair and free from obstructions. Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance.

(g) All cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition.

(h) All overhang extensions including, but not limited to, canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes and exhaust ducts shall be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored so as to be kept in a sound condition. When required, all exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.

(i) Every exterior stairway, deck, porch and balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto, shall be maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage and capable of supporting the imposed loads.

(j) All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks, and similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe and sound, and in good repair. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.

(k) Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition.

(l) Every window, skylight, door and frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and weather tight. Operable windows located in whole or in part within six feet (1,828 mm) above ground level or a walking surface below that provide access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a window sash locking device.

(m) All glazing materials shall be maintained free from cracks and holes.

(n) Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be easily openable and capable of being held in position by window hardware.

(o) During the period from May 1st to October 1st, every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of minimum 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm), and every screen door used for insect control shall have a self-closing device in good working condition, except that screens shall not be required where other approved means, such as air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed.

(p) All exterior doors, door assemblies, operator systems if provided, and hardware shall be maintained in good condition. Locks at all entrances to dwelling units and sleeping units shall tightly secure the door. Locks on means of egress doors shall be readily openable from the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort, except where the door hardware conforms to that permitted by the building code.

(q) Required emergency escape and rescue openings shall be operational from the inside of the room without the use of keys or tools. Bars, grilles, grates or similar devices are permitted to be placed over emergency escape and rescue openings provided the minimum net clear opening size complies with the code that was in effect at the time of construction and such devices shall be releasable or removable from the inside without the use of a key, tool or force greater than that which is required for normal operation of the escape and rescue opening.

(r) Every basement hatchway shall be maintained to prevent the entrance of rodents, rain and surface drainage water. Basement hatchways that provide access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with devices that secure the units from unauthorized entry.

(s) Every basement window that is openable shall be supplied with rodent shields, storm windows or other approved protection against the entry of rodents.

(t) Doors, windows or hatchways for dwelling units, room units or housekeeping units shall be provided with devices designed to provide security for the occupants and property within. Doors providing access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a deadbolt lock designed to be readily openable from the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort and shall have a minimum lock throw of one inch (25 mm). Such deadbolt locks shall be installed according to the manufacturer’s specifications and maintained in good working order. For the purpose of this section, a sliding bolt shall not be considered an acceptable deadbolt lock.

(u) All exterior gates, gate assemblies, operator systems if provided, and hardware shall be maintained in good condition. Latches at all entrances shall tightly secure the gates.

(3) Interior Requirements.

(a) All structural members shall be maintained structurally sound, and be capable of supporting the imposed loads.

(b) Every stair, ramp, landing, balcony, porch, deck or other walking surface shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair.

(c) Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition.

(d) Every interior door shall fit reasonably well within its frame and shall be capable of being opened and closed by being properly and securely attached to jambs, headers or tracks as intended by the manufacturer of the attachment hardware.

(4) Plumbing Systems, Facilities and Fixtures.

(a) All plumbing fixtures shall be properly installed and maintained in working order, and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects and be capable of performing the function for which such plumbing fixtures are designed. All plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary and functional condition.

(b) Plumbing systems in a structure found to constitute a hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service, inadequate venting, cross connection, backsiphonage, improper installation, deterioration or damage, or for similar reasons, are in violation of this chapter and are a nuisance and may be abated as provided herein.

(c) All dwelling units shall contain a bathtub or shower, lavatory, toilet and kitchen sink which shall be maintained in a sanitary, safe and working condition.

(d) Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain, toilet or other plumbing fixture shall be properly connected to either the city public water system or to an approved private water system. All kitchen sinks, lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied with hot or tempered and cold running water in accordance with the International Plumbing Code. The water supply system shall be installed and maintained to provide a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices and appurtenances in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to enable the fixtures to function properly, safely, and free from defects and leaks.

(e) Water heating facilities shall be properly installed, maintained and capable of providing an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower and laundry facility at a minimum temperature of 110°F (43°C). A gas-burning water heater shall not be located in any bathroom, toilet room, bedroom or other occupied room normally kept closed, unless adequate combustion air is provided. An approved combination temperature and pressure-relief valve and relief valve discharge pipe shall be properly installed and maintained on water heaters.

(f) All plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to either the city public sewer system or to an approved private sewage disposal system.

(g) Every plumbing stack, vent, waste and sewer line shall function properly and be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects.

(h) Drainage of roofs and paved areas, yards and courts, and other open areas on the premises shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance. (Ord. 3192 § 1, 2015)


Chapter 8.16 NOISE REGULATIONS

Sections:

8.16.010    Definitions.

8.16.020    Sound measurement.

8.16.030    Prohibitions.

8.16.040    Exceptions.

8.16.050    Variances.

8.16.060    Chapter additional to other law.

8.16.070    Administration and enforcement.

8.16.080    Penalties.

8.16.090    Separate violations.


8.16.010 Definitions.

The following terms and definitions shall apply herein unless the context requires otherwise:

(1) “Director” means police chief of the city of St. Helens.

(2) “Idling speed” means that speed at which an engine will run when no pressure is applied to the accelerator or accelerator linkage.

(3) “Noise sensitive unit” means any building or portion thereof, vehicle, boat or other structure used as a church, day care center, hospital, school or adapted or used for the overnight accommodation of persons, including, but not limited to, individual residential units, individual apartments, trailers, and nursing homes.

(4) “Person” includes, in addition to any individual, any public or private corporation, association, partnership, or other legally recognized public or private entity.

(5) “Plainly audible sound” means any sound for which the information content of that sound is unambiguously communicated to the listener, such as, but not limited to, understandable spoken speech, comprehension of whether a voice is raised or normal, or comprehensible musical rhythms.

(6) “Sound-producing device” includes:

(a) Loudspeakers, public address systems;

(b) Radios, tape recorders and/or tape players, phonographs, television sets, stereo systems, including those installed in a vehicle;

(c) Musical instruments, amplified or unamplified;

(d) Sirens, bells;

(e) Vehicle engines or exhausts, when the vehicle is not on a public right-of-way, particularly when the engine is operated above idling speed;

(f) Vehicle tires, when caused to squeal by excessive speed or acceleration;

(g) Domestic tools, including electric drills, chain saws, lawn mowers, electric saws, hammers, and similar tools, but only between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day;

(h) Heat pumps, air-conditioning units, and refrigeration units, including those mounted on vehicles;

(i) Construction, demolition, exterior alteration or repair of a building or structure, as well as excavation, and land development site preparation activities performed with heavy construction equipment, when such activities are performed by a commercial operator or contractor, but only between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day (Monday through Saturday) and between 8:00 p.m. Saturday through 7:00 a.m. Monday;

(7) “Vehicle” includes automobiles, motorcycles, motorbikes, trucks, buses, snowmobiles, and boats;

(8) “A-scale (dBA)” means the sound level in decibels measured using the A-weighted network as specified in American National Standard Specification for Sound Level Meters (ANSI S1.4-1971). (Ord. 2861 § 1, 2002; Ord. 2405 § 1, 1982)


8.16.020 Sound measurement.

(1) If measurements are made, they shall be made with a sound level meter. The sound level meter shall be an instrument in good operating condition, meeting the requirements of a type I or type II meter, as specified in ANSI Standard 1.4-1971. For purposes of this chapter, a sound level meter shall contain at least an A-weighted scale, and both fast and slow meter response capability.

(2) If measurements are made, personnel making those measurements shall have completed training in the use of the sound level meter, and measurement procedures consistent with that training shall be followed.

(3) Measurements may be made at or within the boundary of the property on which a noise sensitive unit which is not the source of the sound is located, or within a noise sensitive unit which is not the source of the sound.

(4) All measurements made pursuant to this chapter shall comply with the provisions of this section. (Ord. 2405 § 2, 1982)


8.16.030 Prohibitions.

It shall be unlawful for any person to produce or permit to be produced, with a sound-producing device, sound which:

(1) When measured at or within the boundary of the property on which a noise sensitive unit which is not the source of the sound is located, or within a noise sensitive unit which is not the source of the sound, exceeds:

(a) Fifty dBA at any time between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day;

(b) Sixty dBA at any time between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. the same day;

(c) Fifty dBA at any time between 8:00 p.m. Saturday and 7:00 a.m. Monday; or

(2) Is plainly audible at any time between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day or at any time between 8:00 p.m. Saturday and 7:00 a.m. Monday:

(a) Within a noise sensitive unit which is not the source of the sound; or 

(b) On a public right-of-way at a distance of 50 feet or more from the source of the sound.

(3) If a measurement of the sound is made, subsection (1) of this section shall supersede subsection (2) of this section and shall be used to determine if a violation of this chapter exists. (Ord. 2861 § 2, 2002; Ord. 2405 § 3, 1982)


8.16.040 Exceptions.

Notwithstanding SHMC 8.16.030, the following exceptions from this chapter are permitted when conditions therefor are met:

(1) Sounds caused by organized athletic or other group activities, when such activities are conducted out of doors on property generally used for such purposes, including stadiums, parks, schools, churches, athletic fields, racetracks, airports and waterways; provided however, that said exception shall not impair the director’s power to declare such event or activities otherwise to violate other laws, ordinances or regulations.

(2) Sound caused by emergency work, or by the ordinary and accepted use of emergency equipment, vehicles and apparatus, whether or not such work is performed by a public or private agency, upon public or private property.

(3) Sounds caused by sources regulated as to sound production by federal law, including, but not limited to, sounds caused by railroad, aircraft or commercially licensed watercraft operations.

(4) Sound caused by bona fide use of emergency warning devices and alarm systems.

(5) Sound caused by blasting activities when performed under a permit issued by appropriate governmental authorities and only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., excluding weekends, unless such permit expressly authorizes otherwise. (Ord. 2405 § 4, 1982)


8.16.050 Variances.

Any person who is planning the use of a sound-producing device, which may violate any provision of this chapter, may apply to the director for a variance from such provision.

(1) Application. The application shall state the provision from which a variance is being sought, the period of time the variance is to apply, the reason for which the variance is sought, the amplification permit fee, as set by resolution, and any other supporting information, which the director may reasonably require.

(2) Review Considerations. The director shall consider:

(a) The nature and duration of the sound emitted.

(b) Whether the public health, safety or welfare is endangered.

(c) Whether compliance with the provision would produce no benefit to the public.

(d) Whether previous permits have been issued and the applicant’s record of compliance.

(3) Time Duration of Variance. A variance may be granted for a specific time interval only.

(4) The director shall, within 10 days, deny the application, approve it, or approve it subject to conditions.

(5) The director’s decision may be appealed to the city council. Notice of appeal should be delivered to the city administrator with the appeals fee as set in the miscellaneous fee schedule. The council shall review the application de novo, at the next regularly scheduled meeting, deny the application, approve it, or approve it subject to conditions.

(6) The director may at any time before or during the operation of a variance granted by the director revoke the variance for good cause. The council may, at any time before or during the operation of any variance, revoke the variance for good cause. (Ord. 3074 § 1, 2008; Ord. 2405 § 5, 1982)


8.16.060 Chapter additional to other law.

The provisions of this chapter shall be cumulative and nonexclusive and shall not affect any other claim, cause of action or remedy; nor, unless specifically provided, shall it be deemed to repeal, amend or modify any law, ordinance or regulation relating to noise or sound, but shall be deemed additional to existing legislation and common law on such subject. (Ord. 2405 § 6, 1982)


8.16.070 Administration and enforcement.

(1) The director shall administer, supervise and perform all acts necessary to enforce this chapter.

(2) Persons appointed or assigned by the director, as he deems necessary to accomplish effective enforcement of this chapter, may be peace officers or not.

(3) Upon citation of a person for a violation of this chapter, the person issuing the citation may seize the sound-producing device which was the source of the sound as evidence only if the violation is determined by use of a sound level meter.

The sound-producing device, if seized, shall be impounded subject to disposition of the issued citation and determination by the court whether the sound-producing device shall be returned to the cited person or deemed contraband, subject to SHMC 8.16.080(2). It is the intent of this chapter to avoid such seizures except where the person being cited has received two previous citations within the previous six months for the use of the same or similar sound-producing device. The previous citations may, but need not, occur on the same date as the citation which prompts the seizure.

(4) Citation forms authorized for use for violations of city ordinances may be used for any violations of SHMC 8.16.030.

(5) In addition to any other enforcement procedures, the city council may, upon its own motion, or upon receipt of a petition requesting hearing by the council signed by no fewer than 10 persons residing in the vicinity of a property upon which is located an alleged violation of this chapter, issue its order to the person producing or permitting to be produced the sound which allegedly violates this chapter, to appear before the council and show cause why the council should not declare the sound a violation of this chapter and order the violation abated. Noncompliance with the order may result in the council referring the order to the city attorney for injunctive enforcement, or alternatively to the district attorney for appropriate action. (Ord. 2861 § 3, 2002; Ord. 2405 § 7, 1982)


8.16.080 Penalties.

(1) Violation of any provision of SHMC 8.16.030 shall constitute a class C misdemeanor offense.

(2) In addition to the penalties prescribed herein, the court may order any sound-producing device found to have been used to violate this chapter seized, confiscated, and destroyed as contraband, or sold with the proceeds of sale to be deposited in the city general fund. (Ord. 2861 § 4, 2002; Ord. 2405 § 8, 1982)


8.16.090 Separate violations.

Each day’s violation of a provision of this chapter constitutes a separate offense. (Ord. 2405 § 9, 1982)


Chapter 8.20       WATER PURITY*

Sections:

8.20.010  Definitions.

8.20.020  Prohibitions.

8.20.030  Exceptions.

8.20.040  Permits.

8.20.050  Group permits.

8.20.060  Enforcement.

8.20.070  Penalties.

8.20.080  Exclusion from city watershed.

*	Code reviser’s note: See also Chapter 9.24 SHMC.


8.20.010      Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the singular includes the plural, the plural includes the singular, and the masculine includes the feminine. Except where the context indicates otherwise, the following definitions apply:

(1)  "City" means the city of St. Helens, Oregon.

(2)  "Person" means an individual, corporation or other legal business entity.

(3)  "Watershed," "watershed property," or "watershed properties" means any property owned, acquired, occupied, or controlled by the city of St. Helens, whether inside or outside the city limits, that is used or intended for any of the following uses: waterworks, reservoirs, water systems, city water supply, emergency water supply, storage and care of the water supply, and all property acquired or maintained for the preservation and protection of the purity of the city water supply, or for recreational use. The watershed also includes all property owned or possessed by the city that constitutes a source, or possible source, of the water supply such as springs, creeks, pipes, rivers, streams, tributaries, and lakes, including specifically Salmonberry, and all property draining into such sources of the water supply. Said watershed properties include specifically, but are not limited to, the following real property outside the city limits of the city of St. Helens: Columbia County Tax Lots 5-2-8-02000, 5-2-15-00200, 5-2-16-00200, 5-2-20-00100, 5-2-21-00100, 5-2-22-00200, 5-2-27-02400, 5-2-28-00100, 5-2-29-01300, and 5-2-33-00100, comprising approximately 2,355 acres. The property described by the tax lots is illustrated by Exhibit A, which is attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and made a part hereof by this reference. (Ord. 3000 § 2, 2006)


8.20.020      Prohibitions.

(1)  Except as provided in SHMC 8.20.060, it is unlawful for a person to enter or remain in the watershed without an entry permit issued by the city of St. Helens in their personal possession.

(2)  It is unlawful for a person with or without an entry permit to enter or remain in the watershed in violation of the permit prohibitions and rules specified on the reverse side of the permit and in this section. 

(3)  It is unlawful for a person to enter or remain in the watershed in violation of any state statute, state regulation, county or city ordinance, the specific prohibitions, terms and conditions of this chapter, or the terms and conditions of an entry permit.

(4)  It is unlawful for a person to enter or remain in the watershed between dusk to dawn, without a valid entry permit that has special use authorization obtained from the city of St. Helens.

(5)  It is unlawful for a person to enter or remain in the watershed, with or without a permit, when there is a posted fire danger or a declared emergency.

(6)  It is unlawful for a person to operate a motor vehicle, including but not limited to a truck, car, van, motorcycle, quad, camper, any type of recreational vehicle, or any other form of motorized vehicle on the city watershed properties. A motor vehicle used in violation of this section will be subject to towing and impoundment under Ordinance 2373, as amended (Chapter 8.40 SHMC). Ordinance 2373 as amended is expressly understood to be extra-territorial in its application by this reference. Notwithstanding the prohibitions of this section, the city will make reasonable accommodation of handicapped visitors upon reasonable notice to the city administrator, and upon issuance of an entry permit.

(7)  It is unlawful for a person to discard or deposit any rubbish, trash, garbage, debris, animal waste, animal carcass, or other refuse in the watershed.

(8)  It is unlawful for a person to discard any glass, cans, trash, rubbish, debris, litter, or substance in the watershed within 100 yards of any body of water which could cause pollution or endanger the purity of the lakes, springs, streams, dams, creeks, or tributaries in the watershed.

(9)  It is unlawful for a person to light or maintain a fire of any kind, including but not limited to campfires, smoking, and torches, while in the watershed. 

(10)  It is unlawful for any person to possess any explosive or fire accelerant, including but not limited to dynamite, fireworks of any kind, gasoline, oil, propane, or butane while in the watershed.

(11)  It is unlawful for any person to possess a firearm or weapon in the watershed without a valid entry permit with special use authorization that allows entry for hunting purposes during a regular hunting season as specified in the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife Big Game and Game Bird Regulations. Notwithstanding this provision, any discharge of a firearm or weapon unrelated to hunting and any discharge of a firearm or weapon in posted boundary zones marked as no-shooting zones is expressly prohibited. Weapons include any spring- or air-actuated pellet gun, air gun, BB gun, crossbow, bow and arrow, or blowgun.

(12)  It is unlawful for any person to kill, injure, or remove any animal, fish, or fowl from the watershed without a valid entry permit with special use authorization and the appropriate state-issued license and tag.

(13)  It is unlawful for any person to possess, sell or consume any alcoholic beverage, intoxicant or controlled substance in the watershed.

(14)  It is unlawful for any person to: (a) post a sign of any kind, (b) construct a building or structure of any kind, or (c) attach a sign or structure to any tree, shrub, railing, fountain, post, statue, bridge, monument, or any other structure located in the watershed.

(15)  It is unlawful for any person in the watershed to solicit or conduct any business, or solicit contributions, without an approved concession agreement between the vendor and the city.

(16)  It is unlawful for any person to cut, burn, damage, or remove any forest product, including firewood, while in the watershed.

(17)  It is unlawful for any person to alter, change, deface, destroy, or remove any structure, sign, warning, notice, gate, or lock that was implemented, posted or maintained by the city or its duly authorized agents in the watershed. (Ord. 3000 § 3, 2006)


8.20.030      Exceptions.

The prohibitions of SHMC 8.20.020 do not apply to government officials entering the property in the performance of their lawful duties, including, but not limited to, authorized law enforcement officers, Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife employees, Oregon Department of Forestry employees, Columbia River Fire and Rescue, emergency service personnel, city employees, or city contractors. (Ord. 3000 § 4, 2006)


8.20.040      Permits.

A permit specifying the location to which it applies shall be issued by the city free of charge to individuals that complete and sign the permit application. The signature required on the application certifies the information provided is true and correct and is made under the penalty of perjury and false swearing. By signing the permit application the individual also acknowledges receipt of the rules and regulations that govern entry by permit. Falsification of entry applications will be prosecuted. Entry permits may be obtained from St. Helens City Hall, 265 Strand Street, St. Helens, Oregon 97051 between 8:30 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. and between 1:00 p.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, excluding legal holidays. Entry permits with special use authorization (overnight camping, hunting, etc.) may only be obtained from City Hall. Entry permits may also be obtained from other authorized locations. All entry permits will be ineffective and entry upon the property will not be permitted when there is fire danger, or when the city council, the mayor, or his designee specifies that entry shall not be permitted pursuant to the city emergency operations ordinance (Chapter 2.48 SHMC) or other declared emergency. The city may deny an application for an entry permit to persons that: (1) have been convicted of any crime or any game violation in any jurisdiction, or (2) are on a current release agreement concerning any fish and game offense, property crime, or any controlled substance manufacturing offense. (Ord. 3000 § 5, 2006)


8.20.050      Group permits.

Issuance of a group permit requires that all persons to which the group permit will apply be identified on the permit application, and each person must meet the minimum qualifications for issuance given in SHMC 8.20.040. Group permits are limited to two adults per permit and an unlimited number of juveniles. An adult and/or juvenile named on the permit shall be deemed to be in possession of a permit allowing entry if they enter the watershed accompanied by the other adult and one of the adults has personal possession of a permit. (Ord. 3000 § 6, 2006)


8.20.060      Enforcement.

State laws are enforced in the watershed by the state police and other law enforcement agencies. The city police may also cite violators for violations of state law, and violations of this and other city ordinances. Crimes and violations created by city ordinance require appearance in St. Helens municipal court. In addition, any city enforcement officer may cite violators for civil violations to appear in St. Helens municipal court and/or refer violators to the St. Helens police department or prosecuting attorney. The prosecuting attorney shall designate the appropriate mental state on the complaint for criminal violations of this chapter.

The following are listed "enforcement officers" and are hereby specifically authorized by law to make such investigations and inspections as are necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and to issue violation citations to individuals or entities to appear in the St. Helens municipal court:

(1)  Any city police officer, city code enforcement officer, city building official, city planning administrator, city administrator, city engineering manager, or supervisory employee of the city public works/parks department and such other employees of the city of St. Helens as are specifically identified in an order or resolution of the city council. (Ord. 3000 § 7, 2006)


8.20.070      Penalties.

(1)  Violations of this chapter are punishable as set forth in Schedule A attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter, incorporated and made a part hereof by this reference.

(2)  The fine for any business entity shall be double the misdemeanor or violation fine specified for an individual that is provided in the criminal, vehicle, or violation codes adopted by city ordinance, or as specified in this chapter.

(3)  Any offense noted herein which constitutes a criminal, vehicle or violation code offense shall be punishable as set forth in the Oregon Criminal, Vehicle or Violation Codes adopted by reference by city ordinance. Any offense not specifically classified in this chapter shall be considered a class C misdemeanor. 

(4)  In addition to any fines imposed by the court, the court is specifically authorized to order abatement and restitution, as well as community service, as appropriate for the level of violation or crime.

(5)  Each day’s violation of any section, subsection, paragraph, or clause shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 3000 § 8, 2006)


8.20.080      Exclusion from city watershed.

Any authorized law enforcement officer, peace officer, or city enforcement officer may exclude any person who violates any applicable provision of law from the city watershed property for a period not to exceed 120 days. For purposes of this chapter, "applicable provision of law" includes any applicable provision of this chapter, other city ordinance (including criminal laws and vehicle codes), applicable federal, state law or regulation, or rule, regulation, order or permit issued by the city council.

(1)  Written notice shall be given to any person excluded from the city watershed property. Such notice shall specify the dates and places of exclusion. It shall be signed by the issuing party, and a warning expressing the consequences for failure to comply shall be prominently displayed on the notice.

(2)  A person receiving such notice may appeal to the chief of police, to have the written notice rescinded or the period shortened. The appeal notice shall specify the relief sought and the reason for said relief. An appeal must be filed with the chief of police within five days of receiving notice. This is a jurisdictional requirement. The chief of police or his designee (i.e., a hearing officer) shall uphold the exclusion if, upon de novo review, the preponderance of the evidence convinces the chief or his designee that, more likely than not, the person in fact committed the violation, and that the exclusion is otherwise in accordance with law. If an appeal of the exclusion is timely filed under this section, the effectiveness of the exclusion shall be stayed, pending the outcome of the appeal. If the exclusion is affirmed, the remaining period of the exclusion shall be effective immediately upon issuance of the written decision. 

(3)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the exclusion of any person lawfully exercising free speech rights or other rights protected by the Constitution of the state of Oregon or the Constitution of the United States of America. However, a person engaged in such protected activity who commits acts that are not protected, in violation of applicable provisions of law, shall be subject to exclusion as provided by this section.

(4)  This section is in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other ordinance or law. No person shall enter or remain on the city watershed property at any time during which there is in effect a notice of exclusion issued under this section excluding that person from the watershed property. Entrance in violation of an exclusion order shall result in trespass, a class C misdemeanor. (Ord. 3000 § 9, 2006)


Chapter 8.24 PARK REGULATIONS

Sections:

8.24.010    Purpose.

8.24.020    Definitions.

8.24.030    Motorized vehicles.

8.24.040    Animal control.

8.24.050    Fire and fireworks.

8.24.060    Commercial activity.

8.24.065    Smoking in city parks.

8.24.070    Garbage and other refuse.

8.24.080    Motor vehicle speed.

8.24.090    Dangerous equipment and activities.

8.24.100    Special use areas.

8.24.110    Sound.

8.24.120    Hours of use – Sleeping and camping – Liquor.

8.24.130    Hours of park closure.

8.24.140    Liability.

8.24.150    Flora.

8.24.160    Marking, injuring or disturbing any structure.

8.24.170    Discretion of director of parks and recreation.

8.24.180    Penalties for park offenses.

8.24.190    Rules and regulations.

8.24.200    Campground rules for parks.

8.24.210    Trespass.

8.24.220    Fees.

8.24.230    Inspection and citation.

8.24.240    Schedule A – Parks offenses.


8.24.010 Purpose.

The parks of this city are established and maintained as areas of recreation, relaxation and enjoyment for the public. It is intended that they shall be regulated and used to permit enjoyment by a maximum number of people engaged in widely diverse interests and activities as may be practical within the limits of space, design and accommodation available in each park unit. Limitations may be required to ensure the use of park areas in safety and to protect the rights of others in surrounding areas. (Ord. 2250 § 1, 1978)


8.24.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter:

(1) The term “park” means an area of land owned or controlled by the public, set aside and maintained by the public for the recreation and relaxation of the public, including neighborhood parks and community parks, as well as limited use parks (which includes undeveloped greenways).

(2) The term “park” includes school grounds of each public school within the city of St. Helens when said school ground is being used by the parks and recreation department of the city of St. Helens as provided in any agreement between the city of St. Helens and the school district.

(3) As used in this chapter, the term “director of city parks” means the city engineering manager or his designee, acting as the director of parks. (Ord. 2958 § 2, 2005; Ord. 2250 § 2, 1978)


8.24.030 Motorized vehicles.

Motorized vehicles such as autos, trucks, motorcycles, motorscooters, go carts, and all terrain vehicles shall operate, stop or park only upon designated roadways or within designated parking areas unless specifically authorized by the director. Parking prohibitions, time limits or other parking restrictions for areas within city parks may be designated by the director with official traffic signs. (Ord. 2446 § 1, 1983; Ord. 2250 § 3, 1978)


8.24.040 Animal control.

Except where expressly prohibited by SHMC 8.24.190(4), the director of city parks is hereby granted reasonable discretion to designate special use areas and otherwise regulate by administrative order, up to two weeks in duration, the presence and activities of dogs and other animals in city parks, including the designation of dog park areas. (Ord. 2958 § 3, 2005; Ord. 2563, 1988; Ord. 2250 § 4, 1978)


8.24.050 Fire and fireworks.

No person shall build or maintain any fire in a park, except in fire rings or fireplaces as provided by the city or in a stove or barbecue unit where picnic areas are provided. No person shall take firewood from any park for his own personal use unless authorized by park officials. No person shall ignite or use any type of firework, sparkler, snake, model rocket, rocket motor, other form of explosive, or smoke-producing device or material in any city park or on any city docks, except for qualified pyrotechnicians with proper city, state and federal permits and liability insurance who may use Sand Island to ignite fireworks. (Ord. 3005 § 2, 2006; Ord. 2250 § 5, 1978)


8.24.060 Commercial activity.

(1) Prior to issuance of any permit for periods of exclusive use over two weeks in duration, the director shall obtain review by the parks and trails commission and approval by the council.

(2) No person who holds a valid permit issued by the director under this section shall sell merchandise or services within a park in violation of any conditions stated in that permit.

(3) The director shall obtain, in the conditions of a permit, reasonable contributions of labor and money based on the applicant’s ability to contribute in exchange for the applicant’s priority use of park facilities and the applicant’s retaining the proceeds from concessions.

(4) Permits for commercial activities in city parks shall not be reissued for another season until the permit applicant has submitted an annual report of the preceding season, including the following:

(a) Park concession stands, gross sales, expenses and net receipts certified for accuracy by the authorized agent of the applicant.

(b) Applicant improvements to the park in the preceding 12 months.

(c) Number of persons permitted to stay overnight during the term of the previous permit, if any.

(d) Applicant expenditures for park maintenance, including city lighting, if any. (Ord. 3229 § 3, 2018; Ord. 2505, 1986; Ord. 2250 § 6, 1978)


8.24.065 Smoking in city parks.

See SHMC 8.32.010. (Ord. 3188 § 1, 2015; Ord. 3136 § 1, 2010)


8.24.070 Garbage and other refuse.

(1) No person shall discard or dispose of any garbage in a park, except in a receptacle provided for such garbage and other refuse.

(2) No person shall take any garbage or other refuse into a public park for the purpose of discarding or disposing of such garbage or other refuse. (Ord. 2250 § 7, 1978)


8.24.080 Motor vehicle speed.

The designated speed for motor vehicles upon the roadways within any park is 10 miles per hour unless otherwise posted. No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon any roadway in a park at a speed greater than permitted by the basic rule as provided in ORS 811.100. (Ord. 3186 § 7, 2015; Ord. 2250 § 8, 1978)


8.24.090 Dangerous equipment and activities.

No person shall use or engage in any activity that the director determines, in his reasonable discretion, creates an unreasonable interference or danger to other persons. Such activity shall include, but not be limited to, the use of golf clubs, archery equipment, a discus, javelin or shot; or any aircraft, rocket or missile powered by fuel or mechanical means; or any firearm. Such activities will be allowed only as provided in SHMC 8.24.100. (Ord. 2250 § 9, 1978)


8.24.100 Special use areas.

The director is authorized to set aside, establish, alter, and/or discontinue special use areas in one or more of the parks. These special use areas would include, but not be limited to, activities such as horse or pony riding, junior olympics, bicycle riding, camping activities, motorcycle riding, or any one or more of those activities otherwise prohibited under SHMC 8.24.090. Before establishing, altering or discontinuing such a special use area, the director shall determine, in his or her reasonable discretion, priority of need for such an area and whether the activity may be carried on without unreasonable interference or danger to other persons.

If the director establishes a special use area, the director may designate such hours or days of usage, the particular activity or activities that are permitted, and such conditions as he or she determines to be reasonably required for the safety and convenience of persons and property. He or she shall mark the boundaries of the special use area and post such signs and warnings concerning that special use area as he or she deems reasonably appropriate. No person shall use or injure any special use area, except for the purposes of one or more of the activities permitted in that special use area under any conditions specified by the director.

Prior to issuance of any permit for periods of exclusive use over two weeks in duration, the director shall obtain review by the parks and trails commission and approval by the council. (Ord. 3229 § 3, 2018; Ord. 2505, 1986; Ord. 2250 § 10, 1978)


8.24.110 Sound.

(1) No person shall disturb the peace in any park between the hours of 11:15 p.m. and 7:30 a.m. For purposes of this subsection, “disturbing the peace” is defined as including, but not limited to, the following:

(a) Playing a musical instrument.

(b) Playing a radio, tape recorder or television.

(c) Shouting.

(d) Engaging in any organized games.

(2) No person shall use any device to amplify sound in any park unless a valid permit has been issued by the director under subsection (3) of this section.

(3) The director may issue a permit authorizing the use of one or more designated devices to amplify sound by one or more designated person in a designated area of a park on a designated date between specific hours if he or she finds, in his or her reasonable discretion, that the number of persons to be entertained or served by the use of sound can be adequately and reasonably served only by the amplification of sound. The director may include conditions in such permit which he or she deems reasonable, and the director may revoke a permit if the terms of the permit are violated, or he or she may deny a permit to a person or group of persons who have violated the terms of a permit within the previous year.

(4) No person who holds a valid permit issued by the director under this section shall amplify sound within a park in violation of any conditions stated in that permit. (Ord. 2250 § 11, 1978)


8.24.120 Hours of use – Sleeping and camping – Liquor.

(1) No person shall sleep in any park between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except as provided in subsection (3) of this section.

(2) No person shall use any tent, shelter-half, vehicle, camper or trailer as a shelter for housing or sleeping in any park area, except as provided in subsection (3) of this section.

(3) The director may, in his or her reasonable discretion, issue permits for the use of tents, shelter-halves, vehicles, campers or trailers as shelters for housing or sleeping in parks and for any overnight sleeping in parks between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.

(4) No corporation, organization or person shall bring, possess, consume, or permit any person to bring, possess or consume any intoxicating liquor, beverage or substance on city park premises, except in Columbia View Park as authorized in a negotiated park concession agreement, and only in strict compliance with the terms and conditions of that agreement. At a minimum, the concessionaire shall strictly abide by all parks rules and regulations, including specifically permit requirements for exclusive use and commercial activity. All required OLCC licenses and permits shall also be obtained by the concessionaire. A valid park concession agreement serves as the exclusive use/commercial activity permit. No corporation, organization or person shall violate the terms and conditions of the approved parks concession agreement. The alcohol possession and consumption prohibitions of this section do not apply to Sand Island. (Ord. 2957 § 2, 2005; Ord. 2430 §§ 1, 2, 1983; Ord. 2250 § 12, 1978)


8.24.130 Hours of park closure.

No person shall enter or use any park during posted hours of closure without a permit to do so from the director. (Ord. 2250 § 13, 1978)


8.24.140 Liability.

All persons to whom an exclusive use permit has been granted must agree in writing to hold the city harmless and indemnify the city from any and all liability for injury to persons or property occurring as a result of the activity sponsored by permittee. Said persons shall be liable to the city for any and all damages to parks, facilities and buildings owned by the city which results from the activity of permittee or is caused by any who participate in said activity. (Ord. 2250 § 14, 1978)


8.24.150 Flora.

No person other than a duly authorized city employee in the performance of his duty or persons participating in city-approved activities shall dig, remove, destroy, injure, mutilate or cut any trees, plants, shrubs, blooms or flowers, or any portion thereof growing in any park. (Ord. 2250 § 15, 1978)


8.24.160 Marking, injuring or disturbing any structure.

No person other than a duly authorized city employee in the performance of his or her duties shall:

(1) Cut, break, injure, deface or disturb any rock, building, cage, pen, monument, sign, fence, bench, structure, apparatus, equipment or property in a park.

(2) Mark or place thereon any mark, writing or printing.

(3) Attach thereto any sign, card, display or other similar device, except as authorized by permit issued by the director. (Ord. 2250 § 16, 1978)


8.24.170 Discretion of director of parks and recreation.

Whenever this chapter makes a reference to the exercise of reasonable discretion by the director, he or she shall take into account the use and enjoyment of the parks for the maximum number of people and the general purpose set forth in SHMC 8.24.010. (Ord. 2250 § 17, 1978)


8.24.180 Penalties for park offenses.

(1) Violations of this chapter are punishable as set forth in SHMC 8.24.240, Schedule A, incorporated and made a part hereof by this reference.

(2) Any offense not specifically enumerated in this section shall be considered an “A” violation.

(3) Any offense noted herein which constitutes a vehicle code violation or offense shall be punishable as set forth in the Oregon Vehicle Code adopted by reference by city ordinance.

(4) In addition to any fines imposed by the court, the court is specifically authorized to order abatement and restitution, as well as community service, as appropriate for the level of violation or crime.

(5) Each day’s violation of any section, subsection, paragraph or clause shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 3005 § 3, 2006; Ord. 2958 § 4, 2005; Ord. 2250 § 18, 1978)


8.24.190 Rules and regulations.

(1) General.

(a) St. Helens city parks shall be open for public recreation from sunrise to sunset. (Except by permit.)

(b) No peddling, soliciting or commercial enterprise is permitted in a city park without a permit.

(c) Disorderly conduct, abusive language, noisy disturbances or disregard of these rules and regulations will be grounds for your immediate removal from the park by the police or authorized city officials.

(d) Park participants will be held responsible for the conduct of and any damage to the park or its equipment caused by their children.

(e) Children under 10 years of age shall not be left unattended in any city park.

(f) No person shall consume or have in their possession any intoxicating beverage or narcotics while in or upon the property of a city park.

(g) Air rifles, BB guns, bow and arrow or other guns and dangerous objects may not be used in city parks.

(h) No swimming is allowed on park property because lifeguards and a suitable designated swimming area is not provided.

(i) No overnight camping is allowed on park property without a permit.

(j) The mayor, council and city officials or employees will not be responsible for accidents, injuries or loss of property by fire, theft, wind, flood or other natural acts which are beyond their control. Equipment furnished on the grounds is solely for your convenience and used at your own risk.

(k) The mayor, council and city officials or employees are not responsible for any personal injury to children or adults using playground equipment. Participants use the equipment at their own risk.

(l) All persons should immediately notify the parks department office or the police department of hazardous conditions in the park or conditions that violate these rules and regulations.

(2) Automobiles and Motorized Vehicles.

(a) Motor vehicles shall be parked only in the designated areas. Motor vehicles parked elsewhere or on the grass will be towed at the owner’s expense. No auto repairs allowed anywhere at any time on park property.

(b) The speed limit in city parks is 10 miles per hour and must be observed at all times and drivers must be alert for children and pedestrians.

(c) Bicycles, roller skates, skateboards and other types of nonmotorized vehicles must be used safely, properly and without the possibility of injury to others.

(d) Disturbing or careless operation of motorcycles, automobiles or other types of motor vehicles will be grounds for removal from the park and/or citation by the city police.

(3) Park Buildings and Facilities.

(a) Park buildings and facilities are provided for public convenience or pleasure. All persons who use park buildings or facilities do so on condition that they keep the premises neat and clean and show respect for the premises and future users thereof. Any irregularities should be reported immediately to the park management.

(b) Except for service animals, no animals are allowed in the park buildings or structures at any time.

(4) Animals.

(a) No person shall ride or lead any horse or pony in city parks, except upon a roadway or designated parking area or designated bridle path.

(b) Except as provided herein, pets are prohibited from being at large in any city park. For purposes of this section, “at large” means not on a leash, as set forth herein. Pets are permitted in city parks (unless otherwise posted) only if they are on a leash that is six feet or less in length. Pets shall be kept under supervision at all times and not allowed to run at large, except in specific areas designated as dog parks, and pets shall not be allowed to commit any nuisance in the limits of the park.

(c) An off-leash area has been designated by Council Resolution No. 1564 in McCormick Park.  Dogs shall be allowed to be off leash for play and exercise purposes in the area designated as the McCormick Park pet off-leash area so long the rules set forth in subsection (7) of this section are observed. 

(d) All fecal material left by the pet or animal in the park must be picked up immediately by the owner or person in control of the animal, and placed in a container and removed from the park for proper disposal.

(e) Violation of these regulations will lead to the removal of both animal or pet and owner.

(5) Solid Waste Disposal and Fire Protection.

(a) All park users must place garbage and trash in the proper receptacles.

(b) No person shall bring any nonpark-generated garbage into any city park for the purpose of discarding or disposing of such garbage or other refuse.

(c) Fires are permitted only in fire rings or cookers. No open fires are permitted elsewhere on park property.

(6) Vegetative Protection.

(a) No person other than a duly authorized city employee in the performance of his or her duty or persons participating in city approved activities shall dig, remove, destroy, injure, mutilate, or cut any trees, plants, shrubs, blooms, or flowers, or any portion thereof growing in the park.

(b) Trees and shrubs are not to be climbed, hung on, or used as poles for game nets or swings.

(c) No bills can be posted on the trees or shrubs, nor can any nails, screws or other foreign objects be driven into the plants.

(d) Activities that will damage the grass or flowers, such as open fires or unauthorized digging, are strictly prohibited.

(7) Additional rules applicable within the off-leash area of McCormick Park as designated by Council Resolution No. 1564 are as follows:

(a) All dogs must be licensed by the jurisdiction in which the dog resides and have proof of license available while in park.

(b) Dog owners must read and become familiar with all off-leash area rules before entering the area.

(c) This is not a fenced area  It is therefore your responsibility to ensure that your dog does not leave the area unless properly leashed.

(d) Owners must be attentive and watch their dogs at all times, staying near in case intervention becomes necessary.

(e) Keep your dog under voice control at all times.

(f) Dogs in heat are not allowed in the area.

(g) All dogs must have proper immunizations and flea control.

(h) Aggressive dogs as defined in SHMC 6.04.010(1) must be leashed and removed from the area.

(i) Waste must be picked up immediately.

(j) No food or treats (for animals or humans) allowed in the off-leash area.

(k) Repealed by Ord. 3205.

(l) No human running allowed.

(m) No strollers in the off-leash area.

(n) Children under the age of 12 must be supervised by an adult.

(o) Abandoned or unsupervised dogs will be impounded.

(p) Call city animal control at (503) 397-1521 for abandoned or unsupervised dogs.

(q) Call 911 for biting or other serious incidents.

(8) The applicable rules and regulations shall be posted in each park, in a place conspicuous to the public. (Ord. 3206 § 1, 2016; Ord. 3205 § 2, 2016; Ord. 3149 § 2, 2011; Ord. 2958 §§ 5, 6, 2005; Ord. 2797 § 1, 1999; Ord. 2568, 1989)


8.24.200 Campground rules for parks.

The following are overnight camping rules:

(1) No overnight camping without a permit.

(2) No drinking of alcoholic beverages allowed in McCormick Park.

(3) Age limit: any minors under 18 years of age must be accompanied by a responsible adult 21 years of age or older.

(4) Maximum stay – McCormick Park: 72 hours is the maximum stay during a seven-day period.

(5) Maximum stay – Sand Island Park: 10 days is the maximum stay during a 30-day period.

(6) Camping season: May through October.

(7) Camping fee: as per city council resolution.

(8) In addition, all campers must abide by the posted rules and regulations for park use. (Ord. 3088 § 1, 2008; Ord. 2892 § 1, 2003; Ord. 2600, 1990)


8.24.210 Trespass.

Any peace officer or park official or employee may exclude any person who violates any applicable provision of law from any or all city parks for a period not to exceed 120 days. For purposes of this chapter, “applicable provision of law” includes any applicable provision of this chapter, or of any city ordinance, including criminal laws and vehicle codes, or any rule, regulation, order or permit issued by the director of parks or the city council on recommendation of the parks and trails commission, or any applicable federal or state law or regulation.

(1) Written notice shall be given to any person excluded from any city park(s). Such notice shall specify the dates and places of exclusion. It shall be signed by the issuing party; warning of consequences for failure to comply shall be prominently displayed on the notice.

(2) A person receiving such notice may appeal to the chief of police, to have the written notice rescinded or the period shortened. The appeal notice shall specify the relief sought and the reason for said relief. An appeal must be filed with the chief of police within five days of receiving notice. This is a jurisdictional requirement. The police chief or his designee (i.e., a hearing officer) shall uphold the exclusion if, upon de novo review, the preponderance of the evidence convinces the chief or his designee that, more likely than not, the person in fact committed the violation, and if the exclusion is otherwise in accordance with law. If an appeal of the exclusion is timely filed under this section, the effectiveness of the exclusion shall be stayed, pending the outcome of the appeal. If the exclusion is affirmed, the remaining period of the exclusion shall be effective immediately upon issuance of the written decision.

(3) Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the exclusion of any person lawfully exercising free speech rights or other rights protected by the Constitution of the state of Oregon or the Constitution of the United States of America. However, a person engaged in such protected activity who commits acts that are not protected, but that violate applicable provisions of law, shall be subject to exclusion as provided by this section.

(4) This section is in addition to and not in lieu of any other ordinance or law. No person shall enter or remain in any park at any time during which there is in effect a notice of exclusion issued under this section excluding that person from the park (i.e., violation is trespass). Trespass is a class C misdemeanor. (Ord. 3229 § 3, 2018; Ord. 2958 § 7, 2005; Ord. 2662, 1993)


8.24.220 Fees.

(1) The city council may set fees for the use of parks and recreational facilities. Such fees shall provide for the equitable sharing of the costs of operating city parks and recreational facilities considering the fact that taxes paid by city residents are used to support the parks and other recreational facilities while nonresidents do not contribute financially to their support. Fees may be assessed to cover costs that can be attributable to benefiting individuals or groups.

(2) Fees for use of parks and recreational facilities may be set by resolution adopted by the city council after first receiving a recommendation from the parks and recreation commission. (Ord. 2860 §§ 1, 2, 2002)


8.24.230 Inspection and citation.

The following are listed “enforcement officers” and are hereby specifically authorized by law to make such investigations and inspections as are necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and to issue violation citations to individuals or entities to appear in the St. Helens municipal court:

(1) Any city police officer, city code enforcement officer, city building official, city planning administrator, city administrator, city engineering manager, or supervisory employee of the city public works/parks department and such other employees of the city of St. Helens as are specifically identified in an order or resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2958 § 8, 2005; Ord. 2250 § 23, 1978)


8.24.240 Schedule A – Parks offenses.

(1) Violation of sections: 

	(a)	SHMC 8.24.030	Parking locations and time limits

	(b)	SHMC 8.24.120(1)	Sleeping without a camping permit

	(c)	SHMC 8.24.120(2) 	Camping without a permit

	(e)	SHMC 8.24.160(3)	Displaying signs without a permit

	(f)	SHMC 8.24.190(1)(h)	Swimming

	(g)	SHMC 8.24.190(1)(i)	Camping without a permit

	(h)	SHMC 8.24.190(2)(a)	Performing auto repairs or parking violations

	(i)	SHMC 8.24.190(6)(b)	Climbing trees

	(j)	SHMC 8.24.190(6)(c)	Posting signs on vegetation

	(k)	SHMC 8.24.200(1)	Camping without a permit

	(l)	SHMC 8.24.200(5)	Camping out of season

are class D violations.

(2) Violation of sections:

	(a)	SHMC 8.24.040	Horse not on bridle path

	(b)	SHMC 8.24.190(3)(b)	Pets in park buildings

	(c)	SHMC 8.24.190(4)	Animals

	(d)	SHMC 8.24.190(7)	McCormick Park pet off-leash area rules

	(e)	SHMC 8.24.200(4)	Staying more than 72 hours in one week

are class C violations.

(3) Violation of sections:

	(a)	SHMC 8.24.050	Fire not in a fire pit, using or lighting fireworks and other similar materials

	(b)	SHMC 8.24.090	Golf clubs, javelin, shot put, discus, etc.

	(c)	SHMC 8.24.110	Sound

	(d)	SHMC 8.24.190(5)(c)	Fire not in a fire pit

are class A violations.

(4) Violation of sections:

	(a)	SHMC 8.24.030	Off-road motor vehicle operation

	(b)	SHMC 8.24.070	Garbage and refuse

	(c)	SHMC 8.24.090	Air rifles, bows, fuel-powered rockets, missiles or aircraft

	(d)	SHMC 8.24.130	Park closure (after hours)

	(e)	SHMC 8.24.190(1)(g)	Air rifles, bows, fuel-powered rockets, missiles or aircraft

	(f)	SHMC 8.24.190(5)(a)	Garbage and refuse

	(g)	SHMC 8.24.190(5)(b)	Garbage and refuse

are class C misdemeanors.

(5) Violation of sections:

	(a)	SHMC 8.24.060(2)	Commercial activity without a permit

	(b)	SHMC 8.24.120(4)	Possession/ consumption of alcohol

	(c)	SHMC 8.24.190(1)(f)	Possession/ consumption of alcohol

	(d)	SHMC 8.24.200(2)	Possession/ consumption of alcohol

	(e)	SHMC 8.24.150	Flora

	(f)	SHMC 8.24.190(1)(b)	Commercial activity without a permit

	(g)	SHMC 8.24.190(1)(c)	Disorderly conduct

	(h)	SHMC 8.24.190(6)(a)	Destruction of vegetation

	(i)	SHMC 8.24.190(6)(d)	Damaging vegetation

are class B misdemeanors.

(6) Violation of sections:

	(a)	SHMC 8.24.090	Firearm in park

	(b)	SHMC 8.24.160(1), (2)	Destruction of buildings

are class A misdemeanors. (Ord. 3206 § 1, 2016; Ord. 3149 § 3, 2011; Ord. 3005 § 3, 2006; Ord. 2958, 2005)


Chapter 8.28 CITY DOCKS Amended Ord. 3239

Sections:

8.28.010    Purpose.

8.28.020    Definitions. Amended Ord. 3239

8.28.030    Use of city docks.

8.28.040    Time limitations. Amended Ord. 3239

8.28.050    Commercial use of city docks.

8.28.052    Public assembly exemption.

8.28.054    Registration and commercial moorage agreements.

8.28.056    Fees and charges.

8.28.060    Prohibited activities. Amended Ord. 3239

8.28.070    Sanitation and waste disposal.

8.28.072    Abandoned vessels.

8.28.074    Hazardous vessels.

8.28.080    Penalties.

8.28.090    Inspection and citation.

8.28.100    Impoundment/tow. Amended Ord. 3239

8.28.110    Additional remedies.


8.28.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to assure access to city docks by setting reasonable time limitation on moorage at the docks and to preserve the recreational purpose of the docks by limiting their use to recreational boats or vessels. (Ord. 2888 § 1, 2003)


8.28.020 Definitions. Amended Ord. 3239

(1) “Abandoned vessel” means a vessel left at the city docks in violation of the time limitations in SHMC 8.28.040 or the Oregon State Marine Board certificate of number and registration requirements.

(2) “City” means the city of St. Helens.

(3) “City administrator” means the person holding the position of city administrator or any agent, employee, or designee authorized to perform the duties of this chapter by the city administrator.

(4) “City docks” means all public docks operated by the city of St. Helens, including the Courthouse Docks, Sand Island Marine Park North, and Sand Island Marine Park.

(5) “Commercial” means any profession, trade, occupation, shop, or any calling carried on for profit or livelihood, including but not limited to the rental of commercial or residential property, and those working as independent contractors, whether or not the contractor is paid on an hourly or job basis.

(6) “Hazardous vessel” means any vessel which is unseaworthy or which is in such a state of disrepair that the environment, life, or property could become endangered if such state is unduly prolonged; any vessel which presents a hazard to navigation.

(7)  “Moorage” means any place where a vessel is anchored, made fast to a dock, or laid alongside another vessel made fast to a dock, including side and multi-side ties.

(8) “Moorage agreement” means a commercial moorage license agreement entered into between the city of St. Helens and an owner/operator.

(9) “Owner/operator” means a person who claims, expressly or otherwise, to have lawful care, custody, control or possession of a vessel by legal title, equitable interest, lease or charter, or by any other method or manner giving the person lawful care, custody, control or possession of a vessel.

(10) “Person” means an individual, a partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity recognized by the state of Oregon.

(11) “Recognized boating or yachting organization” means any active, incorporated nonprofit boating or yachting association that provides written notice of incorporation to the city administrator.

(12) “Vessel” means every type of watercraft. (Ord. 3087 § 1, 2008; Ord. 2888 § 2, 2003)


8.28.030 Use of city docks.

Use of city docks includes the following:

(1) Mooring or tying a vessel directly to a city dock;

(2) Locating a vessel within five feet of a city dock;

(3) Mooring or tying a vessel to a vessel which is moored or tied to a city dock or located within five feet of a city dock;

(4) Mooring or tying a vessel to one or more of a group of vessels, one of which is moored or tied to a dock or located within five feet of a city dock. Vessels moored or tied to city docks shall be limited to three abreast on each side of the city dock;

(5) Fishing in designated fishing zones. (Ord. 3087 § 2, 2008; Ord. 2888 § 3, 2003)


8.28.040 Time limitations. Amended Ord. 3239

(1) City docks shall not be used by a vessel for moorage, either directly to a dock or to one or more vessels that are moored to a dock, for more than five continuous calendar days, not to exceed 10 calendar days per calendar month. The five-calendar-day period shall begin with the first hour the vessel is tied or moored to any city dock, regardless of whether or not the vessel moved from its original mooring to another position on the same or any other city dock during the five-calendar-day period. 

(2) City docks are not available as a place to park an unoccupied boat. Notwithstanding subsection (1) of this section, city docks shall not be used by a vessel for moorage as described in subsection (1) of this section when the vessel is unoccupied, as defined herein. For the purposes of this section, an “unoccupied vessel” is a vessel that is without occupant for a continuous period of at least four hours of every night that the vessel is so moored.

(3) Regardless of how long the vessel has been moored as described herein, any vessel that is moored in violation of subsection (2) of this section is hereby deemed to have exceeded the time limitations allowed in subsection (1) of this section and is, therefore, subject to all penalties and sanctions described herein. (Ord. 3151 § 1, 2011; Ord. 3147 § 1, 2011; Ord. 3087 § 3, 2008; Ord. 2888 § 4, 2003)


8.28.050 Commercial use of city docks.

The city docks shall not be used by commercial vessels or for commercial activity without first entering into a moorage agreement, obtaining the necessary permits and business licenses and paying all fees. (Ord. 3087 § 4, 2008; Ord. 2888 § 5, 2003)


8.28.052 Public assembly exemption.

Any use of the city docks by a recognized boating or yachting organization within the time limits established by this chapter shall be exempt from the public assembly permit requirement of Chapter 8.08 SHMC so long as no adjacent lands are used by the boating or yachting organization. Assembly permits are required for proposed use outside this exception. Nothing herein shall be interpreted as exempting members of such associations or organizations from all other applicable prohibitions and regulations in city ordinances including regulations concerning use of city dock facilities. (Ord. 3087 § 5, 2008)


8.28.054 Registration and commercial moorage agreements.

(1) Permitted Moorage. No commercial vessel will be permitted to be moored at the city docks, unless the vessel is properly registered, a moorage agreement entered into, and all fees and charges have been paid. All vessels mooring at city docks shall be seaworthy; upon request by the city, an owner/operator may be required to demonstrate the seaworthiness of the vessel.

 (2) Registration.

(a) Time for Registration. All vessels must be registered with the city prior to or within two hours after arrival at the facility. Registration will be made with the business office of the city. If the time within which to register is after regular business hours, or if the harbormaster is not on duty, a registration form shall be completed at the start of the next business day. Payment of the fee for the initial term of moorage and any other required fees or charges shall be made at the time of registration.

(b) Information and Authorization Required. At the time of registration, the owner shall provide all information required on the moorage agreement form. If the person making the registration is an operator only, owner authorization for moorage shall be made available upon request.

(c) Notice of Vessel Condition. At the time of registration, the owner/operator of the vessel shall provide notice of the physical condition of the vessel, including any structural limitations which could result in damage to the vessel if the vessel is towed or placed in dry dock. Notice of the physical condition of the vessel shall be updated from time to time when the condition of the vessel changes.

(3) Moorage License Agreements.

(a) Requirements. No commercial vessel shall be moored at the facility without notifying the business office of the city within two hours of its arrival nor moor at the facility for more than six hours without the owner/operator entering into a moorage agreement with the city, according to the terms and conditions as set forth in the agreement. 

(b) Period. A moorage agreement shall be a transient moorage and shall be limited to the dates and length of time specified in the moorage agreement. A “transient moorage” for a commercial vessel shall be any moorage exceeding one hour, but less than six hours. 

(c) Moorage Space. A moorage agreement does not assign a particular space for the designated vessel and it does not guarantee the owner/operator accommodations at any of the city docks.

(4) Renewal. No moorage agreement shall be renewed unless all conditions for the initial issuance of the moorage agreement are still being met, and all fees and charges are paid in full.

(5) Scope. The moorage agreement shall allow the use of the facility for moorage purposes only, and shall grant no further rights, privileges or uses.

(6) Transferability. Moorage agreements shall be issued only to the owner/operator of the vessel, and shall be valid only for the specific vessel designated in the moorage agreement. A moorage agreement may not be assigned, sold, or transferred by any means whatsoever; any such transfer shall be void. Sale of a vessel shall not transfer any rights or privileges under a moorage agreement; a valid moorage agreement does not ensure the transferee will be issued a moorage agreement.

(7) Revocation. The moorage agreement may be revoked by the city upon 10 days’ written notice if the vessel or owner/operator is in violation of the terms of the moorage agreement or any provision of this chapter. 

(a) Notice. Notice of revocation may be by personal delivery or certified mail to the owner/operator at the owner/operator’s last known address, and by posting notice on the vessel. The notice of revocation shall state the moorage agreement has been revoked, give the reasons therefor, and state the owner/operator has 10 days from the date of the notice to correct the violation or have the vessel impounded or otherwise secured at the owner/operator’s expense.

(b) Reinstatement. Upon proof of correction of any violation and payment of all costs and charges, the owner/operator may apply for reinstatement of the moorage agreement, which may be permitted by the city. If reinstatement is permitted, and a second violation occurs at any time within the next six months, the moorage agreement shall be immediately revoked, and no reinstatement shall be allowed.

(8) Cancellation. A moorage agreement may be cancelled by the owner/operator upon 10 days’ written notice to the city, which shall provide an address where the owner/operator can be reached after the termination of the moorage agreement for return of any refund as hereinafter provided. 

(9) Denial. The city may deny a moorage agreement to a vessel which is a hazard to health or safety, or if the owner/operator is delinquent on any fee or charge under this chapter, or any other city ordinance, or if the owner/operator is unwilling or unable to provide the city with the required registration information. Immediately after a moorage agreement has been denied, the owner/operator shall remove the vessel from the facility, and the city shall not moor the vessel nor permit the vessel to be moored until all hazards to health or safety have been corrected and proof of such correction has been provided to the city, all such fees and charges are paid in full, and the required information has been completely provided. (Ord. 3087 § 6, 2008)


8.28.056 Fees and charges.

(1) Establishment. Moorage rates, fees and other charges shall be established by resolution of the city council, and may be reviewed by the city council from time to time and raised or lowered as deemed appropriate.

(2) Terms of Payment. The vessel’s owner/operator shall be liable for all moorage rates, fees and other charges assessed under this chapter. Moorage rates shall be paid in advance, unless otherwise agreed upon in writing by the city. Invoices for all other fees and charges are due and payable at time of presentation to the owner/operator.

(3) Late Charges. A late fee shall be assessed for late payments for each month or part of a month that payments are late. An account is past due if the moorage rate, fee or other charge remains unpaid in whole or in part for a period of 30 days. 

(4) Attorney’s Fees and Costs. The owner/operator shall be liable for any and all collection costs and expenses, including reasonable attorney’s fees, necessary to collect delinquent moorage rates, fees or other charges or to enforce any other provision of this chapter. (Ord. 3087 § 7, 2008)


8.28.060 Prohibited activities. Amended Ord. 3239

(1) No person shall swim from or within 50 feet of the docks;

(2) No person shall obstruct a vessel from docking;

(3) No person shall cut, drill holes in, or attach in any manner any object other than a vessel with mooring lines to the docks without written permission from the city administrator;

(4) No commercial activity will occur on city docks without specific authorization in the moorage agreement;

(5) Vehicles are not allowed on city docks, except for the immediate transport of a bicycle to and from a vessel or the use of a vehicle that is necessary due to a disability. Vehicles include but are not limited to bicycles, scooters, skateboards, rollerblades, mopeds, motorcycles, or other self-propelled units;

(6) Vessels are not allowed to use docking space designated only for emergency craft use. Such docking space is designated by a yellow stripe on the edge of the dock or by a sign or by both. The use of such space by craft other than government emergency craft is prohibited;

(7) Fishing is allowed in the docking space designated for emergency craft use when emergency craft are not present. Persons who are fishing must yield to emergency craft;

(8) Violation of any other limitations, including the time limitations in this chapter. (Ord. 3147 § 2, 2011; Ord. 3087 § 8, 2008; Ord. 2888 § 6, 2003)


8.28.070 Sanitation and waste disposal.

(1) No person shall throw, place, leave, deposit, abandon, cause, or permit to be thrown, placed, left, deposited or abandoned, any industrial waste, litter, or sewage at the facility or adjacent property or into the Columbia River, except in receptacles specifically designated for such purpose by the city. 

(2) No person shall use, cause, or permit the use of a toilet that is not equipped with a device in good operating condition, adequate to treat, hold, incinerate or otherwise handle sewage in such a manner which will prevent pollution on a vessel moored at the city docks or underway in the Columbia River. For the purposes of this section, an acceptable control device is one approved by the U.S. Coast Guard for such purpose.

(3) The owner/operator of the vessel shall be personally liable for any and all cleanup costs, fines and penalties assessed by any other governmental unit, resulting from a violation of this section. (Ord. 3087 § 9, 2008; Ord. 2908 § 1, 2004; Ord. 2888 § 7, 2003)


8.28.072 Abandoned vessels.

No person shall leave an abandoned vessel at the city docks. Any abandoned vessel may be removed in accordance with ORS 830.907 through 830.927 regarding abandoned boats, floating homes, and boathouses. (Ord. 3087 § 10, 2008)


8.28.074 Hazardous vessels.

(1) In the event of an emergency, a hazardous vessel may, immediately and without notice by the city, be secured or removed from the facility. If removal is required, the city may take reasonable efforts to notify the owner/operator prior to moving a hazardous vessel. If the city moves a hazardous vessel without prior notice, notice indicating the vessel has been moved shall be given as soon as practicable. In all other cases, the city shall give written notice to the owner/operator, requesting removal of hazardous vessels within 10 days of the date of such notice. Notice shall be posted on the hazardous vessel, and delivered by personal delivery to the owner/operator or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last address provided by the owner/operator to the city. 

(2) All risk of loss or damage resulting from securing or removing the vessel shall be borne by the vessel owner/operator. In the event the vessel is moved to another location, the vessel and its owner/operator shall be liable for any and all costs associated with removal and storage of the vessel.

(3) In the event any vessel capsizes, sinks or is otherwise disabled in such a manner as to be a hazard to navigation or use of city facilities, all loss, damage or cost of removing the same shall be chargeable to the vessel owner/operator.

(4) A hazardous vessel which remains at the facility in excess of 10 days from the date of notice requesting removal may be deemed an abandoned vessel. (Ord. 3087 § 11, 2008)


8.28.080 Penalties.

Violation of any portion of this chapter shall be punishable as a class B violation. Notwithstanding the above, violation of SHMC 8.28.060(6) (improper use of designated emergency craft space) and SHMC 8.28.060(8) (violation of time limitations of SHMC 8.28.040 and exemptions under SHMC 8.28.070) shall be class A violations. Any person in violation of this chapter can be served with a park ban notice in addition to any other citation. (Ord. 2919 § 2, 2004; Ord. 2888 § 8, 2003)


8.28.090 Inspection and citation.

(1) Investigations and Inspections. The following people are hereby authorized by this chapter to make such investigations and inspections as are necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter: any law enforcement officer, including without limitations any city police officer, city code enforcement officer, sheriff’s deputy, or state police trooper, and city officials such as the city building official, city planning administrator, city engineering manager and such other employees of the city of St. Helens as are specifically identified in an order or resolution of the city council. Nothing herein shall be interpreted as prohibiting privately initiated violation citations as provided in ORS Chapter 153.

(2) Citations. The following people are hereby authorized by this chapter to issue citations to individuals or entities to appear in the St. Helens municipal court: any law enforcement officer, including without limitations any city police officer, city code enforcement officer, sheriff’s deputy, or state police trooper. 

(3) Service of Citations. Unless the police officer or other authorized person issuing the citation witnesses the mooring of the vessel, a rebuttable presumption exists that a vessel moored in violation of this chapter was moored by the registered owner of the vessel and the citation issued for the violation may be placed upon the vessel. If the mooring of the vessel is witnessed by the police officer or other person authorized to issue a citation for the offense, the operator of the vessel shall be the person responsible for violations of this section. (Ord. 3147 § 3, 2011; Ord. 3087 § 12, 2008; Ord. 2919 § 3, 2004; Ord. 2888 § 9, 2003)


8.28.100 Impoundment/tow. Amended Ord. 3239

Law enforcement officers are authorized to call for a tow or impound any vessel in violation of this chapter in accordance with the ORS 830.907 through 830.927 concerning abandoned boats, floating homes and boathouses. Any vessel removed by the authorization of a law enforcement officer shall be disposed of in accordance with ORS 98.245. (Ord. 3087 § 13, 2008; Ord. 2888 § 10, 2003)


8.28.110 Additional remedies.

Any removal of a vessel pursuant to this chapter is in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other civil, criminal, or administrative penalty, sanction, or remedy otherwise authorized by law. (Ord. 3087 § 14, 2008)




Chapter 8.32 SMOKING, TOBACCO AND MARIJUANA USE CONTROL

Sections: 

8.32.010    Smoking, tobacco and marijuana use prohibited.

8.32.100    Inspection and citation.

8.32.200    Penalties.


8.32.010 Smoking, tobacco and marijuana use prohibited.

(1) Smoking, tobacco and marijuana use are prohibited within all city parks, on any posted city-owned property, in any city-owned building, and at any city-sponsored event.

(2) Prohibited products include, but are not limited to, bidis, cigarettes, cigarillos, cigars, clove cigarettes, electronic cigarettes, nicotine vaporizers, nicotine liquids, hookahs, kreteks, pipes, chew, snuff, smokeless tobacco, and marijuana, including edibles.

(3) “SMOKE-FREE/TOBACCO-FREE” signs or signs with the international “no smoking” symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across the cigarette) shall be clearly, sufficiently, and conspicuously posted in every public place where smoking and tobacco use is prohibited by this section. (Ord. 3188 § 2, 2015)


8.32.100 Inspection and citation.

The following are listed “enforcement officers” and are hereby specifically authorized by law to make such investigations and inspections as are necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and to issue violation citations to individuals or entities to appear in the St. Helens municipal court:

(1) Any city police officer, city code enforcement officer, city building official, city planning administrator, city administrator, city engineering manager, or supervisory employee of the city public works/parks department and such other employees of the city of St. Helens as are specifically identified in an order or resolution of the city council. (Ord. 3188 § 2, 2015)


8.32.200 Penalties.

Violation of SHMC 8.32.010 is a class B violation. (Ord. 3188 § 2, 2015)


Chapter 8.36 OUTDOOR BURNING

Sections:

8.36.010    Short title.

8.36.020    Prohibitions.

8.36.030    Exemptions.

8.36.040    Penalty.

8.36.050    Inspection and citation.

8.36.060    Other laws.


8.36.010 Short title.

This chapter shall be known as the “outdoor burning ordinance.” (Ord. 2882 § 2, 2003)


8.36.020 Prohibitions.

(1) Except as provided in SHMC 8.36.030, no person shall kindle, start, maintain or allow to be maintained an “open outdoor fire.” For purposes of this chapter an “open outdoor fire” shall include any open outdoor fire within the ordinary definition and understanding of said words, and shall include, but not be limited to, the outdoor burning of grass, hay, straw, or similar material, as well as commercially available fuel, wood, tree limbs, branches, leaves, trimmings, or any other woody debris, and may also include burning other inappropriate material such as waste, debris, trash, rubbish or garbage, regardless of whether the fire is in the open or contained in a fire ring, burn barrel, outdoor fireplace, trash burner, incinerator, barbecue pit, fire pit or other similar burning container. 

(2) No person shall kindle, start, maintain or allow to be maintained a garbage fire or rubbish fire. A garbage fire or rubbish fire is an open outdoor fire in which the materials burned are ordinarily found in household garbage and trash, including but not limited to food packaging, cardboard and plastic food containers, as well as putrescible and nonputrescible materials. (Ord. 2882 § 3, 2003)


8.36.030 Exemptions.

The following activities are specifically exempted from the prohibition in SHMC 8.36.020:

(1) Cooking Fire. Outdoor fire used for pleasure, religious, ceremonial, cooking or similar purposes with the fire contained in a fireplace, barbecue grill, barbecue pit, or other similar enclosure specifically designed for outdoor recreation or cooking. Notwithstanding this exception, no outdoor fire is permitted in any type of burn barrel.

(2) Recreation Fire. A fire as defined in the Oregon Fire Code, based on the International Fire Code as adopted by the city, to wit: recreation fire is the burning of materials other than rubbish where the fuel being burned is not contained in an incinerator, outdoor fireplace, barbecue grill, or barbecue pit (or other enclosure) and with a total fuel area of three feet (914 millimeters) or less in diameter and two feet (610 millimeters) or less in height, for pleasure, religious, ceremonial, cooking, warmth or similar purposes.

(3) Biannual Burn Period.1 An “open outdoor fire” may be allowed by special permit during the following special burn periods:

(a) A period beginning the first Saturday in May and continuing for 16 consecutive days.

(b) A period beginning the third Saturday in October and continuing for 16 consecutive days.

(c) Such other period as established by resolution of the city council.

Special permits shall be issued by the fire marshal after payment of an administrative fee. Said administrative fee shall be established by resolution. A permit may be issued only for the approved burn periods and shall contain such conditions and restrictions deemed necessary by the fire marshal to protect public health and safety, including but not limited to compliance with the Columbia County Fire Defense Board Rules for Open Burning. The holder of such special permit shall be allowed to build an open outdoor fire under the conditions of the permit only. Any deviation from the provisions of the permit shall be a violation of this chapter.

(4) Training. Fires set and maintained for fire fighting training or training fire protection personnel provided all safety precautions required by the fire marshal are met. 

(5) Emergency Fire. When an emergency is declared under the emergency operations chapter, Chapter 2.48 SHMC as amended, the mayor may suspend the open burning ban and permit case by case burning subject only to the written or verbal approval of the fire marshal, and in accordance with such conditions and restrictions deemed necessary by the fire marshal to protect public health and safety.

Any open outdoor fire authorized in this section shall only be used to burn commercially available fuel, wood, tree limbs, branches, leaves, trimmings, or any other woody debris. (Ord. 3135 § 1, 2010; Ord. 3122 § 1, 2009; Ord. 3026 § 1, 2006; Ord. 2882 § 4, 2003)


8.36.040 Penalty.

(1) A violation of SHMC 8.36.020(1) shall be considered a “B” violation. 

(2) A violation of SHMC 8.36.020(2) or a second conviction within three years of the date of the first conviction under SHMC 8.36.020(1) shall be considered an “A” violation. 

(3) A violation of the limitations on exemptions set forth in SHMC 8.36.030 or of any special permit condition granted pursuant to this chapter shall be considered a “B” violation. A second conviction for violation of the limitations set forth in SHMC 8.36.030 or of any special permit condition that occurs within three years of the date of the first conviction shall be an “A” violation.

(4) In addition to any fines imposed by the court, the court is specifically authorized to order abatement and restitution, as well as community service, not to exceed 48 hours.

(5) The references to violation classes in this section correspond to the most recent classification level and penalty set forth in the Oregon Revised Statutes for such violations, currently ORS 153.018. (Ord. 3067 § 1, 2007; Ord. 2955 § 2, 2005; Ord. 2882 § 5, 2003)


8.36.050 Inspection and citation.

(1) The following are listed “enforcement officers” and are hereby specifically authorized by law to make such investigations and inspections as are necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and to issue violation citations to individuals or entities to appear in the St. Helens municipal court:

(a) Any city police officer, city code enforcement officer, city building official, city planning administrator, city administrator, city engineering manager, the fire chief of Columbia River Fire and Rescue and his agents, employees, or designees authorized to perform the duties of this chapter, and such other employees of the city of St. Helens as are specifically identified in an order or resolution of the city council.

(2) When it may be necessary to inspect any premises to enforce the provisions of this code, any enforcement officer having reasonable cause to believe that there exists, upon a premises, a condition which is contrary to or in violation of this chapter, the enforcement officer, in accordance with administrative policy, may enter at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this chapter; provided, that if such premises be occupied that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such premises be unoccupied, the enforcement officer shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the enforcement officer shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry, including specifically an administrative search warrant from the municipal court. (Ord. 3067 § 2, 2007; Ord. 2882 § 6, 2003)


8.36.060 Other laws.

Nothing in this chapter authorizes or commands or shall be interpreted as authorizing or commanding the performance of an activity which is in violation of any county, state or federal law or regulation. (Ord. 2882 § 8, 2003)1

Code reviser’s note: Section 2 of Ord. 3135 provides, “The effective start for the new Fall burning period will be October of 2010. The effective start for the new Spring burning period will be May of 2011.” 


Chapter 8.40 ABANDONED AND DISCARDED VEHICLES

Sections:

8.40.010    Definitions.

8.40.020    Declaration of public nuisance.

8.40.030    Prohibited action.

8.40.040    Abandoned or discarded vehicle investigation and notice.

8.40.050    Entry upon private property.

8.40.060    Towing of vehicles.

8.40.070    Towing and storage charges – Redemption of vehicles.

8.40.080    Notice to interested parties of vehicle towing.

8.40.090    Hearing available to contest validity of vehicle tow or nuisance abatement.

8.40.100    Abatement by city and appraisal.

8.40.110    Disposition of abandoned vehicles.

8.40.120    Right to sell abandoned or towed vehicles.

8.40.130    Additional remedies.


8.40.010 Definitions.

The following definitions are applicable to this chapter:

(1) “Abandoned vehicle” means any vehicle that has been deserted or relinquished without claim of ownership. A vehicle shall be considered abandoned if it has remained in the same location for more than 24 hours and one or more of the following conditions exist:

(a) The vehicle has an expired registration sticker or trip permit affixed to it;

(b) The vehicle appears to be inoperative or disabled; or

(c) The vehicle appears to be wrecked, partially dismantled or junked.

(2) “Chief of police” means the person holding the position of chief of police of the St. Helens police department, or any agent, employee, or designee authorized to perform the duties of this chapter by the chief of police.

(3) “City administrator” means the person holding the position of city administrator or any agent, employee, or designee authorized to perform the duties of this chapter by the city administrator.

(4) “Discarded” vehicle means any vehicle or part thereof which is in one or more of the following conditions:

(a) Inoperative;

(b) Wrecked;

(c) Dismantled;

(d) Partially dismantled;

(e) Junked.

Discarded vehicles may be deemed to include major parts thereof including but not limited to bodies, engines, transmissions and rear ends.

(5) “Police department” means the St. Helens police department or any other law enforcement agency authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter.

(6) “Storage” means the holding of a vehicle, with the attendant fees for such holding, at an appropriate facility.

(7) “Towing” means the taking possession of a vehicle and removing it to a storage facility at the request of a city officer or employee.

(8) “Vehicle” means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon any street or highway, and includes any hulk or component thereof. (Ord. 3064 § 1, 2007; Ord. 2399 § 1, 1982; Ord. 2385 §§ 1, 2, 1982; Ord. 2373 § 1, 1981)


8.40.020 Declaration of public nuisance.

The open accumulation and storage of abandoned or discarded vehicles are hereby found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight, deterioration and unsightliness, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned or discarded vehicle on private or public property is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 3064 § 2, 2007; Ord. 2385 § 3, 1982; Ord. 2373 § 2, 1981)


8.40.030 Prohibited action.

It shall be unlawful to store, or permit the storing of, an abandoned or discarded vehicle upon any private property within the city unless the vehicle is (1) completely enclosed within a building; (2) stored in connection with a business enterprise dealing in discarded vehicles lawfully conducted; or (3) screened to prevent visibility from the street or other public or private property by an approved fence of solid material or by natural foliage that screens the area all year. (Ord. 3064 § 3, 2007; Ord. 2385 § 4, 1982; Ord. 2373 § 3, 1981)


8.40.040 Abandoned or discarded vehicle investigation and notice.

(1) It shall be the duty of the police department whenever an abandoned or discarded vehicle is found upon private property to:

(a) Make an investigation to discover the owner of the vehicle, any other persons who reasonably appear to have an interest in the vehicle, and the person in charge of the property upon which such vehicle is located and give written notice to them by personal service or by registered or certified mail that the vehicle is in violation of this chapter; and

(b) If the owner of the vehicle is not found, to place a notice upon the windshield, or some other part of the vehicle where it can be easily seen.

(2) The notice shall state that a certain abandoned or discarded vehicle is in violation of this chapter and that within five days of the day of the sending or posting of the notice, the vehicle must be removed.

(3) The notice shall also state that the alternative to compliance with subsection (2) of this section is to petition the city administrator and request within five days of sending or posting of the notice and show cause why such vehicle should not be immediately abated as provided in this chapter.

(4) The notice shall also state that failure to comply with this chapter authorizes the city to remove the vehicle and charge the costs of removing, storing or selling the vehicle. (Ord. 3064 § 4, 2007; Ord. 2399 § 2, 1982; Ord. 2385 § 5, 1982; Ord. 2373 § 4, 1981)


8.40.050 Entry upon private property.

(1) The police are authorized at all reasonable times to enter upon private property and examine any vehicle for the purpose of determining whether or not it is abandoned or discarded. The chief of police will first present proper credentials to the appropriate party and request entry. If such entry is refused, the chief of police will have recourse to any remedy provided by law to obtain entry.

(2) No search warrant shall be issued under the terms of this chapter until an affidavit has been filed showing probable cause for such inspection by stating the purpose and extent of the proposed inspection, citing this chapter as the basis for such inspection, whether it is an inspection instituted by complaint, or other specific or general information concerning the vehicle in question or the property on which it is situated. (Ord. 3064 § 5, 2007; Ord. 2385 § 6, 1982; Ord. 2373 § 5, 1981)


8.40.060 Towing of vehicles.

(1) Authority to Tow. Any vehicle found on any street, alley, lane, sidewalk, parking strip, on private property without the permission of the person in control of such property, in a public park or other public place or property may be towed, upon the order of a city officer or employee, and taken to a storage area designated by the city and held at the expense of the owner or person entitled to possession thereof, when:

(a) The vehicle is parked on city owned or operated property without express city permission;

(b) The vehicle was used in committing a traffic or parking violation for which an unserved warrant or citation is on file with the clerk of the district court;

(c) The vehicle is parked unlawfully or in a manner that may be hazardous to traffic or public safety;

(d) The vehicle is impeding or likely to impede the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic;

(e) The vehicle is illegally parked in a conspicuously posted restricted space, zone or traffic lane where parking is limited to designated classes of vehicles or is prohibited in excess of a designated time period, or during certain hours or on designated days, or at any time and where the vehicle is interfering or reasonably likely to interfere with the intended use of such a space, zone or traffic lane;

(f) The vehicle has been reported stolen, or a police officer reasonably believes that the vehicle is stolen;

(g) The vehicle or its contents are to be used as evidence in traffic or criminal prosecutions, or a police officer reasonably believes that the vehicle or its contents constitute evidence of an offense; or

(h) The vehicle is in possession of a person taken into custody by a law enforcement agency and no reasonable means of removing the vehicle is applicable.

(2) Towing Without Prior Notice. Vehicles may be towed without prior notice, pursuant to subsections (1)(c) to (1)(h) of this section, or for any reason allowed under ORS 819, which is hereby adopted, or any other provision of Oregon law.

(3) Towing After Notice. Pursuant to subsection (1) of this section, vehicles may be towed if notice is provided prior to the towing of the vehicle, as required in SHMC 8.40.080(1), under the following circumstances:

(a) A city officer or employee reasonably believes that the vehicle is abandoned or discarded; or

(b) The circumstances involving the violation of a temporary or permanent parking restriction present no reason to immediately remove the vehicle.

Vehicles subject to towing under this subsection shall not be towed prior to the conducting of a hearing, if one has been requested, pursuant to SHMC 8.40.090.

(4) Towing Upon Order of Municipal Court. Vehicles that have been used in the commission of a traffic or parking violation, for which an unserved warrant or citation is on file with the municipal court clerk, may be towed upon order of the municipal court. (Ord. 3064 § 6, 2007; Ord. 2385 § 7, 1982; Ord. 2373 § 6, 1981)


8.40.070 Towing and storage charges – Redemption of vehicles.

(1) Towing and storage charges shall be paid before release of a vehicle towed under this chapter. Any private company, who tows and stores any vehicle pursuant to this chapter, shall have a lien on the vehicle, in accordance with ORS 87.152, for the just and reasonable charges for the tow and storage services performed, and may retain possession of that vehicle, as is consistent with this chapter, until such charges have been paid.

(2) The accrued towing and storage charges assessed under subsection (1) of this section shall be waived by the city administrator if the towing is found to be invalid or for any other reason not justified, after a hearing has been held pursuant to SHMC 8.40.090. A person’s inability to pay the towing and storage charges, in and of itself, is not a sufficient basis for the waiving of such charges. If these charges are owed to a private company, the city shall pay same if, after a hearing, the towing is found to be invalid or for any other reason not justified and the charges have not previously been paid. Provided further, the city shall pay all storage charges that accrue as a result of the hearings process, per SHMC 8.40.090(7).

(3) If the required towing and storage charges have been paid, then the vehicle shall be immediately released to the person(s) entitled to lawful possession.

(4) If subsection (3) of this section has not been complied with, then the vehicle shall not be released, except upon the order of the city administrator.

(5) A vehicle towed pursuant to this chapter may only be released to the owner, or to the person who was lawfully in possession or control of the vehicle at the time it was towed, or to a person who purchased the vehicle from the owner and who produces written proof of ownership. In all cases, adequate evidence of the right to possession of the vehicle, as determined by the police department, must be presented prior to release of the vehicle. (Ord. 3064 § 7, 2007; Ord. 2385 § 8, 1982; Ord. 2373 § 7, 1981)


8.40.080 Notice to interested parties of vehicle towing.

(1) Notice Prior to Removal. Prior to towing a vehicle pursuant to SHMC 8.40.060, the police department shall provide notice to the registered owner(s), and any other persons who reasonably appear to have an interest in the vehicle, by:

(a) Affixing a towing citation to the vehicle, prior to the towing of the vehicle; and

(b) By mailing a notice, at least five business days prior to the towing, excluding city recognized holidays, to the registered owner(s) and any other persons who reasonably appear to have an interest in the vehicle.

The notices provided for in this subsection shall state that a hearing may be requested to contest the validity of the intended towing by filing a written request with the city administrator within five business days from the mailing date of the notice, excluding city recognized holidays, and any other information required by Oregon law. If a timely request for a hearing is made pursuant to this subsection, then the involved vehicle shall not be towed until the city administrator makes a determination pursuant to SHMC 8.40.090.

(2) Notice After Removal. After a vehicle has been towed pursuant to the authority granted in SHMC 8.40.060, notice shall be provided to the registered owner(s), and any other persons who reasonably appear to have an interest in the vehicle, of the towing and the procedures available for obtaining a hearing, by mailing a notice, within 48 hours after the towing, excluding city recognized holidays and weekends, stating a hearing may be requested to contest the validity of the towing by filing a written request with the city administrator within five business days from the mailing date of the notice, excluding city recognized holidays, and any other information required by Oregon law. If a vehicle has been released prior to the mailing of such notice, then the notice need not be mailed.

(3) Exemption from Notice and Hearing Requirements. A vehicle that is being held as part of any criminal investigation is not subject to any of the notice or hearing requirements of this chapter unless the investigation relates to the theft of the vehicle. (Ord. 3064 § 8, 2007; Ord. 2385 § 8, 1982; Ord. 2373 § 8, 1981)


8.40.090 Hearing available to contest validity of vehicle tow or nuisance abatement.

(1) After a vehicle has received notice pursuant to SHMC 8.40.040 or has been towed pursuant to SHMC 8.40.060 or prior to towing pursuant to SHMC 8.40.060, the owner(s), or any other persons who reasonably appear to have an interest in the vehicle, shall, upon timely request filed with the city administrator, be entitled to request a hearing to contest the validity of the towing of such vehicle. A timely request shall be five business days from the mailing date of the notice of towing or nuisance abatement. The city administrator may waive this five-day requirement for good cause shown.

(2) The request for a hearing shall be in writing and shall state the grounds upon which the person believes the tow or nuisance abatement notice to be invalid, or, for any other reason, not justified, and shall also state such other information, relating to the purposes of this chapter, as may be required by the city administrator.

(3) The city administrator shall set and conduct an administrative hearing on the matter within 72 hours, not including city recognized holidays or weekends, on receipt of a proper request filed pursuant to this section.

(4) The hearing shall afford a reasonable opportunity for the person(s) requesting it to demonstrate by the statement of witnesses and other evidence, that the tow and/or storage of the vehicle was invalid, or for any other reason not justified.

(5) As consistent with this section, the city administrator shall promulgate necessary rules and regulation regarding the conducting of such hearings.

(6) If the city administrator finds, by substantial evidence, based upon the record as a whole, that the tow and/or storage or nuisance abatement notice was invalid, or, for any other reason, not justified, the city administrator shall order the vehicle to be immediately released, if still held. If the city administrator finds that the owner(s), or any other person who has an interest in the vehicle, are not liable for the towing and/or storage charges, the city administrator shall order the return of any money paid for tow and/or storage charges, as appropriate, to the person who paid such charges. If such vehicle is about to be towed or removed, the city administrator shall order that such vehicle shall not be towed. In any case where the city administrator orders the vehicle to be released, the vehicle must be picked up by the person entitled to possession within 24 hours to avoid further storage charges. If the vehicle is not claimed within this time period, then it will not be released until the additionally accruing storage charges, if any, are paid by the person entitled to possession of the vehicle.

(7) If the city administrator finds, by substantial evidence, based upon the record as a whole, that the towing and/or storage was valid, he/she shall order that the vehicle, if still held, remains in the towing company’s possession until all tow and storage charges are paid. If such vehicle is about to be towed or removed, he/she shall order that such vehicle shall be towed and impounded if the traffic violation or nuisance involving that vehicle has not been completely corrected. The vehicle must be picked up by the person entitled to possession within 24 hours after the decision of the city administrator to avoid further storage charges. If the vehicle is not claimed within this time period, then it will not be released until the additionally accruing charges, if any, are paid, by the person entitled to possession of the vehicle.

(a) Provided, however, that the city shall be responsible in all cases in which a hearing has been requested and held, and the tow and/or storage found to be valid, for those storage charges that have accrued from the date that the hearing was requested through the first available hearing date.

(8) The decision of the city administrator is a quasi-judicial decision and is final, and shall not be appealable to the council.

(9) Any person who has a hearing scheduled pursuant to this section and, without good cause shown, as determined by the city administrator, fails to appear at such hearing, shall not be entitled to have such hearing rescheduled.

(10) The owner and any other person who has an interest in the vehicle shall only be entitled to one hearing for each tow of that vehicle. (Ord. 3064 § 9, 2007; Ord. 2385 § 9, 1982; Ord. 2373 § 9, 1981)


8.40.100 Abatement by city and appraisal.

(1) Five days after the giving of notice required in SHMC 8.40.040 or after the decision of the city administrator, declaring a vehicle to be a public nuisance as set forth in SHMC 8.40.090, the city shall be deemed to have acquired jurisdiction to abate the nuisance and may remove the vehicle by use of city employees or duly authorized independent contractors. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder or refuse to allow such persons to enter upon private property for the purpose of removing a vehicle under the provisions of this chapter.

(2) After removing the vehicle, the tow company in possession of the vehicle shall cause it to be appraised and sold or disposed of in accordance with Oregon law. 

(3) The certificate of sale issued by the tow company shall comply with Oregon law. (Ord. 3064 § 10, 2007; Ord. 2385 § 10, 1982)


8.40.110 Disposition of abandoned vehicles.

(1) If the tow company in possession of the vehicle chooses to sell or dispose of the vehicle, the tow company shall give written notice, within 48 hours of the day the vehicle was towed, to the registered owner of the vehicle and any persons claiming interests in the vehicle as shown by records of the Department of Transportation. The police department shall provide the tow company with the names and contact information of the registered owner of the vehicle and any persons claiming interests in the vehicle at the time of the tow, or as soon as practicable.

(2) If either the legal owner or person entitled to possession has not signed a release and has not, within 15 days after the date notification is mailed, reclaimed the vehicle, such action shall constitute a waiver of the interest of such person.

(3) If a towed vehicle is not claimed within 15 days after it is towed and placed in storage under provisions of this chapter, such vehicle shall be deemed to be abandoned, and a reasonable effort shall be made, by mail, to notify the owner(s), and any other persons who reasonably appear to have an interest in the vehicle, of the following:

(a) The location of the vehicle and that it may be recovered only upon evidence that the claimant is the owner or person entitled to possession;

(b) The address and telephone number of the person, tow company, facility, or any combination thereof that may be contacted for information as to the charges that must be paid or deposited before the vehicle will be released;

(c) That the vehicle, if not claimed within 15 days after the mailing of such notice, will be subject to sale by tow company and storage facility where the vehicle is located, and that such failure to reclaim the vehicle shall constitute a waiver of the interest of such person(s). At any time within 15 days after the notice required by this section has been sent, the owner or person lawfully entitled to possession of any such vehicle may claim the same by presenting satisfactory proof of ownership or right to possession, and by paying the charges and expenses, if any, incurred in the preservation and custody of the vehicle.

(4) If a tow company chooses to sell or dispose of an abandoned or discarded vehicle the tow company shall comply with all provisions of Oregon law regarding such vehicles.

(5) When an abandoned or discarded vehicle is sold or disposed of the tow company shall mail a sales receipt or appropriate document showing the disposition of the vehicle to the police department. (Ord. 3064 § 11, 2007; Ord. 2385 § 11, 1982; Ord. 2373 § 11, 1981)


8.40.120 Right to sell abandoned or towed vehicles.

Whenever any vehicle shall be taken into custody pursuant to this chapter, the same shall be held at the expense and risk of the owner or person lawfully entitled to possession. (Ord. 3064 § 12, 2007; Ord. 2385 § 11, 1982; Ord. 2373 § 12, 1981)


8.40.130 Additional remedies.

Any abatement of a vehicle pursuant to this chapter is in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other civil, criminal, or administrative penalty, sanction, or remedy otherwise authorized by law. (Ord. 3064 § 13, 2007)


Chapter 8.44 DROP BOXES AND OTHER WASTE RECEPTACLES

Sections:

8.44.010    Definitions.

8.44.020    Offenses against the city.

8.44.030    Exceptions.

8.44.040    Violation.


8.44.010 Definitions.

(1) “City” means the city of St. Helens.

(2) “Drop box” means any container of sufficient size used for the collection of solid waste or building materials as defined by city ordinance or state law.

(3) “Other waste receptacle” means any type of container that holds material that is for disposal, whether disposal is by a private party or licensed businesses that remove waste or discarded materials. “Other waste receptacle” does not include roll carts for garbage, yard debris, or recycling services provided by a franchised solid waste hauler with the city.

(4) “Person” means any natural person, copartnership, association or corporation, whether he, she, or it is acting for himself, herself or itself, or as servant, employee, agent, or representative of another.

(5) “Right-of-way” means as defined by the St. Helens Community Development Code (SHMC Titles 17 and 18), Ordinance No. 2875 or its successor. (Ord. 3034 § 1, 2007)


8.44.020 Offenses against the city.

It shall be unlawful for any person to place or have placed within the city right-of-way any drop box or other waste receptacle, except as expressly allowed in this chapter. (Ord. 3034 § 2, 2007)


8.44.030 Exceptions.

(1) The city recognizes that strict enforcement of this chapter may place an undue hardship on some residents. Therefore, the city council authorizes the city administrator or the designee of the city administrator to review requests for the placement of a drop box or other waste receptacle within the city right-of-way in residentially zoned areas. Such requests must be in writing to the city administrator. The city administrator or designee may grant permission for the placement of a drop box or other waste receptacle so long as the following conditions are met:

(a) The drop box or other waste receptacle shall be placed immediately in front of the person’s property that is using the drop box or other waste receptacle.

(b) At least 10 feet of clearance is available between the center line of the traveled portion of the street and edge of the drop box or other waste receptacle.

(c) The drop box or other waste receptacle may not be left in the right-of-way for more than 14 days in a 30-day period.

(2) In commercial zoned areas, a drop box or other waste receptacle may be placed within the city street right-of-way after a written plan for pedestrian access, traffic control and parking is submitted to and approved by the public works director. Such drop box or waste receptacle may only be located in the city right-of-way for six months during any 12-month period. (Ord. 3034 § 3, 2007)


8.44.040 Violation.

Violation of SHMC 8.44.020 or 8.44.030, or any subsection thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $250.00. (Ord. 3034 § 4, 2007)


Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE 

Chapters:

9.04    Criminal Code  

9.08    Repealed

9.10    Weapons Possession

9.12    Firearms and Weapons Discharge

9.14    Social Games

9.16    Impoundment of Vehicles

9.20    Inventory Searches of Impounded Vehicles

9.24    Trespass to City Watershed Properties


Chapter 9.04 CRIMINAL CODE

Sections:

9.04.010    Oregon Criminal Code adopted.

9.04.020    Application of the law.


9.04.010 Oregon Criminal Code adopted.

(1) The most current versions of ORS Chapters 161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 166 and 167, as well as offenses described in the Oregon Vehicle Code and ORS Chapters 33, 137, 153, 471, 475, 476, and 480, are adopted by reference. Subject to the misdemeanor jurisdiction of the court, violation of an adopted provision of those chapters is an offense against this city and shall be punishable to the same extent as provided in the code or statute.

(2) The provisions of ORS Chapter 161 relating to defenses, burden of proof, general principles of criminal liability, parties, and general principles of justification apply to offenses defined and made punishable by city ordinance.

(3) The most current versions of the Oregon Revised Statutes concerning criminal law and violation procedures are applicable to the municipal court, including, but not limited to, the Oregon Evidence Code (ORS Chapters 40 and 41), ORS Chapters 131 through 138, 142, 144, 146, 147, 151, 153, 156 and 157, are adopted by reference.

(4) Except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, definitions appearing in the general definitional and other particular sections of chapters adopted by subsection (1) of this section are applicable throughout this chapter. Where appropriate, references to “state” and “state statute” shall be deemed to also include “city” and “city ordinances.”

(5) The city police, city attorney, assistant city attorney, and municipal court, including the municipal court judge, judges pro tem, court clerk and deputy court clerks, shall have all the powers, duties, and responsibilities provided under the most current Oregon Revised Statutes applicable to investigation, prosecution, administration, and adjudication of criminal offenses and violations within the city of St. Helens and on city-owned property. (Ord. 3186 § 8, 2015; Ord. 3157 § 1, 2012; Ord. 3072 § 1, 2008; Ord. 3006 § 2, 2006; Ord. 2977 § 1, 2005; Ord. 2935 § 1, 2005)


9.04.020 Application of the law.

The statutes, codes and procedures adopted in SHMC 9.04.010 are expressly made applicable within the city limits of the city of St. Helens as well as outside the city limits when concerning offenses occurring on city-owned or controlled property located outside the city limits of the city of St. Helens, Oregon. (Ord. 2977 § 2, 2005)


Chapter 9.08       FIREWORKS

(Repealed by Ord. 3005)


Chapter 9.10       WEAPONS POSSESSION*

Sections:

9.10.010  Definitions.

9.10.020  Prohibition.

9.10.030  Firearms exception.

9.10.040  Exceptions.

9.10.050  Administrative search.

9.10.060  Municipal judge’s powers.

*	Code reviser’s note: See also Chapter 9.12 SHMC.


9.10.010      Definitions.

"City building" means any city-owned or controlled building, including but not limited to the St. Helens public library, police department building, wastewater treatment plant, water filtration facility, public works building, St. Helens City Hall, as well as the adjacent and connected St. Helens municipal court building. (Ord. 3013 § 2, 2006)


9.10.020      Prohibition.

Except as provided in SHMC 9.10.030 and 9.10.040, no person shall possess in or on any city building a weapon, explosive or hazardous substance of any kind, whether concealed or unconcealed, including but not limited to the following items:

(1)  Any dirk, dagger, ice pick, slingshot, metal knuckles, or any similar instrument or a knife, including an ordinary pocket knife;

(2)  Mace, tear gas, pepper mace, or any similar deleterious agent;

(3)  An electrical stun gun or any similar instrument;

(4)  A tear gas weapon;

(5)  A club, bat, baton, billy-club, bludgeon, knobkerrie, nunchaku, nightstick, truncheon, or any similar instrument; 

(6)  Any form of explosive or explosive components; 

(7)  Any hazardous substance capable of inflicting death or physical injury.

There is no requirement that the instrument or substance be used, attempted to be used or threatened to be used. Mere possession in or on a city building is an offense. Violation of this prohibition is a class A misdemeanor. (Ord. 3013 § 3, 2006)


9.10.030      Firearms exception.

ORS 166.170 expressly grants the power to regulate firearms to the state’s Legislative Assembly, and nothing in this chapter shall be construed as an attempt to regulate any type of firearm. The prohibition in SHMC 9.10.020 does not apply to loaded or unloaded firearms, possession of which in a public building is a class C felony by operation of ORS 166.370, with limited exceptions as outlined in state statute. (Ord. 3013 § 4, 2006)


9.10.040      Exceptions.

The prohibition in SHMC 9.10.020 does not apply to government officials, including but not limited to the following defined persons; provided, that such authorization to possess such instruments or materials extends only to the extent such persons are acting within the scope of their employment:

Any sworn sheriff, constable, marshal, municipal police officer, member of the Oregon State Police, investigator of the Criminal Justice Division of the Department of Justice, investigator with a district attorney’s office, district attorney, deputy district attorney, city attorney, assistant city attorney, and municipal court personnel; appointed certified reserve officers; sworn and certified corrections officers; sworn and certified parole and probation officers; federal officers; federal, state or local emergency service personnel; and city employees or authorized city contractors; provided, that such individuals may possess only such tools, equipment and substances as are necessary to perform their normal work duties. (Ord. 3013 § 5, 2006)


9.10.050      Administrative search.

Any person entering a city building may be subject to an administrative search program designed to ensure the safety of city personnel and the public. Said program may include metal detectors and consent searches during periods of elevated security risk. The St. Helens police department, or any other law enforcement agency, shall enforce the prohibition on firearms and dangerous weapons, in ORS 166.370, as adopted by city ordinance, and the provisions of this chapter by every lawful means, including lawful searches of an individual’s person and carried items and the seizure of any firearm, hazardous substance, weapon, or explosive, in order to prevent any person from entering or being within or on a city building with any proscribed item. Refusal of a person to submit to an administrative search as prescribed by an administrative search program pursuant to this chapter shall require the immediate removal of the person from the city building. Refusal to leave when requested by law enforcement or city personnel shall be considered trespass. (Ord. 3013 § 6, 2006)


9.10.060      Municipal judge’s powers.

The municipal court judge of the city of St. Helens shall have the authority to issue, adopt or promulgate such local court rules (e.g., adoption of UTCR) and orders as are necessary to ensure the proper functioning and safety of the court, the litigants, witnesses, and jurors, including the power to impose remedial and punitive sanctions for contempt for violation of such orders when violations occur in the St. Helens municipal court and city judicial offices. (Ord. 3013 § 7, 2006)


Chapter 9.12 FIREARMS AND WEAPONS DISCHARGE*

Sections:

9.12.010    Short title.

9.12.020    Purpose.

9.12.030    Definitions.

9.12.040    Discharge of firearms and certain weapons prohibited.

9.12.050    Discharge of certain weapons prohibited.

9.12.060    Penalties, seizure and disposition of firearms and weapons.

*    Code reviser’s note: See also Chapter 9.10 SHMC.


9.12.010 Short title.

This chapter shall be known as the “firearms and weapons discharge ordinance.” (Ord. 2814 § 1, 2000)


9.12.020 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of St. Helens by making all public and private property safer by prohibiting the discharge of firearms within the city limits. These regulations are intended to achieve protection of the public with a minimum of infringement on the personal liberty of the citizens of the city. (Ord. 2814 § 2, 2000)


9.12.030 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, “firearm” means a pistol, revolver, gun, rifle, or other ordnance, including a miniature weapon, which projects a missile or shot by force of gunpowder or any other explosive. (Ord. 2814 § 3, 2000)


9.12.040 Discharge of firearms and certain weapons prohibited.

Except as provided below, it is unlawful for any person to knowingly, recklessly, or negligently fire or discharge a firearm, crossbow, bow and arrow, or blowgun within the boundaries of the city:

(1) A person discharging a firearm or weapon in the lawful defense of a person or property. “Lawful defense” is a defense recognized by Oregon law (e.g., ORS 161.195 et seq.);

(2) A person discharging a firearm or weapon on a licensed public or private shooting range, shooting gallery or other approved area designed or built for the purpose of target shooting, when such person is a member or guest of said range or area;

(3) A peace officer or member of the military discharging a firearm or weapon while acting within the scope of his or her official duty;

(4) A government employee discharging a firearm or weapon when authorized and required by his or her employment or public office to carry or use firearms or weapons and while acting within the scope of his or her official duty;

(5) A person conducting an athletic contest who fires blank ammunition in a plugged firearm toward the sky;

(6) Persons authorized by permit of the chief of police to discharge blank ammunition or a weapon for a lawful purpose;

(7) A person lawfully engaging in hunting in compliance with rules and regulations adopted by the State Department of Fish and Wildlife. (Ord. 3004 § 2, 2006; Ord. 2814 § 4, 2000)


9.12.050 Discharge of certain weapons prohibited.

No person other than a peace officer or animal control officer shall discharge a spring- or air-actuated pellet gun, air gun or BB gun on public property, rights-of-way, or across property lines in the city of St. Helens. (Ord. 3004 § 2, 2006; Ord. 2814 § 5, 2000)


9.12.060 Penalties, seizure and disposition of firearms and weapons.

(1) Unlawful discharge of a firearm or weapon in violation of SHMC 9.12.040 is a class A misdemeanor.

(2) Unlawful discharge of a weapon identified in SHMC 9.12.050, in violation of SHMC 9.12.050, is a class A violation.

(3) It is the duty of the police department to seize and take possession of any firearm or weapon being used unlawfully or for an unlawful purpose.

(4) Upon conviction of a violation of this chapter, the municipal court shall order the seized firearm or weapon disposed of in accordance with ORS 166.279 and other applicable laws, for returning, selling, or destroying seized weapons or firearms.

(5) If, after investigation or adjudication, it is determined the firearm or weapon was not used unlawfully, it shall be released to the owner only after the owner files a written claim with the city of St. Helens police department and the municipal court has entered an order releasing the firearm or weapon from evidence. Nothing herein shall prohibit the municipal court in the exercise of its discretion to withhold release of a firearm or weapon in the interests of justice and in accordance with law. The firearm or weapon will be available to be claimed for 90 days after the municipal court has released the firearm or weapon. If there is a question as to ownership or right to possession, the firearm or weapon shall be released as ordered by the court in proceedings initiated under ORS 133.633 through 133.663 by any person claiming ownership or right to possession. If the name and address of a person entitled to claim possession of a firearm or weapon is known to the police department, the department shall give that person written notice that said person may claim the firearm or weapon, including the 90-day claim period. If the firearm or weapon is not claimed within 90 days of the court’s release of the firearm or weapon from evidence, or the firearm or weapon was used unlawfully by the owner, it is a nuisance. Subject to a court order to the contrary, the firearm or weapon shall be returned, sold, or destroyed in accordance with ORS 166.279 and other applicable Oregon laws. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, an unclaimed firearm or weapon may be disposed of as provided in ORS 98.245. (Ord. 3073 § 1, 2008; Ord. 3004 § 2, 2006; Ord. 2814 § 6, 2000)


Chapter 9.14 SOCIAL GAMES

Sections:

9.14.010    Definitions.

9.14.020    Gambling prohibited.

9.14.030    Social games licensed.

9.14.040    Social game license.

9.14.050    Social game regulations.

9.14.060    Tournament organizer license, fees.

9.14.070    Social games license revocation.

9.14.080    License not transferable.

9.14.090    Violation.

9.14.100    Severability.


9.14.010 Definitions.

The following definitions shall apply in this chapter:

(1) “Gambling” means that a person stakes or risks something of value upon the outcome of a contest of chance or a future contingent event not under the control or influence of the person, upon an agreement or understanding that the person or someone else will receive something of value in the event of a certain outcome.

“Gambling” does not include:

(a) Bona fide business transactions valid under the law of contracts for the purchase or sale at a future date of securities or commodities, and agreements to compensate for loss caused by the happening of chance, including but not limited to contracts of indemnity or guaranty and life, health or accident insurance.

(b) Engaging in contests of chance under the following conditions:

The contest is played for some token other than money; an individual contestant may not purchase more than $100.00 worth of tokens for use in the contest during any 24-hour period; the tokens may be exchanged only for property other than money; except when the tokens are exchanged for a beverage or merchandise to be consumed on the premises, the tokens are not redeemable on the premises where the contest is conducted or within 50 miles thereof; and except for charitable, fraternal or religious organizations, no person who conducts the contest as owner, agent or employee profits in any manner from operation of the contest.

(c) Social games.

(d) Bingo, lotto or raffle games or Monte Carlo events operated in compliance with ORS 167.118, by a charitable, fraternal or religious organization licensed pursuant to ORS 167.118, 464.250 to 464.380, and 464.420 to 464.530.

(2) “Social game” means:

(a) A game, other than a lottery, between players in a private home where no house player, house bank or house odds exist and there is no house income from the operation of the social game; and

(b) A game, other than a lottery, as authorized in this chapter, between players in a private business, private club or place of public accommodation where no house player, house bank or house odds exist and there is no house income from the operation of the social game.

(3) “Gambling device” means any device, machine, instrument, paraphernalia, equipment or other property that is used or usable in the playing phases of unlawful gambling, whether it consists of gambling between persons or gambling by a person involving the playing of a machine. Lottery tickets, policy slips and other items used in the playing phases of lottery and policy schemes are not gambling devices within this definition. Amusement devices other than gray machines, that do not return to the operator or player thereof anything but free additional games or plays, shall not be considered to be gambling devices.

(4) “Player” means a person who engages in any form of gambling solely as a contestant or bettor, without receiving or becoming entitled to receive any profit therefrom other than personal gambling winnings, and without otherwise rendering any material assistance to the establishment, conduct or operation of the particular gambling activity. A person who gambles at a social game of chance on equal terms with the other participants therein is a person who does not otherwise render material assistance to the establishment, conduct or operation thereof by performing, without fee or remuneration, acts directed toward the arrangement or facilitation of the game, such as inviting persons to play, permitting the use of premises therefor and supplying cards or other equipment used therein. A person who engages in bookmaking is not a player. (Ord. 3117, 2009)


9.14.020 Gambling prohibited.

No person shall participate in, operate or assist in operating any gambling game or activity, except as otherwise expressly provided in this chapter. No person shall have in his or her possession any gambling device. Any such gambling device is a nuisance and may be summarily seized by a police officer. Property so seized shall be placed in the custody of the chief of police of the city of St. Helens. Upon conviction of the person owning or controlling a gambling device for a violation of this section, the municipal judge shall order such property confiscated and destroyed. (Ord. 3117, 2009)


9.14.030 Social games licensed.

Any person who owns, manages or operates a private business, private club or place of public accommodation may allow a social game between players at such place but only if they first apply for and receive a license for such purpose from the city administrator. (Ord. 3117, 2009)


9.14.040 Social game license.

(1) The city administrator will prepare and make available applications for a social game license. 

(2) The chief of police, or someone he designates, shall investigate and determine if the applicant satisfies the requirements for issuance of a license.

(3) The chief of police will submit to the city administrator a written report containing his findings and making a recommendation that the license be issued or denied. 

(4) An applicant must submit, with the application, a nonrefundable application fee. This fee is adopted by and may be amended by resolution of the city council.

(5) An application will not be granted if:

(a) Any person who has a financial interest in a private business, private club or public place of accommodation, or the organizer, if the organizer is the applicant, has been convicted of a felony within the last 10 years; or

(b) Any person who has a financial interest in a private business, private club or public place of accommodation, or the organizer, if the organizer is the applicant, has been convicted of five misdemeanors in the last five years; or

(c) Any person who has a financial interest in a private business, private club or public place of accommodation, or the organizer, if the organizer is the applicant, has been convicted of any crime involving gambling within the last five years or has forfeited bail for any crime involving gambling; or

(d) The application contains false or misleading information.

(6) A license shall be issued only upon payment of a license fee as established by city council resolution. License fees may be amended by resolution of the city council.

(7) Each license expires 12 months following the date it was issued.

(8) There shall be no right to automatic renewal of a license issued under this chapter. A person seeking a license renewal must submit a new application and be approved prior to the current license expiration. (Ord. 3139, 2010; Ord. 3117, 2009)


9.14.050 Social game regulations.

(1) Pursuant to a social games license, a private business, private club or public place of accommodation (“licensed business”) may only allow card games to be played. 

(2) While participating in social games, no more than 10 players may sit at each table at any one time. 

(3) Social games may only be played during legal liquor dispensing hours. 

(4) While playing social games, there shall be a $5.00 limit on any bet and a three-raise limit. 

(5) Licensees may not allow patrons to engage in disorderly conduct.

(6) Licensees shall agree, as a condition of the license, to be bound by and observe each and all of the regulations set forth in this section and all the provisions of the laws and regulations of the state of Oregon and the city of St. Helens.

(7) A licensed business shall be open to police inspection during all hours of operation. Licenses shall be available for inspection during all hours of operation.

(8) No person under the age of 21 shall be allowed to participate in any social game or to enter or remain upon such licensed premises.

(9) Each licensee shall assign a person whose duty shall be to supervise the games and see to it that they are played strictly in accordance with this chapter, other applicable city of St. Helens ordinances and regulations and Oregon law. The licensed business shall be vicariously liable for any conduct of any employee in regard to any gambling activity or social game conducted in or upon the licensed premises. (Ord. 3117, 2009)


9.14.060 Tournament organizer license, fees.

An organizer who organizes tournaments, such as Texas Hold’em tournaments, to be held in a private business, private club or place of public accommodation and who is a separate person or entity from the private business, private club or place of public accommodation in which the tournament shall take place shall first obtain a social game license, as provided in SHMC 9.14.040. (Ord. 3117, 2009)


9.14.070 Social games license revocation.

(1) The city administrator may temporarily suspend any social game license and/or may permanently revoke such license if:

(a) Any person who has an interest in the licensed business or a licensee is convicted of a felony; or

(b) Any person who has a financial interest in the licensed business or a licensee has been convicted of five misdemeanors in the last five years; or

(c) Any person who has a financial interest in the licensed business or a licensee has been convicted of any crime involving gambling within the last five years or has forfeited bail for any crime involving gambling; or

(d) The city discovers that the application contains any false or misleading information or any information requested is omitted from the application; or

(e) Any licensee, any person who has any financial interest in the licensed business or any employee of the licensed business violates any provision of this chapter; or

(f) Any licensee allows any person to engage in unlawful gambling in or upon any licensed premises. 

(2) A temporary suspension shall become effective 15 days after the chief of police notifies the licensee in writing of the grounds for such suspension and possible revocation, unless the licensee shall file a notice of appeal with the city recorder prior to the effective date of the suspension. To be timely filed, the notice of appeal must be received by the city recorder on or before the effective date of the suspension. Upon proper notice of appeal, the suspension shall be stayed until final determination by the city council. All notices required in this section shall be given in person or by first class mail. Notice to the licensee will be deemed to have been received if the notification is mailed to the address listed on the license application. A temporary suspension shall remain in effect for 30 days.

(3) Upon receiving a notice of appeal of a suspension or prior to permanent revocation of a license, a hearing shall be held by the city council at a meeting after the licensee has been served notice at least 10 days before the meeting. Such notice shall include the time and date of the hearing and the grounds upon which the council seeks to suspend or permanently revoke the license. The licensee shall be deemed to have received service if the city recorder mails such notice to the address the license holder listed on his application for a license. (Ord. 3117, 2009)


9.14.080 License not transferable.

A social game license shall not be transferable or assignable. If any change of persons having any financial interest in a licensed business occurs, the license holder must submit a new license application to the city administrator within 10 days of the change, along with the nonrefundable application fee as set by resolution and in effect at the time of the change. (Ord. 3139, 2010; Ord. 3117, 2009)


9.14.090 Violation.

In addition to the suspension or revocation of any license issued hereunder, violation of this section is punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00. (Ord. 3117, 2009)


9.14.100 Severability.

If any section, provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other sections, provisions, clauses or paragraphs of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. (Ord. 3117, 2009)


Chapter 9.16 IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES*

Sections:

9.16.010    Definitions.

9.16.020    Impoundment of uninsured vehicle.

9.16.030    Hearing on impoundment.

9.16.040    Notice after removal.

*    Prior legislation: Ord. 2758.


9.16.010 Definitions.

“Hearings officer” means the police chief or his designee. (Ord. 2756 § 1, 1997)


9.16.020 Impoundment of uninsured vehicle.

(1) A police officer who has probable cause to believe that a person, at or just prior to the time the police officer stops the person, has committed an offense described in this subsection may, without prior notice, order the vehicle impounded until a person with right to possession of the vehicle complies with the conditions for release or the vehicle is ordered released by a hearings officer. This subsection applies to the following offenses:

(a) Driving while suspended or revoked in violation of ORS 811.175 or 811.182.

(b) Driving while under the influence of intoxicants in violation of ORS 813.010.

(c) Operating without driving privileges or in violation of license restrictions in violation of ORS 807.010.

(d) Driving an uninsured vehicle in violation of ORS 806.010.

(2) Notice that the vehicle has been impounded shall be given to the same parties, in the same manner and within the same time limits as provided in ORS 819.180 for notice after removal of a vehicle.

(3) A vehicle impounded under subsection (1) of this section shall be released to a person entitled to lawful possession upon compliance with the following:

(a) Submission of proof that a person with valid driving privileges will be operating the vehicle;

(b) Submission of proof of compliance with financial responsibility requirements for the vehicle; and

(c) Payment to the city of an administrative fee to be determined to be sufficient to recover its actual administrative costs for the impoundment.

(4) Notwithstanding subsection (3) of this section, a person who holds a security interest in the impounded vehicle may obtain release of the vehicle by paying the administrative fee.

(5) When a person entitled to possession of the impounded vehicle has complied with the requirements of subsection (3) or (4) of this section, the impounding police agency shall authorize the person storing the vehicle to release it upon payment of any towing and storage costs. (Ord. 2756 § 2, 1997)


9.16.030 Hearing on impoundment.

(1) A person entitled to lawful possession of a vehicle impounded under this chapter may request a hearing to contest the validity of the impoundment. A request must by made within 10 calendar days of the impoundment. The request shall be made to the police department.

(2) When a timely request for a hearing is made, a hearing shall be held before a hearings officer. The hearing shall be set for four calendar days after the request is received, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays, but may be postponed at the request of the person asking for the hearing.

(3) The impounding police agency shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that there were reasonable grounds to believe that the vehicle was being operated in violation of the traffic offenses set forth in SHMC 9.16.020. The police officer who ordered the vehicle impounded may submit an affidavit to the hearings officer in lieu of making a personal appearance at the hearing.

(4) If the hearings officer finds that the impoundment of the vehicle was proper, the hearings officer shall enter an order supporting the removal and shall find that the owner or person entitled to possession of the vehicle is liable for usual and customary towing and storage costs. The hearings officer may also find the owner or person entitled to possession of the vehicle liable for costs of the hearing.

(5) If the hearings officer finds that impoundment of the vehicle was improper, the hearings officer shall order the vehicle released to the person entitled to possession and shall enter a finding that the owner or person entitled to possession of the vehicle is not liable for any towing or storage costs resulting from the impoundment. If there is a lien on the vehicle for towing and storage charges, the hearings officer shall order it paid by the police department. (Ord. 3075 § 1, 2008; Ord. 2756 § 3, 1997)


9.16.040 Notice after removal.

(1) Where the city takes custody of a vehicle under this chapter, it shall provide, by certified mail within 48 hours of the removal, written notice with an explanation of procedures available for obtaining a hearing to the owners of the vehicle and any lessors or security interest holders as shown in the records of the Department of Transportation. The notice shall state that the vehicle has been taken into custody and shall give the location of the vehicle and describe procedures for the release of the vehicle and for obtaining a hearing under ORS 819.190. The 48-hour period under this subsection does not include holidays, Saturdays, or Sundays.

(2) Any notice given under this section after a vehicle is taken into custody and removed shall state all of the following:

(a) That the vehicle has been taken into custody and removed by the city of St. Helens, and the ordinance under which the vehicle has been taken into custody and removed.

(b) The location of the vehicle or the telephone number and address of the city police department that will provide the information.

(c) That the vehicle is subject to towing and storage charges, the amount of charges that have accrued to the date of the notice, and the daily storage charges.

(d) That the vehicle and its contents are subject to a lien for payment of the towing and storage charges and that the vehicle and its contents will be sold to cover the charges if the charges are not paid by a date specified by the appropriate authority.

(e) That the owner, possessor, or person having an interest in the vehicle and its contents is entitled to a prompt hearing to contest the validity of taking the vehicle into custody and removing it and to contest the reasonableness of the charges for towing and storage if a hearing is timely requested.

(f) The time within which a hearing must be requested and the method for requesting a hearing.

(g) That the vehicle and its contents may be immediately reclaimed by presentation to the appropriate authority of satisfactory proof of ownership or right to possession and either payment of the towing and storage charges or the deposit of cash security or a bond equal to the charges with the appropriate authority. (Ord. 2756 § 4, 1997)


Chapter 9.20       INVENTORY SEARCHES OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLES

Sections:

9.20.010  Program adopted.


9.20.010      Program adopted.

The city council is hereby authorized to adopt by order or resolution an administrative program for inventory search of impounded vehicles and property of persons in police custody. (Ord. 2889 § 1, 2003)


Chapter 9.24       TRESPASS TO CITY WATERSHED PROPERTIES* 

Sections:

9.24.010  Definitions.

9.24.020  Criminal trespass – ORS 164.245.

9.24.030  Additional prohibitions resulting in trespass.

9.24.040  Exceptions. 

9.24.050  Permits.

9.24.060  Group permits.

9.24.070  Enforcement.

*	Code reviser’s note: See also Chapter 8.20 SHMC.


9.24.010      Definitions.

As used in this chapter, the singular includes the plural, the plural includes the singular, and the masculine includes the feminine. Except where the context indicates otherwise, the following definitions apply:

(1)  "City" means the city of St. Helens, Oregon.

(2)  "Person" means an individual, corporation or other legal business entity.

(3)  "Watershed," "watershed property," or "watershed properties" means any property owned, acquired, occupied, or controlled by the city of St. Helens, whether inside or outside the city limits, that is used or intended for any of the following uses: waterworks, reservoirs, water systems, city water supply, emergency water supply, storage and care of the water supply, and all property acquired or maintained for the preservation and protection of the purity of the city water supply or for recreational use. The watershed also includes all property owned or possessed by the city that constitutes a source, or possible source, of the water supply such as springs, creeks, pipes, rivers, streams, tributaries, and lakes, including specifically Salmonberry, and all property draining into such sources of the water supply. Said watershed properties include specifically, but are not limited to, the following real property outside the city limits of the city of St. Helens: Columbia County Tax Lots 5-2-8-02000, 5-2-15-00200, 5-2-16-00200, 5-2-20-00100, 5-2-21-00100, 5-2-22-00200, 5-2-27-02400, 5-2-28-00100, 5-2-29-01300, and 5-2-33-00100, comprising approximately 2,355 acres. The property described by the tax lots is illustrated by Exhibit A, which is attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and made a part hereof by this reference. (Ord. 2997 § 2, 2006)


9.24.020      Criminal trespass – ORS 164.245.

Except as provided in SHMC 9.24.060, no person shall enter or remain upon city watershed properties without an entry permit issued by the city of St. Helens in their personal possession. No person with or without an entry permit shall enter or remain upon city watershed properties in violation of the additional prohibitions specified on the reverse side of the permit, and in SHMC 9.24.040. Any person that enters or remains on city watershed properties, including Salmonberry, that is found to be violating these rules commits the crime of criminal trespass and is subject to arrest pursuant to ORS 164.245. (Ord. 2997 § 3, 2006)


9.24.030      Additional prohibitions resulting in trespass. 

Entering or remaining on city watershed properties is expressly conditioned upon strict compliance with the rules, regulations and permit requirements of the landowner, the city of St. Helens. Violation of the following prohibitions will result in a violation of ORS 164.245, Criminal Trespass:

(1)  It is unlawful for a person to enter or remain in the watershed in violation of any state statute, state regulation, county, or city ordinance, the specific prohibitions, terms and conditions of this chapter, or the terms and conditions of an entry permit.

(2)  It is unlawful for a person to enter or remain in the watershed between dusk to dawn, without a valid entry permit that has special use authorization obtained from the city of St. Helens.

(3)  It is unlawful for a person to enter or remain in the watershed, with or without a permit, when there is a posted fire danger or a declared emergency.

(4)  It is unlawful for a person to enter or remain in the watershed while operating a motor vehicle, including but not limited to trucks, cars, vans, motorcycles, quads, campers, any type of recreational vehicles, or any other form of motorized vehicle. A motor vehicle used in violation of this section will be subject to towing and impoundment under Ordinance 2373, as amended (Chapter 8.40 SHMC). Ordinance 2373, as amended, is expressly understood to be extra-territorial in its application by this reference. Notwithstanding the prohibitions of this section, the city will make reasonable accommodation of handicapped visitors upon reasonable notice to the city administrator, and upon issuance of an entry permit.

(5)  It is unlawful for any person to enter or remain in the watershed if the person discards or deposits any rubbish, trash, garbage, debris, animal waste, animal carcass, or other refuse. 

(6)  It is unlawful for any person to enter or remain in the watershed if the person discards any glass, cans, trash, rubbish, debris, litter, or substance on or within 100 yards of any body of water which could cause pollution or endanger the purity of the lakes, springs, streams, dams, creeks, or tributaries in the watershed.

(7)  It is unlawful for any person to enter or remain in the watershed if the person lights or maintains a fire of any kind, including but not limited to campfires, smoking, and torches.

(8)  It is unlawful for any person to enter or remain in the watershed if the person has in their possession any explosive or fire accelerant, including but not limited to dynamite, fireworks of any kind, gasoline, oil, propane, or butane.

(9)(a)  It is unlawful for any person to enter or remain in the watershed to which the general public has access while in possession of a loaded firearm or weapon without a valid entry permit with special use authorization that allows entry for hunting purposes during a regular hunting season as specified in the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife Big Game and Game Bird Regulations. This provision does not apply to or affect a person licensed to carry a concealed handgun or persons authorized to possess loaded firearms pursuant to ORS 166.370.

(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (9)(a) of this section, any discharge of a firearm or weapon within a watershed inside the city limits unrelated to hunting and any discharge of a firearm or weapon in posted boundary zones marked as no-shooting zones inside the city limits is expressly prohibited. Weapons include any spring- or air-actuated pellet gun, air gun, BB gun, crossbow, bow and arrow, or blowgun. This prohibition does not apply to or affect:

(i)  A person discharging a firearm in the lawful defense of person or property.

(ii)   A person discharging a firearm on a public or private shooting range, shooting gallery or other area designed and built for the purpose of target shooting.

(10)  It is unlawful for any person to enter or remain in the watershed if the person kills, injures, or removes any animal, fish, or fowl from the watershed without a valid entry permit with special use authorization and the appropriate state issued license and tag.

(11)  It is unlawful for any person to enter or remain in the watershed if the person possesses, sells or consumes any alcoholic beverage, intoxicant or controlled substance.

(12)  It is unlawful for any person to enter or remain in the watershed if the person: (a) posts a sign of any kind, (b) constructs a building or structure of any kind, or (c) attaches a sign or structure to any tree, shrub, railing, fountain, post, statue, bridge, monument, or any other structure.

(13)  It is unlawful for any person to enter or remain in the watershed if the person solicits or conducts any business, or solicits contributions, without an approved concession agreement between the vendor and the city. 

(14)  It is unlawful for any person to enter or remain in the watershed if the person cuts, burns, damages, or removes any forest product, including firewood.

(15)  It is unlawful for any person to enter or remain in the watershed if the person alters, changes, defaces, destroys, or removes any structure, sign, warning, notice, gate, or lock that was implemented, posted, or maintained by the city or its duly authorized agents.

(16)  It is unlawful for any person to enter or remain in the watershed, with or without a permit, when there is a posted fire danger or a declared emergency. (Ord. 3170 § 1, 2013; Ord. 2997 § 4, 2006)


9.24.040      Exceptions. 

The prohibitions of SHMC 9.24.030 do not apply to or affect government officials entering the property in the performance of their lawful duties, including, but not limited to, employees of the United States Department of Agriculture, members of the military, law enforcement officers, Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife employees, Oregon Department of Forestry employees, Columbia River Fire and Rescue, emergency service personnel, city employees, or city contractors. (Ord. 3170 § 2, 2013; Ord. 2997 § 5, 2006)


9.24.050      Permits.

A permit specifying the location to which it applies shall be issued by the city free of charge to individuals that complete and sign the permit application. The signature required on the application certifies the information provided is true and correct and is made under the penalty of perjury and false swearing. By signing the permit application the individual also acknowledges receipt of the rules and regulations that govern entry by permit. Falsification of entry applications will be prosecuted. Entry permits may be obtained from St. Helens City Hall, 265 Strand Street, St. Helens, Oregon 97051 between 8:30 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. and between 1:00 p.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, excluding legal holidays. Entry permits with special use authorization (overnight camping, hunting, etc.) may only be obtained from City Hall. Entry permits may also be obtained from other authorized locations. All entry permits will be ineffective and entry upon the property will not be permitted when there is fire danger, or when the city council, the mayor, or his designee specifies that entry shall not be permitted pursuant to the city emergency operations ordinance (Chapter 2.48 SHMC) or other declared emergency. The city may deny an application for an entry permit to persons that: (1) have been convicted of any crime or any game violation in any jurisdiction, or (2) are on a current release agreement concerning any fish and game offense, property crime, or any controlled substance manufacturing offense. (Ord. 2997 § 6, 2006)


9.24.060      Group permits.

Issuance of a group permit requires that all persons to which the group permit will apply be identified on the permit application, and each person must meet the minimum qualifications for issuance given in SHMC 9.24.050. Group permits are limited to two adults per permit and an unlimited number of juveniles. An adult and/or juvenile named on the permit shall be deemed to be in possession of a permit allowing entry if they enter the watershed accompanied by the other adult and one of the adults has personal possession of a permit. (Ord. 2997 § 7, 2006)


9.24.070      Enforcement.

State laws are enforced on city watershed properties by the state police and other law enforcement agencies. The city police may also cite violators of this and other city ordinances, which requires appearance in St. Helens municipal court. The prosecuting attorney shall designate the appropriate mental state on the complaint. (Ord. 2997 § 8, 2006)


Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC

Chapters:

10.04    Traffic Control

10.08    Repealed

10.12    Parking

10.16    Motor Vehicles on Rutherford Road Parkway


Chapter 10.04 TRAFFIC CONTROL*

Sections:

10.04.010    Short title.

10.04.020    Definitions.

Article I. Administration

10.04.030    Powers of the council.

10.04.040    Duties of the city council.

10.04.050    Public danger.

10.04.060    Standards.

10.04.070    Authority of police and fire officers.

Article II. General Regulations

10.04.080    Crossing private property.

10.04.090    Unlawful riding.

10.04.100    Skateboards and rollerblades on streets and sidewalks.

10.04.110    Damaging sidewalks and curbs.

10.04.120    Removing glass and debris.

10.04.130    Storage of motor vehicles on streets.

Article III. Parking Regulations

10.04.140    Method of parking.

10.04.150    Prohibited parking or standing.

10.04.160    Use of loading zone.

10.04.170    Unattended vehicles.

10.04.180    Standing or parking of buses and taxicabs.

10.04.190    Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands.

10.04.200    Lights on parked vehicle.

10.04.210    Extension of parking time.

10.04.220    Exemption.

Article IV. Bicycles

10.04.230    Bicycle operating rules.

10.04.240    Impounding of bicycles.

Article V. Pedestrians

10.04.250    Pedestrians must use crosswalks.

10.04.260    Right angles.

Article VI. Parades and Processions

10.04.270    Funeral processions.

10.04.280    Prohibited activity.

10.04.290    Parade permit.

10.04.300    Appeal to council.

10.04.310    Offenses against parade.

10.04.320    Permit revocable.

Article VII. Parking Citations and Owner Responsibility

10.04.330    Citation on illegally parked vehicle.

10.04.340    Failure to comply with parking citation attached to parked vehicle.

10.04.350    Owner responsibility.

10.04.360    Registered owner presumption.

Article VIII. Penalties

10.04.370    Superseded.

10.04.380    Penalties.

Schedules A – H

*    Prior legislation: Ord. 1996.


10.04.010 Short title.

This chapter may be cited as “city of St. Helens uniform traffic ordinance.” (Ord. 2274 § 1, 1978)


10.04.020 Definitions.

(1) In addition to those definitions contained in the Oregon Vehicle Code, the following words or phrases, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, shall mean:

(a) “Bus stop” means a space on the edge of a roadway designated by sign for use by buses loading or unloading passengers.

(b) “Holiday” means New Year’s Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day, and any other day proclaimed by the council to be a holiday.

(c) “Loading zone” means a space on the edge of a roadway designated by sign for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or material during specified hours of specified days.

(d) “Motor vehicle” means every vehicle that is self-propelled, including tractors, forklift trucks, motorcycles, road building equipment, street cleaning equipment, and any other vehicle capable of moving under its own power, notwithstanding that the vehicle may be exempt from licensing under the motor vehicle laws of Oregon.

(e) “Person” means a natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation.

(f) “Street” means every public way, road, street, thoroughfare and place, including bridges, viaducts and other structures within the boundaries of this state, open, used or intended for use of the general public for vehicles or vehicular traffic as a matter of right. 

(g) “Taxicab stand” means a space on the edge of a roadway designated by sign for use by taxicabs.

(h) “Traffic lane” means that area of the roadway used for the movement of a single line of traffic.

(i) “Vehicle,” as used in subsequent sections of this chapter, includes bicycles.

(2) As used in this chapter, the singular includes the plural, and the masculine includes the feminine. (Ord. 3186 § 9, 2015; Ord. 2274 § 2, 1978)

Article I. Administration


10.04.030 Powers of the council.

(1) Subject to state laws, the city council shall exercise all municipal traffic authority for the city except those powers specifically and expressly delegated herein or by another ordinance.

(2) The powers of the council shall include, but not be limited to:

(a) Designation of through streets.

(b) Designation of one-way streets.

(c) Designation of truck routes.

(d) Designation of parking meter zones.

(e) Restriction of the use of certain streets by any class or kind of vehicle to protect the streets from damage.

(f) Authorization of greater maximum weights or lengths for vehicles using city street than specified by state law.

(g) Initiation of proceedings to change speed zones.

(h) Revision of speed limits in parks.

(i) Establishing, maintaining, removing or altering traffic control signals.

(j) Establishing, maintaining, removing or altering loading zones and stops for all vehicles.

(k) Designating certain streets as bridle paths, and prohibiting horses, animals, and skateboards, rollerblades, and bicycles on other streets and sidewalks.

(l) Temporarily blocking or closing streets.

(3) The city council, without relinquishing its own powers and duties, hereby specifically and expressly delegates to the city engineering manager all municipal traffic authority and power, as including but not limited to the specifically enumerated powers set forth in the St. Helens uniform traffic ordinance, as amended. Notwithstanding the above delegation, the power and authority of the city engineering manager is expressly limited in duration, such that no order or action of the city engineering manager may exceed 120 days in duration. (Ord. 2842 § 1, 2001; Ord. 2687, 1994; Ord. 2274 § 3, 1978)


10.04.040 Duties of the city council.

The city council or its designate shall exercise the following duties:

(1) Implement the ordinances, resolutions and motions of the council by installing traffic control devices. Such installations shall be based on the standards contained in the Oregon Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways.

(2) Establish, maintain, remove or alter the following classes of traffic controls:

(a) Crosswalks, safety zones and traffic lanes.

(b) Intersection channelization and areas where drivers of vehicles shall not make right, left or U-turns, and the time when the prohibition applies.

(c) Parking areas and time limitation, including the form of permissible parking.

(3) The most current editions of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, the Oregon Supplement to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, the Signing and Flagging Standards for Short-Term Work Zones and Oregon’s Manual and Specification of Uniform Standards for Traffic Control Devices are hereby adopted.

(4) Without further delegation by the city council, the city engineering manager is hereby authorized to implement the ordinances, resolutions, orders, and motions of the city council as well as the temporary orders of the city engineering manager as authorized and in accordance with the St. Helens uniform traffic ordinance, as amended. (Ord. 3186 § 10, 2015; Ord. 2842 § 2, 2001; Ord. 2594, 1990; Ord. 2274 § 4, 1978)


10.04.050 Public danger.

Under conditions constituting a danger to the public, the city council or its designate may install temporary traffic control devices deemed to be necessary. (Ord. 2274 § 5, 1978)


10.04.060 Standards.

The regulations of the council or its designate shall be based upon:

(1) Traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations.

(2) Standards, limitations and rules promulgated by the Oregon Transportation Commission.



(3) Other recognized traffic control standards. (Ord. 2274 § 6, 1978)


10.04.070 Authority of police and fire officers.

(1) It shall be the duty of police officers to enforce the provisions of this chapter.

(2) In the event of a fire or other public emergency, officers of the police and fire department may direct traffic as conditions require, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2274 § 7, 1978)

Article II. General Regulations


10.04.080 Crossing private property.

No operator of a vehicle shall proceed from one street to an intersecting street by crossing private property. This provision shall not apply to the operator of a vehicle who stops on the property for the purpose of procuring or providing goods or services. (Ord. 2274 § 8, 1978)


10.04.090 Unlawful riding.

(1) No operator shall permit a passenger and no passenger shall ride on a vehicle upon a street except on a portion of the vehicle designed or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to a person riding within a truck body in space intended for merchandise.

(2) No person shall board or alight from a vehicle while the vehicle is in motion upon a street. (Ord. 2274 § 9, 1978)


10.04.100 Skateboards and rollerblades on streets and sidewalks.

No person shall use the streets or sidewalks for skateboarding or rollerblading where prohibited by Schedule H of this chapter. (Ord. 3165 § 1, 2012; Ord. 2687, 1994; Ord. 2274 § 10, 1978)


10.04.110 Damaging sidewalks and curbs.

(1) The operator of a motor vehicle shall not drive upon a sidewalk or roadside planting strip except to cross at a permanent or temporary driveway.

(2) No unauthorized person shall place dirt, wood or other material in the gutter or space next to the curb of a street with the intention of using it as a driveway.

(3) No person shall remove a portion of a curb or move a motor vehicle or device moved by a motor vehicle upon a curb or sidewalk without first obtaining authorization and posting bond if required. A person who causes damage shall be held responsible for the cost of repair. (Ord. 2274 § 11, 1978)


10.04.120 Removing glass and debris.

A party to a vehicle accident or a person causing broken glass or other debris to be upon a street shall remove the glass and other debris from the street. (Ord. 2274 § 12, 1978)


10.04.130 Storage of motor vehicles on streets.

No person shall store or permit to be stored on a street right-of-way or other public property, without permission of the council, a motor vehicle or personal property that prevents access to private property or that interferes with a nine-foot traffic lane from the centerline of the street. Failure to move a motor vehicle or other personal property for a period of 36 hours shall constitute prima facie evidence of storage of a motor vehicle. (Ord. 2406, 1982; Ord. 2274 § 13, 1978)

Article III. Parking Regulations


10.04.140 Method of parking.

(1) Where parking space markings are placed on a street, no person shall stand or park a vehicle other than in the indicated direction and, unless the size or shape of the vehicle makes compliance impossible, within a single marked space.

(2) The operator who first begins maneuvering his motor vehicle into a vacant parking space on a street shall have priority to park in that space, and no other vehicle operator shall attempt to deprive him of his priority or block his access.

(3) Whenever the operator of a vehicle discovers that his vehicle is parked close to a building to which the fire department has been summoned, he shall immediately remove the vehicle from the area unless otherwise directed by police or fire officials. (Ord. 2274 § 14, 1978)


10.04.150 Prohibited parking or standing.

(1) No person shall park or stand:

(a) A vehicle in violation of state motor vehicle laws.

(b) A vehicle in an alley other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of person or materials, and in no case for a period in excess of 30 consecutive minutes.

(c) A motor truck of a size of gross vehicle weight of over 10,000 pounds unloaded on any public street in a residential zone between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day, unless it is in compliance with all conditions of a permit granted under this section.

(d) A vehicle over the time allowed or during a time prohibited by sign for that parking zone.

(e) A vehicle over the painted lines indicating the limits of the vehicle parking space.

(f) A vehicle over one foot from the curb on a public street.

(g) A vehicle over the painted crosswalk lines.

(h) A vehicle, where adjacent to a curb painted yellow.

(i) A vehicle blocking a driveway.

(j) A vehicle within 10 feet of a fire hydrant.

(k) A vehicle on a sidewalk.

(2) No operator shall park and no owner shall allow a vehicle to be parked upon a street for the principal purpose of:

(a) Displaying the vehicle for sale.

(b) Repairing or servicing the vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency.

(c) Displaying advertising from the vehicle.

(d) Selling merchandise from the vehicle, except when authorized.

(3) No person shall park a motor vehicle, or any vehicle customarily pulled by a motor vehicle, either attended or unattended, at any place where official traffic signs have been erected for the purpose of prohibiting or restricting the standing or parking of motor vehicles.

(4) The operator of a motor truck of a gross vehicle weight of a size of over 10,000 pounds unloaded may apply to the city council for a permit to park the vehicle on a public street in a residential zone between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the next day.

(5) A completed truck parking application shall be heard at the next regularly scheduled council meeting. The council may approve the permit with conditions based on the following criteria:

(a) Permitted parking is not materially detrimental to streets not improved for large truck traffic.

(b) Use between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the next day does not create greater than 55 dBA as measured outside any neighboring residential building and the truck passes a stationary vehicle operation test as defined in subsection (6) of this section.

(c) Exceptional circumstances apply to the property which do not apply generally to other property in the same zone or vicinity over which the applicant has no control.

(d) The permitted use is the minimum use which would alleviate the hardship.

(6) Stationary vehicle operation test is a measurement of sound level output of the truck. Sound level output from the truck must be less than or equal to 94 dBA according to the Motor Vehicle Sound Measurements Procedural Manual of the Oregon State Department of Environmental Quality dated May 21, 1980. (Ord. 3194 § 1, 2016; Ord. 2750 § 1, 1997; Ord. 2536 § 2, 1987; Ord. 2517 § 1, 1987; Ord. 2452 §§ 1, 2, 1983; Ord. 2404 §§ 1, 2, 1982; Ord. 2398 §§ 1, 2, 1982; Ord. 2307, 1979; Ord. 2274 § 15, 1978)


10.04.160 Use of loading zone.

No person shall stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time, other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of persons or materials, in a place designated as a loading zone when the hours applicable to that loading zone are in effect. In no case, when the hours applicable to the loading zone are in effect, shall the stop for loading and unloading of material exceed the time limits posted. If no time limits are posted, then the use of the zone shall not exceed 30 minutes. (Ord. 2274 § 16, 1978)


10.04.170 Unattended vehicles.

Whenever a police officer finds a motor vehicle parked unattended with the ignition key in the vehicle, the police officer is authorized to remove the key from the vehicle and deliver the key to the person in charge of the police station. (Ord. 2274 § 17, 1978)


10.04.180 Standing or parking of buses and taxicabs.

The operator of a bus or taxicab shall not stand or park the vehicle upon a street in a business district at a place other than a bus stop or taxicab stand, respectively; except that this provision shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from temporarily stopping his vehicle outside a traffic lane while loading or unloading passengers. (Ord. 2274 § 18, 1978)


10.04.190 Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands.

No person shall stand or park a vehicle other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, or a bus in a bus stop; except that the operator of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers, when stopping does not interfere with a bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter the restricted space. (Ord. 2274 § 19, 1978)


10.04.200 Lights on parked vehicle.

No lights need be displayed upon a vehicle that is parked in accordance with this chapter upon a street where there is sufficient light to reveal a person or object at a distance of at least 500 feet from the vehicle. (Ord. 2274 § 20, 1978)


10.04.210 Extension of parking time.

Where maximum parking time limits are designated by sign, movement of a vehicle within a block shall not extend the time limits for parking. (Ord. 2274 § 21, 1978)


10.04.220 Exemption.

The provisions of this chapter regulating the parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to a vehicle of the city, county or state or public utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work on a street, or a vehicle owned by the United States while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of mail. (Ord. 2274 § 22, 1978)

Article IV. Bicycles


10.04.230 Bicycle operating rules.

In addition to observing all other applicable provisions of this chapter and state law pertaining to bicycles, a person shall:

(1) Not leave a bicycle, except in a bicycle rack. If no rack is provided, the person shall leave the bicycle so as not to obstruct any roadway, sidewalk, driveway or building entrance. A person shall not leave a bicycle in violation of the provision relating to the parking of motor vehicles.

(2) Not ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within the city of St. Helens. (Ord. 2274 § 23, 1978)


10.04.240 Impounding of bicycles.

(1) No person shall leave a bicycles on public or private property without the consent of the person in charge or the owner thereof.

(2) A bicycle left on public property for a period in excess of 24 hours may be impounded by the police department.

(3) In addition to any citation issued, a bicycle parked in violation of this chapter may be immediately impounded by the police department.

(4) If a bicycle impounded under this chapter is licensed, or other means of determining its ownership exist, the police shall make reasonable efforts to notify the owner. No impounding fee shall be charged to the owner of a stolen bicycle which has been impounded.

(5) A bicycle impounded under this chapter which remains unclaimed shall be disposed of in accordance with the city’s procedures for disposal of abandoned or lost personal property.

(6) Except as provided in subsection (4) of this section, a fee as set forth in the most recent universal fee schedule adopted by council shall be charged to the owner of a bicycle impounded under this section. (Ord. 3219 § 5, 2017; Ord. 2274 § 24, 1978)

Article V. Pedestrians


10.04.250 Pedestrians must use crosswalks.

No pedestrian shall cross a street other than within a crosswalk in blocks with marked crosswalks or if within 150 feet of a marked crosswalk. (Ord. 2274 § 25, 1978)


10.04.260 Right angles.

A pedestrian shall cross a street at a right angle unless crossing within a crosswalk. (Ord. 2274 § 26, 1978)

Article VI. Parades and Processions


10.04.270 Funeral processions.

A permit shall not be required to conduct a funeral procession.

(1) A funeral procession shall proceed to the place of interment by the most direct route which is both legal and practicable.

(2) The procession shall be accompanied by adequate escort vehicles for traffic control purposes.

(3) All motor vehicles in the procession shall be operated with their lights turned on.

(4) No person shall unreasonably interfere with a funeral procession.

(5) No person shall operate a vehicle that is not a part of the procession between the vehicles of a funeral procession. (Ord. 2274 § 27, 1978)


10.04.280 Prohibited activity.

No person shall organize or participate in a parade which may disrupt or interfere with traffic without obtaining a permit. A permit shall always be required of a procession of people utilizing the public right-of-way and consisting of 10 or more persons or four or more vehicles. (Ord. 2274 § 28, 1978)


10.04.290 Parade permit.

(1) Application for parade permits shall be made to the city recorder at least 45 days prior to the intended date of the parade, unless the time is waived by him.

(2) Application shall include the following information:

(a) The name and address of the person responsible for the proposed parade.

(b) The date of the proposed parade.

(c) The desired route including assembling points.

(d) The number of persons, vehicles and animals which will be participating in the parade.

(e) The proposed starting and ending time.

(f) The application shall be signed by the person designated as chairman.

(3) If the city recorder, upon receipt of the application, determines that the parade can be conducted without endangering public safety and without seriously inconveniencing the general public, he shall approve the route and issue the permit.

(4) If the city recorder determines that the parade cannot be conducted without endangering public safety or seriously inconveniencing the general public, he may:

(a) Propose an alternate route.

(b) Propose an alternate date.

(c) Refuse to issue a parade permit.

(5) The city recorder shall notify the applicant of his decision within five days of receipt of the application.

(6) If the city recorder proposes alternatives or refuses to issue a permit, the applicant shall have the right to appeal his decision to the city council. (Ord. 2274 § 29, 1978)


10.04.300 Appeal to council.

(1) An applicant may appeal the decision of the city recorder by filing a written request of appeal with the city recorder within five days after the city recorder has proposed alternatives or refused to issue a permit.

(2) The council shall schedule a hearing date which shall not be later than the second regular session following the filing of the written appeal with the city recorder and shall notify the applicant of the date and time that he may appear either in person or by a representative. (Ord. 2274 § 30, 1978)


10.04.310 Offenses against parade.

(1) No person shall unreasonably interfere with a parade or parade participant.

(2) No person shall operate a vehicle that is not part of a parade between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade. (Ord. 2274 § 31, 1978)


10.04.320 Permit revocable.

The city recorder may revoke a parade permit if circumstances clearly show that the parade can no longer be conducted consistent with public safety. (Ord. 2274 § 32, 1978)

Article VII. Parking Citations and Owner Responsibility


10.04.330 Citation on illegally parked vehicle.

Whenever a vehicle without an operator is found parked in violation of a restriction imposed by this chapter, the officer finding the vehicle shall take its license number, and any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its owner, and shall conspicuously affix to the vehicle a parking citation for the operator to answer to the charge against him or pay the penalty imposed within five days during the hours and at a place specified in the citation. (Ord. 2274 § 33, 1978)


10.04.340 Failure to comply with parking citation attached to parked vehicle.

If the operator does not respond to a parking citation affixed to a vehicle within a period of five days, the city recorder may send to the owner of the vehicle to which the traffic citation was affixed a letter informing him of the violation and warning him that in the event that the letter is disregarded for a period of five days, a warrant for his arrest will be issued. (Ord. 2274 § 34, 1978)


10.04.350 Owner responsibility.

The owner of a vehicle placed in violation of a parking restriction shall be responsible for the offense, except when the use of the vehicle was secured by the operator without the owner’s consent. (Ord. 2274 § 35, 1978)


10.04.360 Registered owner presumption.

In a prosecution of a vehicle owner charging a violation of a restriction on parking, proof that the vehicle at the time of the violation was registered to the defendant shall constitute a presumption that he was then the owner in fact. (Ord. 2274 § 36, 1978)

Article VIII. Penalties


10.04.370 Superseded.

Superseded by Ord. 2373. (Ord. 2274 § 37, 1978)


10.04.380 Penalties.

(1) Violation of SHMC 10.04.080 through 10.04.130 is punishable by fine not to exceed $100.00.

(2) Violation of SHMC 10.04.140 and 10.04.150(1) except handicap zone violations shall be $25.00. Any fine not paid within 30 calendar days after the date of the citation shall be $50.00 per citation.

(3) Violation of SHMC 10.04.150(2) through 10.04.320 is punishable by fine not to exceed $50.00. (Ord. 3219 § 8, 2017; Ord. 2691, 1994; Ord. 2517, 1987; Ord. 2274 § 37, 1978)


Schedule A

	Prohibited Parking 

	Ordinance No.	Date of Enactment	Street

	2215	12/6/77	South side S. Vernonia Road, Columbia River Hwy. to 120 ft. west, 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. weekdays.

	2259	6/28/78	North side of S. Vernonia Road, Columbia River Hwy. to W. Columbia Blvd.

	2271	9/5/78	On Parkway between hours of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. or for longer than 2 hours between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.

	2275

+2308

+2320

+2333	9/5/78

6/19/79

12/4/79

5/6/80	Motor vehicles or vehicles pulled by motor vehicles, where traffic signs prohibit standing and parking, as designated (see Exhibit A*); Sundays and holidays in one place for longer than presently or hereinafter designated (see Exhibit B*).

	2283	10/17/78	Motor vehicles or vehicles pulled by motor vehicles on the north side of St. Helens Street, between 103 ft. and 123 ft. east of 18th Street.

	2304	6/5/79	Motor vehicles or vehicles pulled by motor vehicles on east side of the Strand, (Tidelands) in front of Lots 18 through 21, Block 11, without written permission of mayor.

	2306	6/5/79	Motor vehicles or vehicles pulled by motor vehicle on east side of North 7th Street between West Street and Wyeth Street.

	2361	6/16/81	West side of U.S. Highway 30 (Columbia River Highway), between St. Helens Street and Columbia Blvd., except in emergency. West side of U.S. Highway 30 (Columbia River Highway), between Columbia Blvd. and city limits.

	2693	2/1/95	On the south side of St. Helens Street, between 19th and 20th, during the weekday hours of 6:30 a.m. to 6:30 p.m. for longer than two hours.

	2721	2/21/96	In the access road located in front of 325 South 12th Street and 335 South 12th Street.

	2722	3/20/96	On both sides of North 14th Street for 130 feet north of West Street.

*    Code reviser’s note: This exhibit is on file at City Hall.

(Ord. 2722, 1996; Ord. 2721, 1996; Ord. 2693, 1995; Ord. 2361, 1981; Ord. 2333, 1980; Ord. 2320, 1979; Ord. 2308, 1979; Ord. 2306, 1979; Ord. 2304, 1979; Ord. 2283, 1978; Ord. 2275, 1978; Ord. 2271, 1978; Ord. 2259, 1978; Ord. 2215, 1977)


Schedule B

	Through Streets 

	Ordinance No.	Date of Enactment	Streets

	1193	1/15/51	4th Street at intersection with Wyeth Street.

	 	 	St. Helens Street from 13th Street to Columbia River Hwy. No. 30, except as authorized.

	 	 	Columbia Blvd. from 1st Street to Columbia River Hwy. No. 30, except as authorized.

	 	 	Columbia Blvd. from Columbia River Hwy. No. 30 to 13th Street.

	 	 	St. Helens Street from Columbia River Hwy. No. 30 to 13th Street.

	 	 	South 1st Street from St. Helens Street to Willamette Street (Columbia Blvd.).

(Ord. 1193, 1951)


Schedule C

	One-Way Streets 

	Ordinance No.	Date of Enactment	Street	Traffic Direction

	2175	3/15/77	Willamette Street east of its intersection with First Street	Westbound

	2344	8/5/80	Matzen Street, McBride Street to Sykes Road	Southbound

	2397	8/18/82	South 11th Street, Tualatin Street to Cowlitz Street	Northbound [Repealed by Ordinance No. 2474]

	2474	4/3/85	Repeals Ordinance No. 2397.

(Ord. 2474, 1985; Ord. 2344, 1980; Ord. 2175, 1977)


Schedule D

	Stop Streets 

	Ordinance No.	Date of Enactment	Intersections

	2164	12/7/76	West Street and N. 14th Street from the west.

	 	 	West Street and N. 13th Street from east and west.

	 	 	West Street and 11th Street from east, west, north, and south.

	 	 	Wyeth Street and N. 4th Street from east, west and north.

(Ord. 2164, 1976)


Schedule E

	Truck Traffic Prohibited 

	Ordinance No.	Date of Enactment	Street

	2151	9/21/76	Allendale Drive from Pittsburg-St. Helens Road to Milton Road.

	 	 	McArthur Drive from Allendale Drive to North Vernonia Road.

	 	 	Sunset Blvd. from Pittsburg-St. Helens Road to Columbia Blvd.

	 	 	Wyeth Street from Columbia River Hwy. to N. 16th Street.

	 	 	N. 16th Street from Wyeth Street to Columbia Blvd.

	 	 	N. 15th Street from Willamette Street to Columbia Blvd.

	 	 	South 18th Street from Columbia Blvd. to Old Portland Road.

	 	 	South 17th Street from Columbia Blvd. to Old Portland Road.

	 	 	South 15th Street from Columbia Blvd. to Old Portland Road.

	 	 	South 14th Street from Columbia Blvd. to Old Portland Road.

	 	 	South 12th Street from Columbia Blvd. to Old Portland Road.

	 	 	Columbia Blvd. from N. Vernonia Road to Hwy. 30.

	 	 	Columbia Blvd. from Hwy. 30 to 8th Street.

	 	 	Willamette Street from 8th Street to River Street.

	 	 	(See Section 3 of ordinance for Exceptions.)

(Ord. 2151, 1976)


Schedule F

	Bus Stops, Loading Zones and Taxicab Stands 

	Ordinance No.	Date of Enactment	Street

	2147	8/3/76	[Repealed]

	2150	8/17/76	[Repealed]

	2200	9/20/77	Bus stop: South side St. Helens Street., S. 2nd Street to S. 3rd Street, 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on weekdays.

	2333	5/6/80	[Repeals No. 2150]

	2416	1/5/83	[Repealed]

	2442	9/21/83	Bus stop: South side St. Helens Street, 1st Street to 88 ft. west, with conditions.

	 	 	Loading zone: Eastern 3 spaces of above (44 ft.) western 3 spaces 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m.

	 	 	[Repeals No. 2416]

	2558	9/21/88	Loading zone: Intersection of 21st Street and Columbia Blvd., 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. on weekdays.

(Ord. 2558, 1988; Ord. 2442, 1983; Ord. 2333, 1980; Ord. 2200, 1977)


Schedule G

	Speed Limits 

	Ordinance No.	Date of Enactment	Street

	2284	10/3/78	Old Portland Road, city limits to Milton Creek Bridge, 35 mph.

	 	 	Old Portland Road, Milton Creek Bridge to S. 7th Street, 25 mph.

	 	 	Kaster Road, 25 mph.

	2773	5/6/98	Old Portland Road from 18th Street to Gable Road, 40 mph.

	 	 	Gable Road from the Lower Columbia River Hwy. to west city limits, 30 mph.

(Ord. 2773, 1998; Ord. 2284, 1978)


Schedule H

	Prohibited Skateboarding  and Rollerblading 

	Ordinance No.	Date of Enactment	Street and Sidewalks

	2687	8/17/94	Columbia Blvd., from First Street to the Railroad Tracks.

	2687	8/17/94	St. Helens Street, from 13th Street to the Railroad Tracks.

	2687	8/17/94	First Street, from Columbia Blvd. to its southern terminus.

	2687	8/17/94	Strand St., from Plaza St. to the southern terminus of Cowlitz Street.

	2780	3/17/99	S. 3rd Street, from Columbia Blvd. south 116 feet.

	2780	3/17/99	St. Helens Street, from S. 4th Street to River Street.

	2780	3/17/99	Cowlitz Street, from S. 2nd Street to River Street.

(Ord. 3165 § 1, 2012; Ord. 2780 § 1, 1999; Ord. 2687, 1994)


Chapter 10.08 STATE MOTOR VEHICLE LAWS

(Repealed by Ord. 2928)


Chapter 10.12 PARKING*

Sections:

10.12.010    North 12th Street.

10.12.020    Definitions.

10.12.030    Offenses against the city.

10.12.040    Exceptions.

10.12.050    Violation.

*    Code reviser’s note: See also Schedule A, Chapter 10.04 SHMC.


10.12.010 North 12th Street.

It shall be unlawful to park or leave standing a motor vehicle or any vehicle customarily pulled by a motor vehicle, whether attended or unattended, at the following locations:

Beginning at the intersection of Columbia Boulevard and North 12th Street, proceeding northerly on both sides of the street on North 12th Street and continuing along the Wyeth Street right-of-way, and continuing along North 11th Street to a point 40 feet north of the northerly boundary of the Wyeth Street right-of-way.

(Ord. 2661 § 1, 1993)


10.12.020 Definitions.

Except where the context indicates otherwise, the singular number includes the plural, and the masculine gender includes the feminine, and the following mean:

(1) “Boat” means any watercraft used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on the water.

(2) “City” means the city of St. Helens.

(3) “Person” means every natural person, firm, partnership, association, or corporation, whether he or it is acting for himself, itself, or as the clerk, servant, employee, or agent of another.

(4) “Vehicle” means any wheeled conveyance, whether motor powered or animal drawn, but excluding human propelled. The term includes any trailer in tow of any size, kind, or description. Exception is made for vehicles in the service of the city parks.

(5) “Trailer” means any piece of machinery designed to be towed by a vehicle.

(6) “Street” means a public or private way that is created to provide ingress or egress for vehicles to one or more lots, parcels, areas, or tracts of land, and includes the terms “road,” “highway,” “lane,” “avenue,” “alley,” “place,” “court,” “way,” “circle,” “drive,” “parkway,” or other designations.

(7) “Sidewalk” means as defined in Ordinance No. 2875 (SHMC Titles 17 and 18).

(8) “City council” means the governing body of the city.

(9) “Camper” means a structure designed to be mounted upon a motor vehicle, and is not permanently attached thereto, and is designed to provide facilities for human habitation, or for camping.

(10) “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle with or without motive power, which is designed for human occupancy and to be used temporarily for recreational, seasonal or emergency purposes; including any camper mounted upon a motor vehicle.

(11) “Park” means a park, playground, creek, recreation center, or any other area in the city, owned or used by the city, and devoted to active or passive recreation.

(12) “Right-of-way” means as defined in Ordinance No. 2875 (SHMC Titles 17 and 18). 

(13) “Parking” means the stopping or standing of any vehicle upon any street or highway within the city, whether such vehicle is occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers or freight, or in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals. (Ord. 3145 §§ 2, 3, 2011; Ord. 3033 § 1, 2007)


10.12.030 Offenses against the city.

It shall be unlawful for any person to commit, or allow to be committed, with any vehicle including recreational vehicles and boats under their control, any of the following:

(1) Parking of any vehicle, including recreational vehicles and boats, on or across any portion of a sidewalk, except as expressly allowed for by ordinance.

(2) Parking of a trailer or boat on a city street for a period of more than five days in any 30-day period. It is not a defense to a citation pursuant to this subsection that the trailer or boat was not parked in the same spot continuously.

(3) Parking of a wrecked, inoperative, or noncurrently licensed vehicle, including recreational vehicles and boats on a city street at any time.

(4) Parking a vehicle, including recreational vehicles or boats, within 15 feet of an intersection.

(5) Parking of a vehicle, including recreational vehicles or boats, so as to block any private or public driveway.

(6) Parking within 10 feet of a fire hydrant.

(7) Parking in a “NO PARKING” zone that has been designated by the city and posted as prescribed by the city.

(8) Parking of a commercial vehicle of over 10,000 pounds gross weight on a city street overnight.

(9) Parking of a vehicle, boat or trailer on a city street to make any mechanical repairs, other than those of a minor nature, and not to involve more than 24 hours to complete such repairs.

(10) Parking of an unattended vehicle, boat, trailer, or camper on a city street, or public property, that has any part thereof suspended by a vehicle jack, or any other unstable device.

(11) Parking perpendicular or diagonally to the sidewalk or curb, except in areas designated and posted for this type parking.

(12) Placing a camper or boat on a city street at any time when not mounted on a motor vehicle.

(13) Parking a recreational vehicle on a city street for a period of more than five days in any 30-day period. It is not a defense to a citation pursuant to this subsection that the trailer or boat was not parked in the same spot continuously.

(14) Parking in the public right-of-way, within 10 feet of any mailbox, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., any day except Sundays and holidays.

(15) No person in a park shall:

(a) Drive any vehicle on any area except gravel or paved park roads, parking areas or other such areas as may on occasion be specifically designated as temporary parking by an elected official, city administrator or designee.

(b) Park a vehicle in other than an established parking area or other such areas as may on occasion be specifically designated as temporary parking by an elected official, city administrator or designee.

(c) Double park any vehicle on any road or parkway unless directed by a park official or traffic officer. (Ord. 3145 §§ 4 – 6, 2011; Ord. 3100, 2008; Ord. 3033 § 2, 2007)


10.12.040 Exceptions.

The city council recognizes that the strict enforcement of this chapter may place an undue hardship on some residents. Therefore, the council authorizes the city administrator or the designee of the city administrator to review any requests to park an RV for a period of time in excess of five days in a 30-day period. Such requests will be accompanied by a written request from the owner of the RV identifying the license and VIN of the RV, the reason for the extended parking requests, and the dates requested for the extended parking. In no case shall an RV be parked on the street for more than 14 days in a 30-day period. The RV must also be parked on the street area within the confines of the requesting RV owner’s lot that owner resides on. The street area available for parking of the RV shall be defined as the side lot lines being extended in the same bearing and direction of the side lot lines out into the street right-of-way. (Ord. 3033 § 3, 2007)


10.12.050 Violation.

Violation of SHMC 10.12.030 or 10.12.040, or any subsection thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $250.00. (Ord. 3033 § 4, 2007)


Chapter 10.16       MOTOR VEHICLES ON RUTHERFORD ROAD PARKWAY

Sections:

10.16.010  Definitions.

10.16.020  Prohibitions.

10.16.030  Permit.

10.16.040  Penalty.


10.16.010      Definitions.

"Motor vehicle" is defined for purposes of this chapter as a vehicle that is self-propelled or designed for self-propulsion except emergency vehicles as defined in ORS 801.260 and utility vehicles of Portland General Electric Co., N.W. Natural Gas Co., Columbia River People’s Utility District and the city of St. Helens, and vehicles of law enforcement agencies. (Ord. 2815 § 1, 2000)


10.16.020      Prohibitions.

(1)  Except when authorized by permit issued by the city administrator pursuant to this chapter, no person shall drive or park a motor vehicle within the city limits of the city of St. Helens, on the Rutherford Road Parkway. The Rutherford Road Parkway area extends from 4th and M Streets in Columbia City south on 4th Street to the city limits of Columbia City; then south along Rutherford Road, a county road; it parallels Burlington-Northern Railroad right-of-way to the northerly end of Oregon Street in the city of St. Helens.

(2)  No person shall violate any condition of a permit issued under this chapter for vehicular use of the parkway. (Ord. 2815 § 2, 2000)


10.16.030      Permit.

Property owners or their contractors using the Rutherford Road Parkway right-of-way to reach their property may obtain a permit to use the paved portion of the Rutherford Road Parkway for those vehicles, under five tons, listed in the permit subject to reasonable conditions established by the city administrator to protect pedestrian and bicycle traffic. As a condition of permit issuance, a release, hold harmless, and indemnification agreement and financial security shall be required to cover any repair or restoration of the parkway surface or vegetation necessitated by the vehicular use proposed in the permit. (Ord. 2815 § 3, 2000)


10.16.040      Penalty.

(1)  A violation of SHMC 10.16.020(1) shall be considered an "A" violation punishable by a fine of up to $600.00.

(2)  A violation of SHMC 10.16.020(2) shall be considered a "B" violation punishable by a fine of up to $300.00. A second offense shall be considered an "A" violation. (Ord. 2815 § 4, 2000)

 


Title 11       (Reserved)

 


Title 12 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES

Chapters:

12.04    Sidewalk Construction and Repair 

12.06    Street Trees and Street Improvements

12.08    Street Maintenance

12.12    Repealed

12.16    Improvement Procedures

12.20    Right-of-Way Regulations

12.24    Construction Right-of-Way Permits

12.28    Advance Financing of Public Improvements

12.32    Advertising Benches


Chapter 12.04 SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR

Sections:

12.04.010    Definitions.

12.04.020    Duty to repair and clear sidewalks.

12.04.030    Liability for sidewalk injuries.

12.04.040    Standards and specifications.

12.04.050    Submission of plans.

12.04.060    Supervision of work.

12.04.070    Required sidewalk work.

12.04.080    City may do work.

12.04.090    Assessment for sidewalk work done by city.

12.04.100    Sidewalk construction requested by the property owner.

12.04.110    Penalty.


12.04.010 Definitions.

Unless the context requires otherwise, the following mean:

(1) “Person” means a natural person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity.

(2) “Sidewalk” means the part of the street right-of-way between the curb lines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines that is intended for the use of pedestrians. (Ord. 2238 § 1, 1978)


12.04.020 Duty to repair and clear sidewalks.

It is the duty of an owner or occupant of land adjoining a street to maintain in good repair and remove obstructions from the adjacent sidewalk. (Ord. 2238 § 2, 1978)


12.04.030 Liability for sidewalk injuries.

(1) The owner of real property responsible for maintaining the adjacent sidewalk shall be primarily liable to any person injured because of any negligence of such owner in failing to maintain the sidewalk in good condition.

(2) If the city is required to pay damages for an injury to persons or property caused by the failure of a person to perform the duty, which this section imposes, the person shall compensate the city for the amount of the damages thus paid. The city may maintain an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this section. (Ord. 2238 § 3, 1978)


12.04.040 Standards and specifications.

Sidewalks shall be constructed, altered and repaired in accordance with the standards and specifications established by the public works superintendent. (Ord. 2238 § 4, 1978)


12.04.050 Submission of plans.

No person shall construct, alter or repair a sidewalk without first submitting the plans and specifications for the proposed work to the public works superintendent and obtaining his approval. After determining that the proposed work conforms to the applicable standards and specifications established under SHMC 12.04.040, the public works superintendent shall give his approval for the proposed work. (Ord. 2238 § 5, 1978)


12.04.060 Supervision of work.

The construction, alteration or repair of sidewalks shall be under the supervision of the public works superintendent. The public works superintendent may inspect any materials and construction details as in his judgment may be necessary to ensure compliance with the applicable standards and specifications. (Ord. 2238 § 6, 1978)


12.04.070 Required sidewalk work.

(1) The public works superintendent is authorized by council to make determinations regarding the construction, alteration or repair of sidewalks throughout the city.

(2) When the public works superintendent determines that a sidewalk needs construction, alteration or repair, he/she shall issue a notice of determination to the owner of the adjacent property.

(3) The notice shall require the property owner to complete the sidewalk work within 30 days after service of notice. The notice shall also state that if the work is not made by the owner within the 30-day time period, the city may do the necessary work and assess the cost of the work against that property in the form of a lien.

(4) The public works superintendent shall cause a copy of the notice to be served personally upon the owner of the property adjacent to the sidewalk, or the notice may be served by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested. If after diligent search the owner is not discovered, the public works superintendent shall cause a copy of the notice to be posted in a conspicuous place on the property, and such posting shall have the same effect as service of notice by mail or by personal service upon the owner of the property.

(5) The person serving the notice shall file with the recorder a statement stating the time, place and manner of service of notice. (Ord. 3137, 2010; Ord. 2238 § 7, 1978)


12.04.080 City may do work.

If the sidewalk work is not completed within 30 days after service of the notice, the public works superintendent shall carry out the sidewalk work. Upon completion of the work, the public works superintendent shall submit a report to the council. The report shall contain an itemized statement of the cost of the work. (Ord. 2238 § 8, 1978)


12.04.090 Assessment for sidewalk work done by city.

Upon receipt of the report, the council, by ordinance, shall assess the cost of the sidewalk work against the property adjacent to the sidewalk. The assessment shall be a lien against the property and may be collected in the same manner as is provided for the collection of street improvement assessments. (Ord. 2238 § 9, 1978)


12.04.100 Sidewalk construction requested by the property owner.

If a property owner petitions the council for an order to build a sidewalk on the part of the street abutting on his property, agrees to pay cash or to make application to pay the cost in installments, waives the right of service and publication of notice of construction, and consents to the assessment of the property upon which the sidewalk abuts, the council may order the construction of the requested sidewalk, if in its judgment the sidewalk should be built. (Ord. 3186 § 11, 2015; Ord. 2238 § 10, 1978)


12.04.110 Penalty.

Violation of this chapter is punishable by fine not to exceed $100.00. Each day’s violation of a provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2238 § 11, 1978)


Chapter 12.06 STREET TREES AND STREET IMPROVEMENTS

Sections:

12.06.010    Definitions.

12.06.020    Applicability.

12.06.030    General provisions.


12.06.010 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter the following mean:

(1) “City” means the city of St. Helens.

(2) “Lack of street trees” means the absence of street trees along one or both sides of the street for a lineal distance of at least 100 feet centered on or within the area of major modification.

(3) “Land use decision” means a final decision or determination made by the approval authority that concerns the adoption, amendment, or application of: (a) the statewide planning goals, (b) a comprehensive plan provision, (c) a land use regulation, or (d) a new land use regulation. See ORS 197.015 for more definition.

(4) “Limited land use decision” means a final decision or determination made by a local government pertaining to a site within an urban growth boundary and concerns: (a) approval or denial of subdivision or partition; and/or (b) approval or denial of an application based upon discretionary standards designed to regulate the physical characteristics of a use permitted outright.

(5) “Major modification” means any of the following:

(a) Replacement or substantial repair of 30 lineal feet or more of sidewalk;

(b) Asphalt overlay of the entire street width of a street section longer than 50 feet; or

(c) Any underground utility repairs when such repair shall require work described in subsection (5)(a) or (b) of this section.

(6) “Person” means any natural person, copartnership, association or corporation, whether he, she, or it is acting for himself, herself, or itself, or as servant, employee, agent, or representative of another. The singular number shall include the plural and the plural the singular.

(7) “Street” means a public or private way that is created to provide ingress or egress for vehicles to one or more lots, parcels, areas, or tracts of land, and including the terms “road,” “highway,” “lane,” “avenue,” “alley,” “place,” “court,” “way,” “circle,” “drive,” or other designations.

(8) “Street tree” is defined as any living, woody perennial plant commonly achieving 10 feet or higher and normally developing a single branch-free trunk higher than six feet. Street trees are any trees planted by the city, or any tree planted by an owner or developer of a property, that is accepted by the city as a street tree. Street trees are trees on land lying within a dedicated right-of-way along either side of a street, avenue, or otherwise within a dedicated “street tree” easement. “Street tree” when installed as a requirement of this chapter may mean a shrub, bush, or other landscaping when approved by the city council. (Ord. 3141 § 1, 2010)


12.06.020 Applicability.

(1) Whenever the city undertakes a major modification as defined herein, it shall be the policy of the city to plant street trees in areas of the city where there is a lack of street trees as defined in this chapter. Plans and specifications for such planting shall be integrated into the general plan of street improvements.

(2) Whenever a person other than the city performs work that will require a major modification, as defined herein, and the major modification is not the direct result or condition of a land use decision or limited land use decision, that person shall plant street trees in areas where there is a lack of street trees as defined herein. Plans and specifications for such planting shall be integrated into the plans and specifications for such work and shall be subject to city approval pursuant to SHMC 12.04.050, 12.20.040 or 12.24.010. (Ord. 3141 § 1, 2010)


12.06.030 General provisions.

(1) Street trees shall be installed pursuant to Chapter 17.72 SHMC, except as modified on a case by case basis as approved by the city council.

(2) The city council may exempt all or some of the provisions of this chapter where it is determined that inclusion of street trees is contrary to public health, safety and welfare, will cause unnecessary hardship due to existing development or unusual topography, or determined to be impractical. (Ord. 3141 § 1, 2010)


Chapter 12.08       STREET MAINTENANCE

Sections:

12.08.010  Unopened streets.

12.08.020  Opened streets.


12.08.010      Unopened streets.

No building permit for new construction on a street that has not been opened, graveled, or accepted for maintenance by the city of St. Helens at the time of passage of this chapter shall be issued until:

(1)  A program for bringing that street up to the city’s developmental standards is developed, and such improvements are completed prior to the occupancy of the premises; or

(2)  The city administrator attains assurance that responsibility for future street maintenance will rest with the private property owners and such responsibility is clearly stated in a deed covenant.

In the case of programs undertaken to bring the street up to city standards, alternatives include the creation of a local improvement district, every property owner being responsible for improving the portion of street abutting his property, or whatever other program shall satisfy the city council. Affected property owners shall play the prime role in determining which street improvement strategy is to be undertaken. (Ord. 2253 § 1, 1978)


12.08.020      Opened streets.

The city of St. Helens shall continue to maintain streets that are opened and accepted for maintenance by the city except in cases where anticipated volumes or types of traffic, topography or the nature of the road with regard to the city’s ability to provide future maintenance make improvements to the road in the public interest. In such cases where the city council deems improvements to be in the public interest, no building permit for new construction on that street shall be issued until:

(1)  A program for bringing that street up to the city’s developmental standards is developed and such improvements are completed prior to the occupancy of the premises; or

(2)  If no program is developed for improving the street up to the city’s developmental standards, the city shall discontinue maintenance of that street. (Ord. 2253 § 2, 1978)


Chapter 12.12 STREET STANDARDS

(Repealed by Ord. 3112)


Chapter 12.16       IMPROVEMENT PROCEDURES

Sections:

12.16.010  Initiating improvements.

12.16.020  Engineer’s report.

12.16.030  Action on engineer’s report or waiver.

12.16.040  Resolution and notice of hearing.

12.16.050  Manner of doing work.

12.16.060  Hearing.

12.16.070  Calls for bids.

12.16.080  Method of assessment and alternative methods of financing.

12.16.090  Assessment ordinance.

12.16.100  Notice of assessment.

12.16.110  Lien record and foreclosure proceedings.

12.16.120  Errors in assessment calculations.

12.16.130  Supplemental assessments.

12.16.140  Rebates.

12.16.150  Remedies.

12.16.160  Abandonment of proceedings.

12.16.170  Curative provisions.

12.16.180  Assessment.


12.16.010      Initiating improvements.

(1)  When the council considers it necessary to require that improvements to a street, sewer, water, sidewalk, parking, curbing, drain, or other public improvement defined in ORS 223.387 be paid for in whole or in part by special assessment according to benefits conferred, the council shall declare by resolution that it intends to make the improvement and direct the city engineer to make a survey of the improvement and file a written report with the recorder.

(2)  When owners of one-half of the property that will benefit by improvements defined in subsection (1) of this section request by written petition that the council initiate an improvement, the council may declare by resolution that it intends to make the improvement and file a written report with the recorder. (Ord. 2375 § 1, 1981)


12.16.020      Engineer’s report.

Unless the council directs otherwise, the engineer’s report shall contain the following:

(1)  A map of plat showing the general nature, location and extent of the proposed improvement and the land to be assessed for payment of the cost.

(2)  Plans, specifications and estimates of work to be done. If the proposed project is to be carried out in cooperation with another governmental agency, the engineer may adopt plans, specifications and estimates of that agency.

(3)  An estimate of probable cost of the improvement, including legal, administrative and engineering costs.

(4)  An estimate of unit cost of the improvement to the benefited properties, per square foot, per front foot, or another unit of cost.

(5)  A recommendation concerning the method of assessment to be used to arrive at a fair apportionment of the whole or a portion of the cost of the improvement to benefited properties.

(6)  A description of each lot, parcel of land, or portion of land to be benefited, with names of the record owners and, when readily available, names of contract purchasers, as shown on books and records of the Columbia County tax department. To describe each lot or parcel of land under provision of this section, it shall be sufficient to use the tax account number assigned to the property by the tax department or the book and page designations shown on books and records of the Columbia County clerk.

(7)  A recommendation regarding the rate of interest, to be determined by the council to be paid on assessments bonded under the Bancroft Bonding Act and ORS Chapter 223. (Ord. 2375 § 2, 1981)


12.16.030      Action on engineer’s report or waiver.

After the engineer’s report is filed with the recorder, the council may by resolution approve the report, modify the report and approve it as modified, require the engineer to supply additional or different information for the improvement, or abandon the improvement. The council may proceed without an engineer’s report and failure to do so shall not affect the validity of assessments made pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 2375 § 3, 1981)


12.16.040      Resolution and notice of hearing.

After the council has approved the engineer’s report as submitted or modified, or if the council is proceeding without an engineer’s report, the council shall declare by resolution that it intends to make the improvement and direct the recorder to give notice of the council’s intention by two publications, one week apart, in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The notice shall contain the following:

(1)  That the report of the engineer is on file in the office of the recorder and is subject to public examination.

(2)  That the council will hold a public hearing on the proposed improvement on a specified date, which shall be no less than 10 days after the first publication of notice, at which objections and remonstrances to the improvement will be abandoned for not less than six months if written remonstrances are filed before or during the hearing by owners of two-thirds of the property to be assessed.

(3)  A description of the property to be benefited by the improvement, owners of the property as shown on books and records of the Columbia County tax department, and the engineer’s estimate of total cost of the improvement to be paid by special assessment to benefited properties. For purposes of this subsection, it shall be sufficient to describe the property to be benefited by the tax account number assigned to the property and used by the Columbia County tax department or the book and page designations shown on books and records of the Columbia County clerk. (Ord. 2375 § 4, 1981)


12.16.050      Manner of doing work.

The council may provide in the improvement resolution that the construction work may be done in whole or in part by the city, by contract, by another governmental agency, or by a combination thereof. (Ord. 2375 § 5, 1981)


12.16.060      Hearing.

If written remonstrances represent less than the amount of property required to defeat the proposed improvement, the council may by motion at the time of the hearing or within 60 days thereafter, on the basis of written remonstrances and oral objections, order the improvement carried out in accordance with the resolution or, if the project was initiated by council motion and not by petition of property owner, abandon the improvement. (Ord. 2375 § 6, 1981)


12.16.070      Calls for bids.

The council may direct the recorder to advertise for bids for construction of all or part of the improvement project. If part of the improvement work is to be done under contract bids, the council shall proceed in accordance with procedures of state law for public contracting. No contract shall be let until after the public hearing has been held to hear remonstrances and oral objections to the proposed improvement. (Ord. 2375 § 7, 1981)


12.16.080      Method of assessment and alternative methods of financing.

(1)  The council, in adopting a method of assessing the cost of the improvement, may:

(a)  Use any just and reasonable method to determine the extent of an improvement district consistent with the benefits derived.

(b)  Use any just and reasonable method of apportioning the sum to be assessed among the benefited properties.

(c)  Authorize payment by the city of all or part of the cost of an improvement when in the opinion of the council the topographical or physical conditions, unusual or excessive public travel, or other character if the work involved warrants only partial payment or no payment of the cost by the benefited property.

(2)  Nothing contained in this section shall preclude the council from using other means of financing improvements, including federal and state grants-in-aid, sewer charges or fees, revenue bonds, general obligation bonds, or other legal means of finance. If other means of financing are used, the council may levy special assessments according to benefits derived to cover any remaining part of the cost. (Ord. 2375 § 8, 1981)


12.16.090      Assessment ordinance.

(1)  If the council determines the public improvement shall be made, when the estimated cost is ascertained on the basis of the contract award of city departmental cost or after the work is done and the cost has been actually determined, the council shall determine whether the benefited property shall bear all or a portion of the cost. The recorder or other person designated by the council shall prepare the proposed assessment for each lot within the assessment district and file the assessments in the recorder’s office.

(2)  Notice of the proposed assessment shall be mailed to the owner of each lot proposed to be assessed at the address shown on the Columbia County tax assessor’s rolls. The notice shall state the amount of assessment proposed on the property and fix a date by which time objections shall be filed with the recorder. An objection shall state the grounds for the objection.

(3)  Within 60 days of the date fixed for filing objections, the council shall:

(a)  Consider the objections and may adopt, correct, modify or revise the assessment against each lot in the district according to special and peculiar benefits accruing to it from the improvement.

(b)  By ordinance, spread the assessment. (Ord. 2375 § 9, 1981)


12.16.100      Notice of assessment.

(1)  Within 10 days after the ordinance levying assessments has been passed, the recorder shall send a notice of assessment to the owner of the assessed property by registered or certified mail and publish notice of the assessment twice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The first publication of notice shall be not later than 20 days after the date of the assessment ordinance.

(2)  The notice of assessment shall include the name of the property owner, a description of the assessed property, the amount of the assessment, and the date of the assessment ordinance and shall state that interest will begin to run on the assessment and the property will be subject to foreclosure unless the owner either makes application to pay the assessment in installments within 10 days after the date of the first publication of notice or pays the assessment in full with 30 days after the date of the assessment ordinance. (Ord. 2375 § 10, 1981)


12.16.110      Lien record and foreclosure proceedings.

(1)  After passage of the assessment ordinance, the recorder shall enter into the docket of liens a statement of the amount assessed on each lot, parcel of land or portion of land, a description of the improvement, names of property owners, and the date of the assessment ordinance. On entry in the lien docket, the amounts shall become liens and charges on the lots, parcels of land or portions of land that have been assessed for improvement.

(2)  Assessment liens of the city shall be superior and prior to all other liens or encumbrances on property insofar as state law permits.

(3)  Thirty days after the date of the assessment ordinance, interest shall be charged at the rate determined by the council in the assessment ordinance, and the city may foreclose or enforce collection of assessment liens in the manner provided by state law.

(4)  The city may enter a bid on property being offered at a foreclosure sale. The city bid shall be prior to all bids except those made by persons who would be entitled under state law to redeem the property. (Ord. 2375 § 11, 1981)


12.16.120      Errors in assessment calculations.

Claimed errors in the calculation of assessments shall be called to the attention of the recorder, who shall determine whether there has been an error. If there has been an error, the recorder shall recommend to the council an amendment to the assessment ordinance to correct the error. On enactment of the amendment, the recorder shall make the necessary correction in the docket of liens and send a corrected notice of assessment by registered or certified mail. (Ord. 2375 § 12, 1981)


12.16.130      Supplemental assessments.

If an assessment is made before the total cost of the improvement is ascertained, and if the amount of the assessment is insufficient to defray expenses of the improvement, the council may declare the insufficiency by motion and prepare a proposed supplemental assessment. The council shall set a time for hearing objections to the supplemental assessment and direct the city recorder to publish one notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. After the hearing, the council shall make a just and equitable supplemental assessment by ordinance, which shall be entered in the docket of liens as provided by SHMC 12.16.110. Notice of the supplemental assessment shall be published and mailed and collection of the assessment shall be made in accordance with SHMC 12.16.110 and 12.16.120. (Ord. 2375 § 13, 1981)


12.16.140      Rebates.

On completion of the improvement project, if the assessment previously levied on any property is found to be more than sufficient to pay the cost of the improvement, the council shall ascertain and declare the excess by ordinance. When declared, the excess amounts must be entered on the lien docket as a credit on the appropriate assessment. If an assessment has been paid, the person who paid it or that person’s legal representative shall be entitled to payment of the rebate credit. (Ord. 2375 § 14, 1981)


12.16.150      Remedies.

(1)  Subject to curative provisions of SHMC 12.16.170 and rights of the city to reassess as provided in SHMC 12.16.180, proceedings for writs of review and suits for relief may be filed not earlier than 30 days or later than 60 days after filing written objections as provided by SHMC 12.16.090.

(2)  A property owner who has filed a written objection with the recorder before the public hearing may have the right to apply for a writ of review based on the council’s exercising its functions erroneously or arbitrarily or exceeding its jurisdiction to the injury of a substantial right of the owner if the facts supporting the claim have been specifically set forth in the written objection.

(3)  A property owner who has filed a written objection with the recorder before the public hearing may begin a suit for relief based on a total lack of jurisdiction on the part of the city. If notice of the improvement was not sent to the owner and if the owner did not have actual knowledge of the proposed improvement before the hearing, the owner may file a written objection alleging lack of jurisdiction with the recorder within 30 days after receiving notice or knowledge of the improvement. 

(4)  A provision of this section shall not be construed to lengthen the period of redemption or to affect the running of a statute of limitation. A proceeding on a writ of review or suit for relief shall be abated if proceedings are commenced and diligently pursued by the council to remedy or cure alleged errors or defects. (Ord. 2375 § 15, 1981)


12.16.160      Abandonment of proceedings.

The council may abandon proceedings for improvements made under this chapter at any time before final completion of the improvements. If liens have been placed on property under this procedure, they shall be canceled and payments made on assessments shall be refunded to the person who paid them or to that person’s legal representative. (Ord. 2375 § 16, 1981)


12.16.170      Curative provisions.

(1)  An improvement assessment shall not be rendered invalid by reason of:

(a)  Failure of the engineer’s report to contain all information required by SHMC 12.16.020.

(b)  Failure to have all information required in the improvement resolution, assessment ordinance, lien docket, or notice required to be published and mailed.

(c)  Failure to list the name of or mail notice to an owner of property as required by this chapter.

(d)  Any other error, mistake, delay, omission, irregularity, or other act, jurisdictional or otherwise, in the proceedings or steps specified, unless it appears that the assessment is unfair or unjust in its effect on the person complaining.

(2)  The council shall have authority to remedy and correct all matters by suitable action and proceedings. (Ord. 2375 § 17, 1981)


12.16.180      Assessment.

When an assessment, supplemental assessment, or reassessment for an improvement made by the city has been set aside, annulled, declared or rendered void, or its enforcement restrained by a court of the state or by a federal court having jurisdiction, or when the council doubts the validity of the assessment, supplemental assessment, reassessment, or any part of it the council may make a reassessment in the manner provided by state law. (Ord. 2375 § 18, 1981)


Chapter 12.20 RIGHT-OF-WAY REGULATIONS

Sections:

12.20.010    Definitions.

12.20.020    Jurisdiction.

12.20.030    Scope of regulatory control.

12.20.040    City permission requirement.

12.20.045    Obstructions in rights-of-way.

12.20.050    Obligation of the city.

12.20.060    Camping in public rights-of-way or on public property.


12.20.010 Definitions.

For the purpose of this chapter, the following mean:

(1) “Campsite” means any place where bedding, sleeping bag, or other sleeping matter or any stove or fire is placed, established, or maintained, whether or not such place incorporates the use of any tent, lean-to, shack, or any other structure or shelter, or any vehicle or part thereof.

(2) “City” means the city of St. Helens, Oregon.

(3) “Person” means individual, corporation, association, firm, partnership, joint stock company, and similar entities.

(4) “Public rights-of-way” include, but are not limited to, streets, roads, highways, bridges, alleys, sidewalks, trails, paths, public easements, and all other public ways or areas, including subsurface and air space over these areas.

(5) “To camp” means to set up, or to remain in or at, a campsite.

(6) “Within the city” means territory over which the city now has or acquires jurisdiction for the exercise of its powers. (Ord. 3208 § 1 (Att. A), 2016; Ord. 2745 § 1, 1997)


12.20.020 Jurisdiction.

The city of St. Helens has jurisdiction and exercises regulatory control over all public rights-of-way within the city under the authority of the City Charter and state law. (Ord. 2745 § 2, 1997)


12.20.030 Scope of regulatory control.

The city has jurisdiction and exercises regulatory control over each public right-of-way whether the city has a fee, easement, or other legal interest in the right-of-way. The city has jurisdiction and regulatory control over each right-of-way whether the legal interest in the right-of-way was obtained by grant, dedication, prescription, reservation, condemnation, annexation, foreclosure, or other means. (Ord. 2745 § 3, 1997)


12.20.040 City permission requirement.

No person may occupy or encroach on a public right-of-way without the permission of the city. The city grants permission to use rights-of-way by franchises, licenses, and permits. (Ord. 2745 § 4, 1997)


12.20.045 Obstructions in rights-of-way.

No person may place any obstruction on, in, or over a public right-of-way in violation of SHMC 8.12.080. (Ord. 3162 § 2, 2012)


12.20.050 Obligation of the city.

The exercise of jurisdiction and regulatory control over a public right-of-way by the city is not official acceptance of the right-of-way, and does not obligate the city to maintain or repair any part of the right-of-way. (Ord. 2745 § 5, 1997)


12.20.060 Camping in public rights-of-way or on public property.

(1) It is unlawful for any person to camp in or upon any public right-of-way or public property, unless otherwise specifically authorized by the city administrator.

(2) Violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $250.00. (Ord. 3208 § 1 (Att. A), 2016)


Chapter 12.24       CONSTRUCTION RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMITS

Sections:

12.24.010  Permit – Required.

12.24.020  Permit – Application.

12.24.030  Permit – Fee.

12.24.040  Construction regulations.

12.24.050  Exceptions.

12.24.060  Inspection.

12.24.070  Violation – Penalty.


12.24.010      Permit – Required.

All construction activity of any kind where work is to be performed in a city right-of-way requires a right-of-way construction permit. Such permit is required by any person, firm or corporation performing such work. (Ord. 2637 § 1, 1992)


12.24.020      Permit – Application.

The application shall be filed with the public works department with plans required at submission. The application is to be reviewed and approved by the city prior to any work being performed. The city may require an engineer’s certificate for plans submitted. (Ord. 2637 § 2, 1992)


12.24.030      Permit – Fee.

There is no fee or charge for the permit or engineering plans review. (Ord. 2637 § 3, 1992)


12.24.040      Construction regulations.

Only city approved materials and methods will be used and permit holders must comply with all laws, rules, regulations and ordinances that apply to such work. (Ord. 2637 § 4, 1992)


12.24.050      Exceptions.

Such permit is not required where such right-of-way work is reviewed and approved by the city under another permit. A permit is not required for any work done by the city. (Ord. 2637 § 5, 1992)


12.24.060      Inspection.

All work must be inspected and a minimum of 24 hours’ notice shall be provided to the city for inspection of any approved project. Where an emergency arises and work must be performed on a weekend or day that city staff is unavailable, work may be performed without prior authorization. However, a permit must be obtained by 5:00 p.m. of the next working day. (Ord. 2637 § 6, 1992)


12.24.070      Violation – Penalty.

A violation of this chapter is punishable by a stop work order as issued by the city building official of the public works director. (Ord. 2637 § 7, 1992)

CITY OF ST. HELENS

APPLICATION AND PERMIT TO CONSTRUCT IN PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY

Date: _____________

The undersigned hereby makes application to construct in City right-of-way (separate applications are required for each type of improvement):

NATURE OF PROJECT (plans must be submitted): ___________________________________________________________________________________________________

LOCATION: __________________________________________________________________

CONTRACTOR(S): __________________________________________________________________

ESTIMATED VALUE OF IMPROVEMENT: $__________________________

DATE(S) DURING WHICH IMPROVEMENT IS TO BE CONSTRUCTED: _________________________________

The applicant agrees to abide by all laws, rules, regulations, ordinances, and policies relating to public improvements as now exist and as hereafter changed or amended.

SIGNATURE OF APPLICANT _________________________________

ADDRESS: __________________________________________________________________

PERMIT APPROVED BY: _________________________________

DATE: _________________________________


Chapter 12.28       ADVANCE FINANCING OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS

Sections:

12.28.010  Definitions.

12.28.020  Receipt of application.

12.28.030  City analysis.

12.28.040  Public hearing – Notification.

12.28.050  Public hearing.

12.28.060  Advance financing district ordinances and agreements.

12.28.070  Advance financed reimbursement.

12.28.080  Calculation of reimbursement – Intervening properties.

12.28.090  Calculation of reimbursement – Future properties.

12.28.100  Interest applied to reimbursements.

12.28.110  Collection of an advance financed reimbursement.

12.28.120  Voluntary imposition of lien.

12.28.130  Disposition of an advance financed reimbursement.

12.28.140  Recording.

12.28.150  Public improvements.


12.28.010      Definitions.

The following words and phrases for the purposes of this chapter and for the purposes of any advance financing agreement entered into pursuant hereto and for any action taken as authorized pursuant to this chapter or otherwise shall have the meanings set out below:

(1)  "Advance financing" is a method of recapturing costs by a developer, where such developer installs public improvements, and where such public improvements may be utilized by intervening or future properties.

(2)  "Advance financing agreement" means an agreement between developer and the city, as authorized by the council, and executed by the mayor, which provides for the installation of and payment for advance financed public improvements and which agreement contains improvement guarantees, provisions for reimbursement by the intervening and future properties that may utilize such improvement, inspection guarantees, and the like as determined in the best interest of the public by the council.

(3)  "Advance financing district ordinance" means an ordinance adopted by the council and executed by the mayor designating a public improvement to be an advance financed public improvement and creating an advance financing district and containing provisions for financial reimbursement by intervening and future properties that may utilize the improvement and such other provisions as determined in the best interest of the public by the council.

(4)  "City" means the city of St. Helens, Oregon.

(5)  "Council" means the council of St. Helens, Oregon.

(6)  "Developer" means the city, an individual, a partnership, a joint venture, a corporation, a subdivider, a partitioner of land or any other entity, without limitation, who will bear, under the terms of this chapter, the expense of design, construction, purchase, installation, or other expenses associated with the creation of a public improvement. The rights of a developer, created under this chapter, also apply to his heirs, successors or assigns.

(7)  "Development" means that real property being developed by the developer and for which property the advance financing district ordinance is adopted.

(8)  "Future property" means that real property which may be served by the installation of oversized or over-capacity public improvements, but does not include the development or intervening property.

(9)  "Intervening property" means that real property abutting an advance financed public improvement, but does not include the development or future property.

(10)  "Owner" means the fee holder of record of the legal title to the real property in question. Where such real property is being purchased under a recorded land sales contract, then such purchasers shall also be deemed owners.

(11)  "Public improvement" means the following:

(a)  The grading, graveling, paving, or other surfacing of any street, or opening, laying out, widening, extending, altering, changing the grade of or constructing any street;

(b)  The construction of sidewalks;

(c)  The construction or upgrading of any sanitary or storm sewer or water main;

(d)  The construction or upgrading of any flood control dike, dam, structure, or facility;

(e)  Those "local improvements" as provided in ORS 223.387(1) as now written or hereafter amended;

(f)  Any other public improvement authorized by the council. (Ord. 2642 § 1, 1992)


12.28.020      Receipt of application.

The council will receive applications for advance financing from developer, which application shall be submitted to the city and shall be accompanied by a fee set by resolution. The fee will be applied for the cost of administrative analysis of the proposed advance financing district, the cost of notifying the property owners, recording costs, and such other costs reasonably associated with processing the application. When the city is the developer, the council may direct the city administrator to submit the application without fee. (Ord. 2642 § 2, 1992)


12.28.030      City analysis.

Upon receipt of the advance financing application, the city engineer shall make an analysis of the advance-financing proposal and shall prepare a report to be submitted to the council for discussion at a public hearing. Such report shall include a map showing the location and front footage of the development and intervening properties, as well as the location and total acreage of all future properties. The report shall also include an estimate of the total cost of the advance financed public improvement. (Ord. 2642 § 3, 1992)


12.28.040      Public hearing – Notification.

Not less than 10 nor more than 30 days prior to any public hearing being held pursuant to this chapter, developer and all intervening and future property owners shall be notified of such hearing and the purpose thereof. Such notification shall be accomplished by regular mail, or by personal service. If notification is accomplished by mail, notice shall be made on the date that said letter of notification is posted. Failure of any owner to be so notified shall not invalidate or otherwise affect any advance financing district ordinance or the council’s action to approve or not to approve the same. (Ord. 2642 § 4, 1992)


12.28.050      Public hearing.

After the city engineer analysis has been completed, an informational public hearing shall be held in which all parties and the general public shall be given the opportunity to express their views and ask questions pertaining to the proposed advance financed public improvement. Since advance financed public improvements do not give rise to assessments, the public hearing is for informational purposes only, and is not subject to remonstrances. The council has the sole discretion after the public hearing to decide whether or not an advance financing district ordinance shall be adopted. (Ord. 2642 § 5, 1992)


12.28.060      Advance financing district ordinances and agreements.

After the public hearing, held pursuant to SHMC 12.28.050, if the council desires to proceed with the advance financed public improvement, it shall adopt an advance financing district ordinance. The ordinance shall designate the improvement as an advance financed improvement and provide for advance financed reimbursement by intervening and future property owners pursuant to this chapter. Except when the developer is the city, the advance financing district ordinance may instruct the city to enter into an agreement between developer and the city pertaining to the advance financed improvement, and may, in such agreement, require such guarantee or guarantees as the city deems best to protect the public, intervening and future properties, and may make such other provisions as the council determines necessary and proper. All agreements entered into must contain and have distributed costs to all future and intervening properties. A copy of the agreement must be filed with the finance director. (Ord. 2642 § 6, 1992)


12.28.070      Advance financed reimbursement.

An advance financed reimbursement is imposed on all intervening and future properties for projects that utilize an advance financed public improvement district. Such reimbursement is made at the time of utilization of the advance financed public improvement. (Ord. 2642 § 7, 1992)


12.28.080      Calculation of reimbursement – Intervening properties.

(1)  The advance financed reimbursements, imposed on intervening properties, when future properties are not involved, shall be calculated by dividing the total actual cost of the advance financed public improvement by the front footage of all intervening properties which determines unit cost. The unit cost (cost per foot) is then multiplied by the front footage of each intervening property. In addition, the city may use any other method of apportioning costs on those properties specially benefited that are just and reasonable. Interest is then applied and calculated as set out in SHMC 12.28.100.

(2)  When the advance financed improvement includes future properties, then the above calculation will be the same except that the total cost of the improvement shall be reduced by the cost, which relates to the oversizing or over capacity of the advance financed improvement.

(3)  In both subsections (1) and (2) of this section and SHMC 12.28.090, advance financing reimbursements for odd-shaped lots shall be individually established and consistent with the benefit received by the lot and the reimbursement required of other lots in the area. If inequities are created through the strict implementation of the above formulas, the council will modify its impact on a case-by-case basis. (Ord. 2642 § 8, 1992)


12.28.090      Calculation of reimbursement – Future properties.

The advance financed reimbursement imposed on future properties shall be calculated by dividing the total actual cost of the advance financed public improvement that relates to oversizing or over capacity by the total acreage of all future properties which determines unit cost. The unit cost (cost per acre) is then multiplied by the acreage of each future property. In addition, the city may use any other method of apportioning costs on those properties specially benefitted that are just and reasonable. Interest is then applied and calculated as set out in SHMC 12.28.100. (Ord. 2642 § 9, 1992)


12.28.100      Interest applied to reimbursements.

In both SHMC 12.28.080 and 12.28.090 the reimbursements will be increased by an annual interest rate as set forth by council in the advance financing district ordinance. The interest will be calculated from the date the council adopts the advance financing district ordinance to the date of collection of the reimbursement. (Ord. 2642 § 10, 1992)


12.28.110      Collection of an advance financed reimbursement.

(1)  The advance financed reimbursement is immediately due and payable to the city by intervening or future property owners upon their utilizing any advance financed public improvement. If connection is made or construction commenced without the proper permits then the advance financed reimbursement is immediately due and payable upon the earliest date that any such permit was required.

(2)  No permit for connection or construction shall be issued until the advance financed reimbursement is paid in full or otherwise processed under the terms of SHMC 12.28.120. Whenever the full and correct advance financed reimbursement has not been paid and collected for any reason, the city finance director shall report to the council the amount of the uncollected reimbursement, the description of the real property to which the reimbursement is attributable, the date upon which the reimbursement was due, and the name or names of the intervening or future property owners.

(3)  The city council, by motion, shall then set a public hearing and shall direct the city engineer to give notice of that hearing to each of those intervening and future property owners, together with a copy of the city engineer’s report concerning the unpaid reimbursement, either in person or by regular mail. Upon public hearing, the council may accept, reject or modify the city engineer’s report; and if it finds that any reimbursement is unpaid and uncollected, the council, by motion, may direct the finance director to docket the unpaid and uncollected reimbursement in the record of liens; and upon completion of the docketing the city shall have a lien against the described land for the full amount of the unpaid advance financed reimbursement, interest, and the city’s actual cost of serving notice upon the intervening or future property owners. The lien shall be enforced in the manner as provided by law. (Ord. 2642 § 11, 1992)


12.28.120      Voluntary imposition of lien.

(1)  The council may allow financing for an advance financed reimbursement. If such option is allowed, it shall be so stated in the ordinance creating the district. If so allowed, when an advance financed reimbursement is due and collectable, the intervening or future property owner within the city limits may apply, upon forms provided by the city, for the voluntary imposition of a lien upon the parcel for the full amount of the advance financed reimbursement and the payment of that lien in 20 equal semiannual installments, including interest. The applicant must provide a certificate from a licensed title insurance company showing the identity and amount of all other liens already of record against the property and a certificate from the county tax assessor showing the assessed valuation of the property. The city shall not permit a lien greater than that allowed by law. Such property that lies outside the city limits must have the permission of Columbia County in accordance with Oregon law.

(2)  Upon receipt of such certificates and application, the city shall compute the amount of the advance financed reimbursement and shall report to the finance director the amount of the advance financed reimbursement, the date upon which the reimbursement is due, the name or names of the applicant/owners and the description of the property; and upon receiving that report, the finance director shall docket the lien in the docket of liens. From the time that docketing is completed, the city shall have a lien upon that land. That lien shall be enforced in the manner as provided by law. (Ord. 2642 § 12, 1992)


12.28.130      Disposition of an advance financed reimbursement.

(1)  Developers shall receive the advance financed reimbursement collected by the city for their advance financed public improvements. Such reimbursements shall be delivered to developer for a period of 10 years after execution of the advance financing agreement unless extended by SHMC 12.28.120. The time limitation does apply to the city as developer, except for public improvements that have been advance financed prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

(2)  Payments will be made to the developer by the city within 90 days of receipt of the advance financed reimbursements, and any advance financed reimbursements not paid the developer under the terms of this chapter shall be retained by the city to be used for related system improvements as authorized from time to time by the council.

(3)  The city shall collect an amount for administrative services performed in collecting and distributing the reimbursements. Such administrative fee shall reasonably reflect the service performed, and shall be set by resolution. (Ord. 2642 § 13, 1992)


12.28.140      Recording.

All advance financing district ordinances and agreements shall be recorded by the city in the deed records of the county. The ordinance and agreement shall contain full legal descriptions of the development, intervening properties and future properties. Failure to make such recording shall not affect the legality of an advance financing ordinance or agreement. (Ord. 2642 § 14, 1992)


12.28.150      Public improvements.

Public improvements installed pursuant to advance financing agreement shall become and remain the sole property of the city pursuant to the advance financing agreement. Advance financed reimbursements, plus interest, not paid to the developers as set forth in SHMC 12.28.130 shall be paid to the city to be used for related system improvement as authorized from time to time by the council. (Ord. 2642 § 15, 1992)

 


Chapter 12.32 ADVERTISING BENCHES

Sections:

12.32.010    Application.

12.32.020    Design and location.

12.32.030    Permit issuance or denial, maintenance.

12.32.040    Appeal.

12.32.050    Insurance.

12.32.060    Bond or insurance.

12.32.070    Revocation.

12.32.080    Removal.

12.32.090    Penalty.


12.32.010 Application.

The applicant shall file with the city recorder an application for authorization to install proposed bench. With the application shall be a sketch of the proposed bench showing its size, design and proposed location. The application shall indicate whether any advertising messages will be displayed on the bench. (Ord. 2349 § 1, 1980)


12.32.020 Design and location.

(1) Dimensions. No bench shall be more than 42 inches high, nor more than two feet, six inches wide, nor more than eight feet long overall, and in every case each bench shall be firmly bolted, anchored or otherwise secured to the surface of the sidewalk or parking strip in such manner as not to tip or be readily movable.

(2) Design. The design of each bench shall be approved by the city council, or such representative as it shall designate, to assure appropriate maintenance, stability, safety and attractiveness, and that it will serve the public interest.

(3) Location. Advertising benches may be permitted only within areas designated under the zoning and sign regulations as permitting advertising. The city recorder shall notify property owners within 200 feet, including streets, of a proposed site to assure they have no objection; if the abutting property owner, or if 50 percent of those property owners within 200 feet, object to the siting of the bench, that proposed location shall be denied.

(4) Advertising. An advertising bench permitted hereunder may display the name, address, and character of business, calling or enterprise of a person, firm or institution, or an advertising message relating thereto; provided, however, that:

(a) The city council approve the design of the sign to assure its compatibility with the surrounding area;

(b) The advertising not be for a competitor of the abutting property owner; and

(c) No such designation or advertising shall display the words “stop,” “look,” “drive in,” “danger,” or any other word, phrase, symbol or character tending to interfere with, mislead or distract traffic. (Ord. 2349 § 2, 1980)


12.32.030 Permit issuance or denial, maintenance.

(1) After having received the approval of the city council, public works department and the police department and after having determined that the proposed bench would not materially impede use of the public right-of-way and complies with all other provisions of this chapter, that city recorder may issue a permit therefor, designating the exact location of the bench. This permit shall be subject to all the provisions of this chapter. Otherwise, the recorder may deny a permit; in case the city recorder denies a permit, he shall make a written statement of the reasons for denial.

(2) A permit for any permanent bench issued after January 1st of any year shall expire on December 31st of the same year and shall not be transferred except upon approval of the city council.

(3) There shall be a per bench annual inspection fee for all advertising benches as set forth in the most recent universal fee schedule adopted by council. For benches where no advertising or other message will be displayed, annual permit fees shall be waived.

(4) A person previously granted an application for an advertising bench may apply for renewal of such permit. If the city recorder finds that the permittee, during the time of an outstanding permit, has fully complied with the provisions of this chapter, the recorder may renew the permit upon payment of the annual inspection fee.

(5) The permittee shall keep and maintain in good and substantial state of repair each and all advertising benches permitted to him, and he shall paint the benches with sufficient frequency to keep them sightly and attractive. It shall be the duty of the permittee to keep the advertising bench unblemished and free of any offensive advertising. (Ord. 3219 § 6, 2017; Ord. 2349 § 3, 1980)


12.32.040 Appeal.

Within 30 days after a denial of a permit, the applicant may appeal to the city council by filing with the city recorder a written notice of appeal. In the event of an appeal, the decision of the city council shall be final. (Ord. 2349 § 4, 1980)


12.32.050 Insurance.

Before installing any advertising bench or benches, the permittee shall file with the city recorder a policy of insurance, or a certificate of insurance and form of policy, issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in Oregon, naming the city as an additional insured and protecting the city, its officers, agents, and employees, and the abutting property owners, lessees and tenants from any and all claims for injury or damage to persons or property that might result through the placing and/or maintenance of the bench or benches. The minimum amount of insurance policy shall be $100,000 for injury to any one person, $300,000 for injuries arising from each accident, and $50,000 for property damage in each accident. The policy shall also contain a provision that the city recorder shall be notified at least 10 days prior to any cancellation of such insurance. The permittee shall maintain the insurance throughout the life of any permit issued. (Ord. 2349 § 5, 1980)


12.32.060 Bond or insurance.

Before installing any advertising bench or benches, the permittee shall file with the city recorder proof that the permittee has attained sufficient insurance or bonding to mend or replace such benches in case of damage. (Ord. 2349 § 6, 1980)


12.32.070 Revocation.

The city recorder may revoke any permit or deny renewal thereof for any violation of any provision of this chapter, for any fraud or misrepresentation in the application, or for any reason which would have been grounds for denial of the initial application. If the abutting property owner withdraws his consent to the continued permit for an advertising bench by giving written notice thereof to the city recorder, then at the expiration date of the current term of the permit a renewal of the permit shall be denied. In addition, a permit may be denied or terminated without cause upon one year’s notice. (Ord. 2349 § 7, 1980)


12.32.080 Removal.

Upon revocation or termination of any permit, whether by lapse of time or for any other reason, the person or persons responsible for the installation or maintenance of the advertising bench shall, at their sole risk and expense, remove the bench, and shall leave the site thereof in a clean and sightly condition and in as good state as when such installation was made, all in a manner satisfactory to the city recorder. If the permittee shall fail to remove the bench within 20 days after termination of its permit, all rights thereto shall be forfeited and the city recorder may have the bench removed from the right-of-way and disposed of at his discretion, all at the sole risk of the permittee, and the permittee shall pay to the city a penalty of $200.00 per bench to cover the cost of the removal.

If any bench for which a permit has been issued and a fee paid to permit display of advertising message shall not be removed within 20 days after failure to pay the inspection fee therefor, the city recorder may elect to cause all advertising material thereon to be deleted or totally obscured and may cancel the permittee’s license to do business or maintain other benches within the city of St. Helens. (Ord. 2349 § 8, 1980)


12.32.090 Penalty.

Violation of any provision of this chapter may be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00. Each bench which does not comply with this chapter shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord. 2349 § 9, 1980)


Title 13 PUBLIC SERVICES Amended Ord. 3240

Chapters:

13.02    Utility Service Administration

13.04    Water Utility

13.06    St. Helens Community Recreation and Parks Fee Added Ord. 3240

13.08    Cross-Connections

13.12    Repealed

13.14    General Sewer Use and Industrial Pretreatment Regulations

13.16    Repealed

13.20    Storm Water Utility

13.24    System Development Charges

13.28    Belton Road Advanced Financial Improvement District


Chapter 13.02 UTILITY SERVICE ADMINISTRATION

Sections: 

13.02.010    Definitions.

13.02.020    Application for utility service – Condition of service.

13.02.030    Turn on fee.

13.02.040    Utility service rates, fees and charges.

13.02.050    Billing.

13.02.060    Application of payments received.

13.02.070    Billing errors – Adjustment to bills.

13.02.080    Restoration charge.

13.02.090    Denial of utility service.

13.02.100    Responsibility for payment of bills.

13.02.110    Utility charge liens.

13.02.120    In-lieu franchise fee.


13.02.010 Definitions.

(1) “Bimonthly” means the designated account is billed once every two months.

(2) “City” means the city of St. Helens.

(3) “Customer” means the owner of property which is served by the city water, sanitary/wastewater sewer, and/or stormwater sewer system. A person, corporation, association or agency which rents or leases premises shall be considered an agent of the property owner.

(4) “Service connection” means the pipe, valves and other equipment by means of which the city conducts water, sanitary/wastewater sewer, and/or stormwater sewer services to or from the property, but does not include piping from the property line and/or meter to the premises served.

(5) “Utility service” means water service, sanitary/wastewater sewer service (hereinafter “wastewater or wastewater service”), stormwater sewer service (hereinafter “stormwater or stormwater service”), or any combination of services, provided by the city to customers. (Ord. 3195 § 1 (Att. A), 2015)


13.02.020 Application for utility service – Condition of service.

(1) An applicant for utility service shall provide the following information in making application for service:

(a) The date of application;

(b) The name of applicant;

(c) The location of premises to be served;

(d) Whether the premises has ever been supplied utility service by the city;

(e) The type of utility service being sought, and, if water service will be provided, the intended use of water;

(f) The size of the service;

(g) The date on which the applicant wishes the services to begin;

(h) Whether or not the applicant is the owner of the property;

(i) If the applicant is not the owner of the property, the name and mailing address of the owner or the owner’s agent;

(j) The name and mailing address for sending utility bills; and

(k) Personal identifying information, property information, or any other information deemed necessary to establish an account or to ensure the identity of the account holder and payment for service. Personal identifying information shall not be disclosed, except as is otherwise required by law and as set forth in council resolution.

(2) Deposits. An application deposit as established by council resolution shall be required in order to initiate utility service. Deposits may be refunded in whole or in part to the customer upon request if customer’s account demonstrates compliance with the regulations governing refund of deposits as set forth in council resolution. Any deposit remaining at the time of closure of the customer account shall be applied to the unpaid balance of the account.

(3) As a condition of receiving utility service, each successful applicant shall agree to comply with all ordinances, rules and regulations related to such service.

(4) Two or more parties who join to make application for service shall be jointly and severally liable for the costs of the utility service. Regardless of the number of parties who are liable for the costs of service, each account shall be sent a single billing.

(5) The obligation to pay for stormwater service arises whenever the premises contain impervious surfaces, whether or not any application for such services has been submitted.

(6) In addition to the application and deposit, a contract, promissory note, bond or other legal instrument designed to insure payment for services may be required prior to service when special circumstances exist. Special circumstances which may require additional security and examples of security which may be required are set forth in the council resolution governing deposits.

(7) No premises shall be connected to the city water, wastewater and/or stormwater system without an approved application. Any premises found to be connected without an approved application will be disconnected.

(8) No service connection or main extension for service connections shall be tapped into water, wastewater and/or stormwater infrastructure without an approved application.

(9) Application for new service connection outside the city limits for surplus city water and/or utilization of the wastewater or stormwater collection system shall be reviewed by the city engineer and the council for facilities planning. Such applications shall not be approved by the council unless the necessary size of main is extended to serve anticipated growth in the relevant area of the city’s urban growth boundary.

(10) No connection for new service outside the city limits for city water, wastewater or stormwater services shall be installed unless a signed consent to annex form has been received by the planning department and a signed outside city utility user agreement has been received by the building department. (Ord. 3195 § 1 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 2613, 1991; Ord. 2510, 1986; Ord. 2285 § 8, 1978. Formerly 13.04.080)


13.02.030 Turn on fee.

There are no fees for turning on services for new customer accounts performed during regularly scheduled work hours. If a customer requests service to be turned on outside the regularly scheduled work hours, a fee as set by council resolution will be charged. (Ord. 3195 § 1 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 2285 § 14, 1978. Formerly 13.04.140)


13.02.040 Utility service rates, fees and charges.

Rates, fees and other charges for utility services, including, but not limited to, delinquent fees, reinstatement fees, and any other account fees, shall be set or amended by council in a public forum after considering a staff report to provide an overview and allowing for public comments and testimony. Council shall pass a rate resolution after the forum. (Ord. 3195 § 1 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 2541, 1988; Ord. 2459 § 1, 1984; Ord. 2453 § 1, 1983; Ord. 2420 § 2, 1983; Ord. 2408 § 1, 1982; Ord. 2393 § 1, 1982; Ord. 2377 § 1, 1981; Ord. 2359 § 1, 1981; Ord. 2285 § 17, 1978. Formerly 13.04.170)


13.02.050 Billing.

(1) All billings for utility service shall be made monthly or bimonthly, based upon customer classification and usage as defined by council resolution.

(2) Administrative services charges, which include, but not limited to, activation fees, reactivation fees, suspension fees, fees for tampering with or bypassing water meters, locking devices, or otherwise interfering with any city equipment, or any other fees and charges may be charged to the customer’s account and included in the billing.

(3) Regular monthly/bimonthly billings are read on or before the fifteenth of the month; mailed no later than the twenty-eighth of the month; due upon receipt; late if not paid in full on or before the fifteenth of the subsequent month; and placed on potential shutoff status if not paid in full on or before the twenty-fifth of the subsequent month.

(4) Prior to discontinuance of service, the city shall advise the customer and the owner of the premises if the customer is not the owner by a written notice that utilities will be disconnected unless the delinquent amounts are paid immediately. If full payment is not made, the city shall immediately thereafter turn off the service. The notice shall be sufficient if mailed to the addresses listed on the application for service.

(5) Final/closing billings are calculated as of the day the customer designates as being their last day of service or when the City receives an account closing notification, whichever is the later. The full amount of the invoice is due and payable in full after 15 days of account closing, minus any applicable deposit.

(6) Billings may include non-utility services items as designated by ordinance or separately contracted with individual customers, such as loan repayments for SDC fees, sewer lateral low income loans, past due balances, etc.

(7) Each meter on a customer’s premises shall be billed separately, and the readings of two or more meters shall not be combined unless the city’s operating convenience requires. (Ord. 3195 § 1 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 2613, 1991; Ord. 2445, 1983; Ord. 2285 §§ 18, 20, 23, 1978. Formerly 13.04.180, 13.04.200, 13.04.230)


13.02.060 Application of payments received.

(1) For customers receiving only one utility service, payments made by the customer to the city shall be credited first against any administrative services charges and then to the customer’s utility account.

(2) For customers receiving two or more utility services, payments made to the city will be credited in the following manner: first to administrative services charges; second to the non-utility charges (i.e., loan agreements); third to stormwater service charges; fourth to wastewater service charges; and finally to water service charges. (Ord. 3195 § 1 (Att. A), 2015)


13.02.070 Billing errors – Adjustment to bills.

Council shall adopt by resolution rules governing adjustments, refunds, or waivers to adjust for billing errors. (Ord. 3195 § 1 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 2285 § 19, 1978. Formerly 13.04.190)


13.02.080 Restoration charge.

A customer shall pay for restoration of utility service when service has been discontinued under the provisions of this chapter. The costs will be set by resolution. This charge shall not apply to new utility service applicants. (Ord. 3195 § 1 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 2613, 1991; Ord. 2285 § 16, 1978. Formerly 13.04.160)


13.02.090 Denial of utility service.

(1) Utility service may be denied to any person for one or more of the following reasons:

(a) The person has an unpaid utility bill or account fees at the current or another address within the city;

(b) The person caused damage or loss of revenue by tampering with or bypassing water meters, locking devices, or otherwise interfering with city equipment; or

(c) The person fails to provide adequate personally identifying information to establish a new account or to resume utility service where service has been disconnected.

(2) Utility service may be denied to any property owner and subsequent tenant of the property owner, if a former tenant at the property has an unpaid utility bill or account fee, or caused damage or loss of revenue resulting from tampering with or bypassing water meters, locking devices, or otherwise interfering with any city equipment. A person aggrieved by this section may request a hearing before council if such request is filed with the city recorder within 30 days of the denial of service.

(3) Upon rectification of the cause of the denial of service by the person or property owner and paying any account fees, service may be commenced or reinstated. (Ord. 3195 § 1 (Att. A), 2015)


13.02.100 Responsibility for payment of bills.

The property owner of record shall be responsible for the payment of all charges prescribed in this chapter. If the property is rented and the renter fails to pay the charges, the city shall notify the owner of the premises of account delinquencies by mailing a copy of notices of delinquency by first class mail to the last address of the owner or owner’s agent that is on file with the city, at the time the notice was sent to the renter. (Ord. 3195 § 1 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 2285 § 21, 1978. Formerly 13.04.210)


13.02.110 Utility charge liens.

Unpaid utility service charges and fees shall be a lien against the premises served from and after the date of billing and entry on the ledger or other records of the city pertaining to its utility system until paid, and such ledger record or other record of unpaid charges and fees shall be made accessible for inspection by anyone interested in ascertaining the amount of such lien against the property. Whenever a bill for utility service and fees remains unpaid 60 days after it has been rendered, the lien thereby created may be foreclosed in the manner provided for by ORS 223.610, or in any other manner provided by law or city ordinance. (Ord. 3195 § 1 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 2285 § 22, 1978. Formerly 13.04.220)


13.02.120 In-lieu franchise fee.

In exchange for the right and privilege to place, lay, maintain and operate in, upon and under the streets, alleys, public highways, and other public places a water, wastewater and/or stormwater drainage system, the person or entity desiring to establish or continue such system shall pay an annual franchise fee representing a percentage of gross revenues derived from utility service charges collected. The franchise fee rate shall be set by council resolution. (Ord. 3195 § 1 (Att. A), 2015)


Chapter 13.04 WATER UTILITY

Sections: 

Article I. Definitions

13.04.010    Definitions.

Article II. Service Provided

13.04.020    Regular service.

13.04.030    Fire protection service.

13.04.040    Outside city service.

13.04.050    Temporary service.

13.04.060    Limitations on use.

13.04.070    Interruptions in service.

13.04.080    Recodified.

13.04.090    Meters.

13.04.100    Meter deposits.

13.04.110    Meter error.

Article III. Main Extensions

13.04.120    Payment for main extensions.

13.04.130    Payment records.

Article IV. Permits, Fees, Charges and Rates

13.04.140    Recodified.

13.04.150    Water service connection permit.

13.04.160    –

13.04.220    Recodified.

Article V. Discontinuance of Service

13.04.230    Recodified.

13.04.240    Unsafe apparatus.

13.04.250    Service detrimental to others.

13.04.260    Fraud and abuse.

13.04.270    Noncompliance.

13.04.280    Water waste.

13.04.290    Customer request for discontinuance.

13.04.300    Temporary discontinuance of service.

13.04.310    Abandoned and non-revenue-producing services.

Article VI. General

13.04.320    Pools and tanks.

13.04.330    Fire hydrants.

13.04.340    Damage to city property.

13.04.350    Control valves.

13.04.360    Cross-connections.

13.04.370    Resale of water.

13.04.380    Access to premises.

13.04.390    Contract purchaser deemed owner.

13.04.400    Penalty.

Article I. Definitions 


13.04.010 Definitions.

(1) “Customer” means the owner of property which is served by the city water system. A person, corporation, association or agency which rents or leases premises shall be considered an agent of the property owner.

(2) “Fire protection service” means provision of water to premises for automatic fire protection.

(3) “Mains” means distribution pipelines that are part of the city water system.

(4) “Premises” means the integral property or area, including improvements thereon, to which water service is or will be provided.

(5) “Service connection” means the pipe, valves and other equipment by means of which the city conducts water from its mains to and through the meter, but not including piping from the meter to the premises served. (Ord. 3195 § 2 (Att. B), 2015; Ord. 2285 § 1, 1978)

Article II. Service Provided 


13.04.020 Regular service.

(1) The city shall furnish and install a service connection of such size and location as a customer requests; provided, that the request is reasonable. The service will be installed from the main to a point between the curb line and the property line if the premises of the main is in the street, or to a point in a city right-of-way or easement.

(2) The customer shall, at customer’s own risk and expense, furnish, install and keep in good and safe condition equipment that may be required for receiving, controlling, applying and utilizing water. The city shall not be responsible for loss or damage caused by the improper installation of the equipment, or the negligence, want of proper care or wrongful act of the customer in installing, maintaining, using, operating or interfering with the equipment.

(3) The city shall not be responsible for damage to property caused by a spigot, faucet, valve or other equipment that is open when the water is turned on at the meter.

(4) A customer making any material change in the size, character or extent of the equipment or operation utilizing water service, or whose change in operation results in a large increase in the use of water, shall immediately give the city written notice of the nature of the change and, if requested, amend the application.

(5) The service connection, whether located on public or private property, is the property of the city, and the city reserves the right to repair, maintain and replace it.

(6) No customer shall serve any other water user through customer’s meter without the express written consent of the city.

(7) All water users in the city whose closest property line is within 160 feet of a city water main shall be connected to the city water system. (Ord. 3195 § 2 (Att. B), 2015; Ord. 3127 § 1, 2010; Ord. 2285 § 2, 1978)


13.04.030 Fire protection service.

Fire protection facilities shall be allowed inside and outside of a building under the following conditions:

(1) The owner of a fire protection system shall furnish and maintain a service meter approved by the city. The connection with the city main and the setting of the meter and the construction of a suitable meter chamber shall be made by the city upon payment of the charges prescribed in SHMC 13.04.150.

(2) When a building has a fire protection service, whether a wet or dry sprinkler system, which is separate from the regular water service to the building, an approved proportional meter or detector check may be used in place of a service meter. The owner of the building shall agree in writing that water supplied through this service will not be used for any purpose except for extinguishing a fire. If registration is recorded on the meter or detector check, the installation of a service meter or the removal of the service may be required.

(3) No charge shall be made for water used in the extinguishing of a fire if the owner reports the use to the city in writing within 10 days of the fire.

(4) Water may be obtained from fire protection facilities for filling a tank connected with the fire service, but only if written permission is secured from the city in advance and an approved means of measurement is available. The rates for general use will apply. (Ord. 3195 § 2 (Att. B), 2015; Ord. 2285 § 3, 1978)


13.04.040 Outside city service.

The following terms and conditions shall be applicable to every purchaser and user of surplus water outside the city limits unless expressly provided otherwise in the agreement between the city and the user.

(1) The word “user” herein refers to any person, firm or corporation desiring to purchase surplus water from the city for use by said user or person, firm or corporation supplied by such user outside of the city. The phrase “private line” herein refers to that water line on private property and extending from the meter.

(2) The user at user’s own expense will construct a private water line from the city’s meter to the property upon which the water is to be used.

(3) The user at user’s own expense will install a pump sufficient to adequately supply water for the user’s purpose.

(4) The private line and pump installation will be installed in accordance with the specifications of the city engineer, and the costs of the engineering will be at the user’s expense.

(5) If a water main needs to be extended for the provision of water service to accommodate a private line, installation will be in accordance with the specifications of the city engineer, and such main will be the property of the city upon acceptance by the city engineer. The cost of construction will be at the user’s expense.

(6) The user will own the private water line, pump and equipment, and will be responsible for the operation, maintenance and replacement of the same.

(7) The user will construct and maintain housing for the pump at user’s own expense.

(8) The city will sell surplus water to all users on the user’s line at the prevailing nonresident rates.

(9) Each user shall be required to pay to the city the usual nonresident meter installation charge and water deposit, and the city will install a water meter at the lot line of such user.

(10) The city will read all meters, and the users will provide the city with easements across all reasonable routes in order to permit access by city employees and equipment to read the meters and maintain, repair and replace the equipment.

(11) The user agrees to and does hereby hold the city, its officers and employees harmless for any claim of damage that might result to the user’s line, pump and equipment, and to the users of such equipment, as a result of the failure of the city to supply surplus water, or as a result of any activity or failure to act on the part of the city, its officers and employees.

(12) The city will bill all water users directly; the owner of a private line may bill users of that line, if any, as he may see fit for their pro rata cost of purchasing, installing, maintaining, operating and replacing the user’s line, pump and equipment.

(13) The user’s agreement, and the renewal thereof, shall be in effect for such period as may be agreed upon by the council.

(14) Nothing contained in said agreement shall prevent the city from raising, lowering or changing the rate schedule at any time to nonresident users; and users shall at all times pay to the city the prevailing nonresident water rate.

(15) The user, any successors, heirs and assigns, and all users of this private line, shall comply with all rules, laws and regulations of the city and sign all necessary documents required by the city, such as the nonresident water user’s agreement.

(16) If at any time it is determined by the public works director or the council that the pipeline or pump of the user or user’s successors, heirs or assigns, or those being permitted to use the same, is not being properly maintained or is in violation of the contract and agreement between the user and the city, the city may terminate surplus water to such pipeline and to the users of the line.

(17) Nothing in said agreement shall bind or require the city to furnish any water other than surplus water above and beyond the needs of the city. (Ord. 3195 § 2 (Att. B), 2015; Ord. 2285 § 4, 1978)


13.04.050 Temporary service.

(1) Charges for water furnished through a temporary service connection shall be at the established rates for other customers, except as noted in subsection (5) of this section.

(2) The applicant for temporary service will be required:

(a) To pay the city, in advance, the estimated cost of installing and removing the facilities to furnish the service.

(b) To deposit an amount sufficient to cover the bill for water during the entire period temporary service may be used, or to establish credit approved by the city.

(c) To deposit with the city an amount equal to the value of equipment loaned by the city. This deposit shall be refundable under the terms of subsection (3) of this section.

(3) The customer shall use all possible care to prevent damage to the meter or other equipment loaned by the city which is involved in furnishing the temporary service from the time they are installed until they are removed, or until 48 hours’ notice in writing has been given to the city that the contractor or other person is through with the meter and other equipment. If the meter or other equipment is damaged, the cost of making repairs shall be paid by the customer.

(4) Temporary service connections shall be disconnected and terminated within six months after installation unless an extension of time is granted in writing by the city.

(5) In cases of new construction where there will be a permanent installation, the city may allow temporary service during the construction period, not to exceed six months. The contractor desiring this temporary water service shall be charged a monthly fee; contractor shall pay the fee in advance and be reimbursed for the months the water is not needed. Fees are set by council resolution. (Ord. 3195 § 2 (Att. B), 2015; Ord. 2285 § 5, 1978)


13.04.060 Limitations on use.

The mayor may limit the use of water in times of shortage. (Ord. 3195 § 2 (Att. B), 2015; Ord. 2285 § 6, 1978)


13.04.070 Interruptions in service.

Temporary shutdowns may be resorted to by the city for improvements and repairs. Whenever possible, and as time permits, customers affected shall be notified prior to a shutdown. The city shall not be liable for damage resulting from an interruption in service. (Ord. 3195 § 2 (Att. B), 2015; Ord. 2285 § 7, 1978)


13.04.080 Application for new service.

Recodified as SHMC 13.02.020 by Ord. 3195. (Ord. 2613, 1991; Ord. 2510, 1986; Ord. 2285 § 8, 1978)


13.04.090 Meters.

(1) Meters shall be furnished and owned by the city.

(2) No rent or other charges shall be paid by the city for a meter or other equipment located on the customer’s premises.

(3) Meters shall be sealed by the city at the time of installation, and no seal shall be altered or broken except by one of city’s authorized agents.

(4) If a change in size of a meter and service is required, the installation shall be accomplished on the basis of a new connection. (Ord. 3195 § 2 (Att. B), 2015; Ord. 2285 § 9, 1978)


13.04.100 Meter deposits.

Where meters are furnished by the city, the customer will be held responsible for the proper use of the meter and to protect the city against misuse. A deposit, as set by council resolution, will be required of customers before water will be furnished. Any money due the water department for repairs to the meter on account of mechanical injury or for back water rent will be deducted from this sum. Any balance will be returned upon discontinuance of service to the original applicant for water service, or to any legal heirs or assigns. (Ord. 3195 § 2 (Att. B), 2015; Ord. 2285 § 10, 1978)


13.04.110 Meter error.

(1) A customer may request the city to test the meter serving the user’s premises. The customer shall deposit an amount set by council resolution to cover the reasonable cost of the test. This deposit will be returned if the meter is found to register more than two percent fast.

(2) A written report giving the results of the test shall be available to the customer within 10 days after completion of the test.

(3) Adjustment of bills for meter error will be made according to the resolution governing adjustments, refunds or waivers adopted by council pursuant to SHMC 13.02.070. (Ord. 3195 § 2 (Att. B), 2015; Ord. 2744, 1997; Ord. 2285 § 11, 1978)

Article III. Main Extensions 


13.04.120 Payment for main extensions.

Water mains extended in the city to supply new connections shall be constructed and paid for as follows:

(1) Where an existing location desires to be served immediately by extension of and connection to a main, the council shall cause such extension to be constructed:

(a) Prior to construction, the customer connecting to such extension shall pay to the city, in addition to the regular water rate, a sum to be determined by the public works director to reflect the actual cost of installing the extension.

(b) Future customers connecting to such a main shall also pay a similarly determined amount to the city at the time the request for water service is made.

(c) The city may, at its option, permit the customer to pay the amount so calculated in 12 equal monthly payments, but such installment payments shall bear interest, the rate of which is to be determined by the city recorder to reflect local current interest rates, but in no case shall it exceed 10 percent per annum.

(2) Where a person, firm or corporation is developing, or desires to develop, a subdivision, and has applied to the city for the construction of water mains therein, the city may proceed to construct the necessary mains upon payment by the subdivider of the amount specified under the provisions of this section, or may require the subdivider to construct said main. (Ord. 3195 § 2 (Att. B), 2015; Ord. 2285 § 12, 1978)


13.04.130 Payment records.

The city recorder shall cause to be kept records in the water department showing completely and accurately the location, cost and extent of all mains constructed according to the provisions of this chapter. These records shall show the amount which each individual customer has agreed to pay for the construction of the main and the schedule of payments, together with a record of payments made. (Ord. 3195 § 2 (Att. B), 2015; Ord. 2285 § 13, 1978)

Article IV. Permits, Fees, Charges and Rates 


13.04.140 Turn on fee.

Recodified as SHMC 13.02.030 by Ord. 3195. (Ord. 2285 § 14, 1978)


13.04.150 Water service connection permit.

All new water connections require a water service permit. The cost for such permit shall be paid in advance. Permit costs may include a systems development charge as well as connection costs incurred by the city. Such costs will be set by council resolution. (Ord. 3195 § 2 (Att. B), 2015; Ord. 2622, 1991; Ord. 2420 § 1, 1983; Ord. 2285 § 15, 1978)


13.04.160 Restoration charge.

Recodified as SHMC 13.02.080 by Ord. 3195. (Ord. 2613, 1991; Ord. 2285 § 16, 1978)


13.04.170 Rate schedule.

Recodified as SHMC 13.02.040 by Ord. 3195. (Ord. 2541, 1988; Ord. 2459 § 1, 1984; Ord. 2453 § 1, 1983; Ord. 2420 § 2, 1983; Ord. 2408 § 1, 1982; Ord. 2393 § 1, 1982; Ord. 2377 § 1, 1981; Ord. 2359 § 1, 1981; Ord. 2285 § 17, 1978)


13.04.180 Billing.

Recodified as SHMC 13.02.050 by Ord. 3195. (Ord. 2285 § 18, 1978)


13.04.190 Adjustment of accounts.

Recodified as SHMC 13.02.070 by Ord. 3195. (Ord. 2285 § 19, 1978)


13.04.200 Delinquent accounts.

Recodified as SHMC 13.02.050 by Ord. 3195. (Ord. 2613, 1991; Ord. 2445, 1983; Ord. 2285 § 20, 1978)


13.04.210 Responsibility for payment of bills.

Recodified as SHMC 13.02.100 by Ord. 3195. (Ord. 2285 § 21, 1978)


13.04.220 Water charge liens.

Recodified as SHMC 13.02.110 by Ord. 3195. (Ord. 2285 § 22, 1978)

Article V. Discontinuance of Service


13.04.230 Nonpayment of bills.

Recodified as SHMC 13.02.050 by Ord. 3195. (Ord. 2285 § 23, 1978)


13.04.240 Unsafe apparatus.

(1) The city may refuse to furnish water and may discontinue service to a premises where an apparatus, appliance, or other equipment using water is dangerous, unsafe or is being used in violation of laws, ordinances or legal regulations.

(2) The city is not required to inspect apparatus on the customer’s property. The city does reserve the right to inspect such apparatus, however, if there is reason to believe that unsafe or illegal apparatus is in use. (Ord. 3195 § 2 (Att. B), 2015; Ord. 2285 § 24, 1978)


13.04.250 Service detrimental to others.

The city may refuse to furnish water and may discontinue service to premises where excessive demand by one customer will result in inadequate service to others. (Ord. 3195 § 2 (Att. B), 2015; Ord. 2285 § 25, 1978)


13.04.260 Fraud and abuse.

The city shall have the right to refuse or to discontinue water service to a premises to protect itself against fraud or abuse. (Ord. 3195 § 2 (Att. B), 2015; Ord. 2285 § 26, 1978)


13.04.270 Noncompliance.

The city may discontinue water service to a customer for noncompliance with city ordinances and regulations if the customer fails to comply with the ordinance or regulation within five days after receiving written notice of the city’s intention to discontinue service. If such noncompliance affects matters of health or safety or other conditions that warrant such action, the city may discontinue water service immediately. (Ord. 3195 § 2 (Att. B), 2015; Ord. 2285 § 27, 1978)


13.04.280 Water waste.

Where wasteful or negligent water use seriously affects the general service, the city may discontinue the service if such conditions are not corrected within five days after the customer is given written notice. (Ord. 3195 § 2 (Att. B), 2015; Ord. 2285 § 28, 1978)


13.04.290 Customer request for discontinuance.

(1) A customer’s water service may be discontinued by notifying the city at least three days in advance of the desired date of discontinuance. Customer shall be required to pay water charges until the date of such discontinuance.

(2) If notice is not given, the customer shall be required to pay for the water service until the date the city has learned that the customer has vacated the premises or otherwise has discontinued service. (Ord. 3195 § 2 (Att. B), 2015; Ord. 2285 § 29, 1978)


13.04.300 Temporary discontinuance of service.

Should customer wish to temporarily suspend water service to the premises for a period of not less than one month, written notice shall be given to the city and payment shall be made for the fee for this service and any other unpaid charges, if any there be. Within 24 hours after such notice and payment, the water shall be turned off and shall only be turned on again upon application. The fee for this service shall be set by council resolution. (Ord. 3195 § 2 (Att. B), 2015; Ord. 2285 § 30, 1978)


13.04.310 Abandoned and non-revenue-producing services.

Where a service connection to a premises has been abandoned or not used for a period of one year or longer, the city may remove it. New service shall be placed only upon the customer’s application and paying for a new service connection. The cost of such new connection shall be based on time and materials. (Ord. 3195 § 2 (Att. B), 2015; Ord. 2628, 1991; Ord. 2285 § 31, 1978)

Article VI. General 


13.04.320 Pools and tanks.

When an abnormally large quantity of water is desired for filling a swimming pool, log pond, or for other purposes, arrangements shall be made with the city prior to taking such water. Permission to take water in unusual quantities shall be given only if it can be safely delivered and if other customers will not be inconvenienced. (Ord. 3195 § 2 (Att. B), 2015; Ord. 2285 § 32, 1978)


13.04.330 Fire hydrants.

Customers desiring a change in the size, type or location of a fire hydrant shall bear the cost of such change. A change in the location of a fire hydrant must be approved by the city and the CRFPD. No person shall cut, alter, change, remove, disconnect or connect with, or in any manner interfere, meddle or tamper with any hydrant owned or used by the city without having received express written approval pursuant to this section. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the fire district, street department, or water department of the city in the proper performance of their duties, or where the requirement for a permit has been waived by the public works director. (Ord. 3195 § 2 (Att. B), 2015; Ord. 2694, 1995; Ord. 2285 § 33, 1978)


13.04.340 Damage to city property.

The customer shall be liable for damage to a meter or other equipment or property owned by the city, which is caused by an act of the customer, customer’s tenants or agents. The damage shall include the breaking or destruction of seals on or near a meter and damage to a meter that may result from hot water or steam from a boiler or heater on the customer’s premises. The city shall be reimbursed by the customer for such damage promptly on presentation of a bill. No person shall tamper or interfere with city water mains, meters or other water service devices. (Ord. 3195 § 2 (Att. B), 2015; Ord. 2285 § 34, 1978)


13.04.350 Control valves.

The customer shall install a suitable valve as close to the meter location as practical, the operation of which will control the entire water supply from the service. No customer shall be permitted to operate the curb stop in the meter box. (Ord. 3195 § 2 (Att. B), 2015; Ord. 2285 § 35, 1978)


13.04.360 Cross-connections.

No physical connection, direct or indirect, shall exist, even temporarily, between the city water supply and that of a private water supply. Where such a connection is found to exist, or where provision is made to connect the two systems by means of a spacer or otherwise, the city water service shall be turned off. The service shall not be reestablished until satisfactory proof is furnished that the cross-connection has been permanently severed. (Ord. 3195 § 2 (Att. B), 2015; Ord. 2285 § 36, 1978)


13.04.370 Resale of water.

Except by special arrangement with the city, no customer shall resell city water, nor shall water be delivered to premises other than those specified in the application for service. (Ord. 3195 § 2 (Att. B), 2015; Ord. 2285 § 37, 1978)


13.04.380 Access to premises.

The city or its duly authorized agents shall, during reasonable hours, have the right to enter or leave the customer’s premises for a purpose properly connected with the service of water to the premises. (Ord. 3195 § 2 (Att. B), 2015; Ord. 2285 § 38, 1978)


13.04.390 Contract purchaser deemed owner.

A person or persons purchasing property under contract, for the purposes of this chapter, shall be deemed to be the owner or owners of the property covered by the contract. (Ord. 3195 § 2 (Att. B), 2015; Ord. 2285 § 39, 1978)


13.04.400 Penalty.

Violation of any provision of this chapter is a Class B violation, punishable by a presumptive fine of $260.00, but in no case shall the fine exceed $1,000. (Ord. 3195 § 2 (Att. B), 2015; Ord. 2420 § 3, 1983; Ord. 2285 § 41, 1978)


Chapter 13.06 ST. HELENS COMMUNITY RECREATION AND PARKS FEE Added Ord. 3240


Chapter 13.08 CROSS-CONNECTIONS

Sections:

13.08.010    Definitions.

13.08.020    Purpose and application.

13.08.030    Cross-connections regulated.

13.08.040    Backflow prevention assembly requirements.

13.08.041    New construction.

13.08.042    Retrofitting.

13.08.043    Irrigation systems.

13.08.044    Thermal expansion.

13.08.050    Mobile units.

13.08.054    Temporary meters and hydrant valves.

13.08.056    Plumbing Code.

13.08.060    Right-of-way encroachment.

13.08.070    Multiple connections.

13.08.080    Access to premises.

13.08.090    Installation requirements.

13.08.100    Annual testing and repair of assemblies.

13.08.110    Maintenance of assemblies.

13.08.115    Responsibilities of backflow prevention assembly testers.

13.08.120    Pressure loss.

13.08.130    Cost of compliance.

13.08.140    Repealed.

13.08.150    Repealed.

13.08.160    Repealed.

13.08.170    Repealed.

13.08.180    Repealed.

13.08.190    Repealed.

13.08.200    Fire systems.

13.08.210    Responsibilities of property owners and renters.

13.08.220    Termination of service.

13.08.230    Recovery of costs.

13.08.240    Falsifying information.


13.08.010 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. If a word or term used in this chapter is not contained in the following list, its definition, or other technical terms used, shall have the meanings or definitions listed in the Oregon Administrative Rules, Chapter 333, or the most recent edition of the Manual of Cross-Connection Control published by the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research, University of Southern California (USC).

(1) “Approved backflow prevention assembly” or “backflow assembly” or “assembly” means an assembly to counteract backpressure or prevent backsiphonage. This assembly must appear on the list of approved assemblies issued by the Oregon Health Authority.

(a) “Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly” or “reduced pressure principle assembly” or “RP” means an assembly containing two independently acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically operated, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the check valves and at the same time below the first check valve. The assembly shall include properly located test cocks and two tightly closing shut-off valves. 

(b) “Reduced pressure detector assembly” or “RPDA” means an approved assembly consisting of two approved reduced pressure backflow assemblies, set in parallel, equipped with a meter on the bypass line to detect small amounts of water leakage or use. The assembly should include properly located test cocks and two tightly closing shut-off valves.

(c) “Double check valve backflow prevention assembly” or “double check assembly” or “double check” or “DCVA” means an assembly which consists of two independently operating check valves which are spring-loaded or weighted. The assembly comes complete with a resilient seated shut-off valve on each side of the checks, as well as test cocks to test the checks for tightness. 

(d) “Double check detector assembly” or “DCDA” means an assembly which consists of two independently operating check valves which are spring-loaded or weighted. The assembly comes complete with a shut-off valve on each side of the checks, as well as test cocks to test the checks for tightness. It shall also be provided with a factory bypass arrangement with a meter and a minimum of an approved double check assembly.

(2) “Auxiliary supply” means any water source or system other than the city of St. Helens water system.

(3) “Backflow” means the flow in the direction opposite to the normal flow or the introduction of any foreign liquids, gases, or substances into the water system of the city.

(4) “Certified backflow assembly tester” means a person who has successfully completed and maintains all requirements as established by the Oregon Health Authority to be a tester in the state of Oregon.

(5) “Certified cross-connection control specialist” shall mean a person who has successfully completed and maintains all requirements as established by the Oregon Health Authority to be a specialist in the state of Oregon. 

(6) “City water system” shall refer to and mean the city of St. Helens water system, which shall include wells, treatment mechanisms or processes, pumping stations, reservoirs, supply trunk or feeder lines, service lines, meters and all other appurtenances, device lines and items necessary to the operation of the system and to supply water service to individual property or premises and shall include the city of St. Helens potable water with which the system is supplied.

(7) “Contamination” means the entry into or presence in a public water supply system of any substance which may be deleterious to health and/or quality of the water.

(8) “Cross-connection” means any physical arrangement where a potable water supply is connected, directly or indirectly, with any other non-drinkable water system, or auxiliary water system, sewer, drain conduit, swimming pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture, swamp cooler, or any other device which contains, or may contain, contaminated water, sewage, or other liquid of unknown or unsafe quality which may be capable of imparting contamination to the public water system as a result of backflow. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices, or other temporary or permanent devices through which, or because of which, backflow may occur are considered to be cross-connections.

(9) “Degree of hazard” means the non-health hazard or health hazard classification that shall be assigned to all actual or potential cross-connections.

(a) “Health hazard” means an actual or potential threat of contamination of a physical, chemical or biological nature to the public potable water system or the consumer’s potable water system that would be a danger to health.

(b) “Non-health hazard” means the classification assigned to an actual or potential cross-connection that potentially could allow a substance that may be objectionable, but not hazardous to one’s health, to backflow into the potable water supply.

(10) “Mobile units” shall mean units that are temporary in nature, connecting to the water system through a legally permitted hydrant, hose bib, or other appurtenance of a permanent nature that is part of the city of St. Helens water system or a permanent water service to a premises. Examples can include but are not limited to the following: water trucks, pesticide applicator vehicles, chemical mixing units or tanks, waste hauler’s trucks or units, sewer cleaning equipment, carpet or steam cleaning equipment other than homeowner use, rock quarry or asphalt/concrete batch plants or any other mobile equipment or vessel that poses a threat of backflow in the city of St. Helens water system. Uses that are excluded from this definition are recreational vehicles at assigned sites or parked in accordance with other city of St. Helens policies pertaining to recreational vehicles and homeowner devices that are used by the property owner in accordance with other provisions of this, or other, city of St. Helens policies pertaining to provision of water service to a premises.

(11) “OHA” means the Oregon Health Authority.

(12) “OAR” means Oregon Administrative Rules.

(13) “Persons” means a natural person (individual), corporation, company, city, partnership, firm, limited liability company, joint venture company, and other such entity.

(14) “Pollution hazard” means an actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the water system or the potability of the public or the consumer’s potable water system but which would not constitute a health or system hazard, as defined. The maximum intensity of pollution to which the potable water system could be degraded under this definition would cause minor damage to the system or its appurtenances.

(15) “Premises” means any piece of property to which water is provided, including, but not limited to, all improvements, mobile structures, and other structures located on it.

(16) “In-premises protection” means the appropriate backflow prevention within the consumer’s water system at or near the point at which the actual or potential cross-connection exists.

(17) “Premises isolation” means the appropriate backflow prevention at the service connection between the public water system and the premises. This location will be at or near the property line and downstream from the service connection meter.

(18) “Public works” or “city” or “the city” means the public works department of the city of St. Helens or designee.

(19) “Resident” means a person or persons living within the area(s) served by the city of St. Helens water system.

(20) “Retrofitting” means to furnish a service connection with parts or equipment made available after the time of construction or assembly installation.

(21) “Specialist” means an Oregon Health Authority-certified cross-connection specialist, either employed with the city of St. Helens or contracted by the city of St. Helens.

(22) “Submerged heads” means irrigation sprinkling or delivery devices that are located below the surface of the landscaped area in which they are installed.

(23) “Supervisor” shall mean the public works supervisor or his/her designee.

(24) “Thermal expansion” means the pressure created by the expansion of heated water.

(25) “Written program plan” or “WPP” shall mean the city’s current cross-connection control written program plan. (Ord. 3200 § 1 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 2743 § 1, 1997)


13.08.020 Purpose and application.

The purpose of this chapter is to protect the water supply of the city of St. Helens public works department from contamination or pollution due to any existing or potential cross-connection and to comply with Oregon Administrative Rules 333-061-0070, 333-061-0071, 333-061-0072, 333-061-0073 and 333-061-0074 or as amended. This chapter applies throughout the city of St. Helens water system and to every premises and property served by the city of St. Helens water system. It applies to all premises, regardless of date of connection to the city of St. Helens water system. Every owner, occupant or person in control of any concerned premises is responsible for the terms and provisions contained in this chapter. (Ord. 3200 § 1 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 2743 § 2, 1997)


13.08.030 Cross-connections regulated.

(1) No cross-connections shall be created, installed, used or maintained within the area(s) served by the city of St. Helens water system, except in accordance with this chapter.

(2) The specialist shall carry out or cause surveys to be carried out to determine if any actual or potential cross-connection exists. If found necessary, an assembly commensurate with the degree of hazard will be required at the service connection.

(3) The owner, occupant or person in control of any given premises is responsible for all cross-connection control within the premises.

(4) All premises found on Table 48 of the OAR shall install a reduced pressure backflow assembly at the service connection in accordance with this chapter.

(5) It is the responsibility of the property owner/occupant to purchase, install, test, repair and maintain all backflow assemblies.

(6) If there is a change in ownership of any and all property within the city’s service area, it shall be the responsibility of the new owner to determine that all assemblies are in compliance with this chapter.

(7) The use of any type of chemical spray attachment connected to the premises plumbing, including garden hose fertilizers and pesticide applicators, is not allowed within the city of St. Helens water system without proper protection from the potential of backflow occurring. 

(8) The use of any type of radiator flush kits attached to the premises plumbing is not allowed within the city of St. Helens water system without proper protection from backflow occurring. (Ord. 3200 § 1 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 2743 § 3, 1997)


13.08.040 Backflow prevention assembly requirements.

A specialist employed by or under contract with the city of St. Helens shall determine the type of backflow assemblies to be installed within the city of St. Helens water system. All assemblies shall be installed at the service connection unless it is determined by the specialist and approved by the public works supervisor that in-premises protection would be adequate. An approved assembly shall be required in each of the following circumstances, but the specialist is in no way limited to the following circumstances:

(1) In the case of any premises where there is any material dangerous to health which is handled in such a fashion as to permit entry into potable water system, the potable water system shall be protected by an approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly.

(2) When the nature and extent of any activity at a premises, or the materials used in connection with any activity on the premises, or materials stored at a premises, could contaminate or pollute the potable water supply.

(3) When a premises has one or more cross-connections as that term is defined in SHMC 13.08.010(8).

(4) When internal cross-connections are present that are not correctable.

(5) When intricate plumbing arrangements are present making it impractical to ascertain whether cross-connections exist.

(6) When the premises has a repeated history of cross-connections being established or reestablished.

(7) When entry to the premises is restricted so that surveys for cross-connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency to assure cross-connections do not exist.

(8) When materials are being used such that, if backflow should occur, a health hazard could result.

(9) When an appropriate cross-connection survey report form has not been filed with the city of St. Helens public works supervisor.

(10) Any and all used water return systems.

(11) If an in-premises assembly has not been tested or repaired as required by this chapter, the installation of a reduced pressure principle assembly will be required at the service connection.

(12) There is piping or equipment for conveying liquids other than potable city of St. Helens water and that piping or other equipment is under pressure and installed and operated in a manner that could cause a cross-connection.

(13) When installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly is deemed by a specialist to be necessary to accomplish the purpose of this chapter.

(14) Wherever reclaimed water or separate irrigation water is used on premises.

(15) When there is a premises with an auxiliary water supply which is interconnected to the city of St. Helens water service or supply system. (Ord. 3200 § 1 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 2743 § 4, 1997)


13.08.041 New construction.

(1) On all new nonresidential construction, an approved backflow assembly shall be installed at the service connection. The type of the assembly will be commensurate with the degree of hazard as determined by a specialist.

(2) When a building is constructed on commercial premises, and the end use of the building is not determined or could change, a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be installed at the service connection to provide protection of the public water supply in the event of the most hazardous use of the building. (Ord. 3200 § 1 (Att. A), 2015)


13.08.042 Retrofitting.

Retrofitting shall be required at all service connections where an actual or potential cross-connection exists, and wherever else the city of St. Helens deems retrofitting necessary to comply with the OAR, this chapter and the city’s WPP. (Ord. 3200 § 1 (Att. A), 2015)


13.08.043 Irrigation systems.

All irrigation systems shall be protected according to the Uniform Plumbing Code. In the event any system is equipped with an injector system, a reduced pressure principle assembly will be required at the service connection. (Ord. 3200 § 1 (Att. A), 2015)


13.08.044 Thermal expansion.

If a closed system has been created by the installation of a backflow prevention assembly, or other appurtenances, it is the responsibility of the property owner, the occupant, or person in control of the property to eliminate the possibility of damage from thermal expansion in accordance with the Plumbing Code. (Ord. 3200 § 1 (Att. A), 2015)


13.08.050 Mobile units.

(1) Any mobile unit or apparatus, as defined in SHMC 13.08.010(10), which uses the water from any premises within the city of St. Helens water system must first obtain a permit from the city of St. Helens and be inspected to assure an approved air gap or a reduced pressure principle assembly is installed on the unit. These mobile units will include, but are not limited to, carpet-cleaning vehicles, water-hauling vehicles, street-cleaning vehicles that use water, portable toilet-hauling and water service vehicles, and septic tank-cleaning vehicles that use water. A fixed air gap or backflow assembly mounted either on the truck or piping system may be required.

(2) The city reserves the right to revoke the permit if the owner fails to comply with above procedures. (Ord. 3200 § 1 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 2743 § 5, 1997)


13.08.054 Temporary meters and hydrant valves.

Backflow protection will be required on all temporary meters and hydrant valves before any use. The type of assembly will be commensurate with the degree of hazard and will be determined on a case-by-case basis by a city of St. Helens specialist. (Ord. 3200 § 1 (Att. A), 2015)


13.08.056 Plumbing Code.

As a condition of water service, customers shall install, maintain, and operate their piping and plumbing systems in accordance with the current Uniform Plumbing Code, or as amended. If there is a conflict between this chapter and the Plumbing Code, the more stringent supersedes. (Ord. 3200 § 1 (Att. A), 2015)


13.08.060 Right-of-way encroachment.

No person shall install or maintain a backflow prevention assembly upon or within any city right-of-way unless approved by the city. (Ord. 3200 § 1 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 2743 § 6, 1997)


13.08.070 Multiple connections.

Any premises requiring multiple service connections for adequacy of supply and/or fire protection will be required to install a backflow assembly on each of the additional service lines to the premises. The assembly will be commensurate with the degree of potential hazard that could occur in the event of an interconnect between any of the buildings on the premises. (Ord. 3200 § 1 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 2743 § 7, 1997)


13.08.080 Access to premises.

Authorized personnel of the city of St. Helens, with proper identification and sufficient notice, shall have access during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. to all parts of a premises and within the structure to which water is supplied. However, if any owner, occupant or person in control refuses authorized personnel access to a premises, or to the interior of a structure, during these hours for inspection, a reduced pressure principle assembly must be installed at the service connection to that premises. (Ord. 3200 § 1 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 2743 § 8, 1997)


13.08.090 Installation requirements.

All backflow prevention assembly installations shall follow the requirements as stipulated by the city of St. Helens and the current OAR Chapter 333, Division 061, as amended.

If the premises isolation assembly is allowed to be installed at an alternate location, the city of St. Helens must have access to the assembly. No connections can be made between the meter and the backflow assembly.

The type of backflow prevention assembly required shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard that exists and must, at all times, meet the standards of the Oregon Health Authority. All backflow prevention assemblies required under this section shall be of a type and model approved by the OHA. (Ord. 3200 § 1 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 2743 § 9, 1997)


13.08.100 Annual testing and repair of assemblies.

All backflow prevention assemblies installed within the area(s) served by the city of St. Helens shall be tested immediately upon installation, and at least annually thereafter, by an OHA certified backflow assembly tester. All such assemblies found not functioning properly shall be promptly repaired or replaced at the expense of the owner, occupant or person in control of the premises. In the event an assembly is moved, repaired or replaced it must be retested immediately. 

All repairs on backflow assemblies within the city of St. Helens service area must be performed according to all state and county regulations. (Ord. 3200 § 1 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 2743 § 10, 1997)


13.08.110 Maintenance of assemblies.

Backflow prevention assemblies shall be maintained, tested and repaired in accordance with the requirements set out in this chapter, the city’s WPP, the OAR and all applicable state agencies’ regulations. The assembly owner is responsible for protecting their assembly from freezing and vandalism.

In the event an assembly is not properly tested and repaired, the city of St. Helens will have the assembly tested and repaired and apply all costs associated with this to the assembly owner’s utility bill. (Ord. 3200 § 1 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 2743 § 11, 1997)


13.08.115 Responsibilities of backflow prevention assembly testers.

(1) All backflow assembly testers operating within the city of St. Helens water system service area shall be certified in accordance with all applicable regulations of the OHA and must abide by the requirements of this chapter and the city’s WPP.

(2) Persons certified as backflow assembly testers shall agree to abide by all requirements of the United States Occupational Safety and Health Administration (“OSHA”) and Oregon Occupational Safety and Health Administration (“OR-OSHA”).

(3) It is the responsibility of backflow assembly testers to submit records of all backflow assembly test reports to the city of St. Helens within 10 days of completing the test. (Ord. 3200 § 1 (Att. A), 2015)


13.08.120 Pressure loss.

Any reduction in water pressure caused by the installation of a backflow assembly is not the responsibility of the city. (Ord. 3200 § 1 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 2743 § 12, 1997)


13.08.130 Cost of compliance.

All costs associated with purchase, installation, surveys, testing, replacement, maintenance, parts and repairs of the backflow prevention assembly, and all costs associated with enforcement of this chapter, are the financial responsibility of the property owner, occupant, or other person in control of the premises. 

The fees for the inspection and testing will be set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 3200 § 1 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 2743 § 13, 1997)


13.08.140 Installation standards and specifications.

Repealed by Ord. 3200. (Ord. 2743 § 14, 1997)


13.08.150 Reduced pressure principle detector backflow prevention assembly (RPDA).

Repealed by Ord. 3200. (Ord. 2743 § 15, 1997)


13.08.160 Double check valve backflow prevention assembly (DC).

Repealed by Ord. 3200. (Ord. 2743 § 16, 1997)


13.08.170 Double check detector backflow prevention assembly (DCDA).

Repealed by Ord. 3200. (Ord. 2743 § 17, 1997)


13.08.180 Pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention assembly (PVB).

Repealed by Ord. 3200. (Ord. 2743 § 18, 1997)


13.08.190 Air gap separation.

Repealed by Ord. 3200. (Ord. 2743 § 19, 1997)


13.08.200 Fire systems.

An approved double check detector assembly (DCDA) shall be the minimum protection on all new fire sprinkler systems using piping material that is not approved for potable water use and/or that does not provide for periodic flow-through. A reduced pressure principle detector assembly (RPDA) must be installed if any solution other than the potable water can be introduced into the sprinkler system. 

Retrofitting on fire sprinkler systems will be required in each of the following circumstances:

(1) Where improper maintenance has occurred;

(2) On all health hazard systems;

(3) Wherever a specialist deems necessary; or

(4) Wherever required by the OAR.

In the event an assembly is installed on a designated lateral, a detector assembly commensurate with the degree of hazard will be required. (Ord. 3200 § 1 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 2743 § 20, 1997)


13.08.210 Responsibilities of property owners and renters.

It is the responsibility of all property owners and their renters to abide by the conditions of this chapter. In the event of any changes to the plumbing system, it is the responsibility of the property owners to notify the city. (Ord. 3200 § 1 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 2743 § 21, 1997)


13.08.220 Termination of service.

Failure on the part of any owner, occupant or person in control of the premises to install a required assembly, have it tested a minimum of annually and repaired if necessary, and/or to discontinue the use of all cross-connections and to physically separate cross-connections in accordance with this chapter is sufficient cause for the discontinuance of public water service to the premises pursuant to Oregon Administrative Rules 333-061-0070, or as amended. In the case of an extreme emergency or where an immediate threat to life or public health is found to exist, discontinuance or termination of public water service to the premises shall be immediate.

In lieu of termination of service, the city of St. Helens may, at the property owner’s expense, install a reduced pressure assembly at the meter. Testing, maintenance and repair of the assembly will be the responsibility of the property owner. (Ord. 3200 § 1 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 2743 § 23, 1997)


13.08.230 Recovery of costs.

Any water customer violating any of the provisions of this chapter and who causes damage to or impairs the city of St. Helens water system, including, but not limited to, allowing contamination, pollution, any other solution or used water to enter the city of St. Helens water system, shall be liable to the city of St. Helens for any expense, loss or damage caused by such violation. The city of St. Helens shall collect from the violator the cost incurred by the city of St. Helens for any cleaning, purifying, repair or replacement work or any other expenses caused by the violation. Refusal to pay the assessed costs shall constitute a violation of this chapter and shall result in the termination of service.

All cost associated with any disconnect or reconnect fees resulting from the enforcement of this chapter are the sole responsibility of the property owner. (Ord. 3200 § 1 (Att. A), 2015)


13.08.240 Falsifying information.

Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation, record, report or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any backflow assembly, device or method required under this chapter shall be subject to civil and/or criminal penalties provided by state law. (Ord. 3200 § 1 (Att. A), 2015)





[IMAGE]


REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE    Standard Detail No. 4:01-1

LARGE ASSEMBLY

NOTES:

1)    Large assemblies are those that are 2 1/2″ and larger.

2)    Assembly shall not be subject to flooding.

3)    Drain lines shall be sized to accommodate full relief valve discharge flow. See flow chart 4:01-2.

4)    Reduced pressure backflow assemblies are typically installed above grade in well draining areas, but may be installed below grade if an adequate drain to daylight is provided.

5)    The installation on the supply line (ahead of assembly) of a strainer with tapping blowout may be required. See Standard Detail 4:01-3.


[IMAGE]


RELIEF VALVE DISCHARGE RATES    Standard Detail 4:01-2

FOR REDUCED PRESSURE BACKFLOW

ASSEMBLIES


[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]


STRAINERS    Standard Detail No. 4:01-3

One of the most common causes of backflow prevention assembly failure is the accumulation of sand, scale, or debris trapped in the assembly. This debris can cause the assembly to fail its required testing and can contribute to a shorter working life span of the assembly.

To minimize maintenance and repairs, it is recommended that a strainer with removable screen is installed immediately upstream on the supply line of the assembly. Also, periodically remove and clean strainer screens.


[IMAGE]


REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE    Standard Detail No. 4:01-4

SMALL ASSEMBLY

NOTES:

1)    Assembly must be protected from freezing.

2)    Removable insulated covers can be used.

3)    Enclosures must be in area not subject to flooding.

4)    The installation on the supply line (ahead of assembly) of a strainer with tapping blowout is recommended. See Standard Detail No. 4:01-3.


[IMAGE]


REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPAL    Standard Detail No. 4:01-5

DETECTOR ASSEMBLY

NOTES:

1)    Assembly shall not be subject to flooding.

2)    Drain lines shall be sized to accommodate full relief valve discharge flow. See flow chart 4:01-2.

3)    Reduced pressure backflow assemblies are typically installed above grade in well draining areas, but may be installed below grade if an adequate drain to daylight is provided.

4)    The installation on the supply line (ahead of assembly) of a strainer with tapping blowout may be required. See Standard Detail 4:01-3.


[IMAGE]


DOUBLE CHECK VALVE    Standard Detail No. 4:02-1

LARGE ASSEMBLY

NOTES:

1)    Large assemblies are those that are 2 1/2″ and larger.

2)    Vault installations require the use of brass pipe plugs in all test cocks.

3)    The installation on the supply line (ahead of assembly) of a strainer with tapping blowout may be required. See Standard Detail No. 4:02-3.


[IMAGE]


DOUBLE CHECK VALVE    Standard Detail No. 4:02-2

SMALL ASSEMBLY

NOTES:

1)    Adequate space must be allowed for testing and maintenance.

2)    Area around assembly must drain well.

3)    Vault installations require the use of brass pipe plugs in all test cocks.

4)    “Y” pattern assemblies must be installed so that test cocks are pointed up (see drawing above).

5)    Thoroughly flush the lines prior to installation of the assembly.

6)    Strainers are recommended. See Standard Detail No. 4:02-3.


[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]


STRAINERS    Standard Detail No. 4:02-3

One of the most common causes of backflow prevention assembly failure is the accumulation of sand, scale, or debris trapped in the assembly. This debris can cause the assembly to fail its required testing and can contribute to a shorter working life span of the assembly.

To minimize maintenance and repairs, it is recommended that a strainer with removable screen is installed immediately upstream on the supply line of the assembly. Also, periodically remove and clean strainer screens.


[IMAGE]


DOUBLE CHECK DETECTOR    Standard Detail No. 4:03-1

ASSEMBLY

NOTES:

1)    Assemblies 2″ and smaller shall have 3″ clearance below and on sides.

2)    Vault installations require the use of brass pipe plugs in all test cocks.

3)    The installation on the supply line (ahead of assembly) of a strainer with tapping blowout may be required. See Standard Detail 4:02-3.


[IMAGE]


PRESSURE VACUUM BREAKER    Standard Detail No. 4:04-1

NOTES:

1)    Downstream control valves or shut-offs are allowed.

2)    Install assembly at least 12″ above highest downstream piping.

3)    No pumps or backpressure source allowed.

4)    No chemical addition into system allowed.

5)    Pressure vacuum breakers must be tested by a certified backflow prevention assembly tester upon installation and annually thereafter; also when moved and repaired.


[IMAGE]


AIR GAP SEPARATION    Standard Detail No. 4:05-1

NOTES:

1)    Provides maximum protection.

2)    The vertical, physical separations must be at least twice the diameter of the inlet pipe but never less than one inch.


Chapter 13.12 SEWER USE REGULATIONS

(Repealed by Ord. 3233)


Chapter 13.14 GENERAL SEWER USE AND INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT REGULATIONS

Sections:

Article I. General Provisions

13.14.010    Purpose and policy.

13.14.020    Administration.

13.14.030    Abbreviations.

13.14.040    Definitions.

Article II. General Sewer Use Requirements

13.14.050    General organization and operation.

13.14.060    Use of public sewers required.

13.14.070    Private wastewater disposal.

13.14.080    Building sewers and connections.

13.14.085    Use of portable privies.

13.14.090    Prohibited discharge standards.

13.14.100    National categorical pretreatment standards.

13.14.110    State pretreatment standards.

13.14.120    Local limits.

13.14.130    Dilution.

13.14.140    City’s right of revision.

13.14.150    Special agreement.

13.14.160    Tenant responsibility.

Article III. Pretreatment of Wastewater

13.14.170    Pretreatment facilities.

13.14.180    Additional pretreatment measures.

13.14.190    Accidental spill prevention/slug control plans.

13.14.200    Sector control programs.

Article IV. Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permits

13.14.210    Wastewater permit eligibility.

13.14.220    Wastewater analysis.

13.14.230    Individual wastewater discharge permit requirement.

13.14.240    Wastewater discharge permitting – Existing connections.

13.14.250    Wastewater discharge permitting – New connections.

13.14.260    Wastewater discharge permit application contents.

13.14.270    Application signatories and certification.

Article V. Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit Issuance Process

13.14.280    Industrial wastewater discharge permit decisions.

13.14.290    Industrial wastewater discharge permit duration.

13.14.300    Industrial wastewater discharge permit contents.

13.14.310    Industrial wastewater discharge permit appeals.

13.14.320    Industrial wastewater discharge permit modifications.

13.14.330    Industrial wastewater discharge permit transfer.

13.14.340    Industrial wastewater discharge permit revocation.

13.14.350    Industrial wastewater discharge permit reissuance.

13.14.360    Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions.

Article VI. Reporting Requirements

13.14.370    Baseline monitoring reports.

13.14.380    Compliance schedule progress reports.

13.14.390    Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline.

13.14.400    Periodic compliance reports.

13.14.410    Reports of changed conditions.

13.14.420    Reports of potential problems.

13.14.430    Reports from unpermitted users.

13.14.440    Notice of violation – Repeat sampling and reporting.

13.14.450    Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste.

13.14.460    Analytical requirements.

13.14.470    Sample collection.

13.14.480    Date of receipt of reports.

13.14.490    Recordkeeping.

13.14.500    Certification statements.

Article VII. Compliance Monitoring

13.14.510    Right of entry – Inspection and sampling.

13.14.520    Search warrants.

Article VIII. Confidential Information

13.14.530    Confidential information.

Article IX. Publication of Users in Significant Noncompliance

13.14.540    Publication of users in significant noncompliance.

Article X. Administrative Enforcement Remedies

13.14.550    Generally.

13.14.560    Notification of violation.

13.14.570    Consent orders.

13.14.580    Show cause hearing.

13.14.590    Compliance orders.

13.14.600    Cease and desist orders.

13.14.610    Administrative fines.

13.14.620    Emergency suspensions.

13.14.630    Termination of discharge.

Article XI. Judicial Enforcement Remedies

13.14.640    Injunctive relief.

13.14.650    Civil penalties.

13.14.660    Criminal prosecution.

13.14.670    Remedies nonexclusive.

13.14.680    Protection from damages.

Article XII. Supplemental Enforcement Action

13.14.690    Performance bonds.

13.14.700    Liability insurance.

13.14.710    Payment of outstanding fees and penalties.

13.14.720    Water supply severance.

13.14.730    Public nuisances.

13.14.740    Contractor listing.

Article XIII. Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations

13.14.750    Upset.

13.14.760    Prohibited discharge standards.

13.14.770    Bypass.

Article XIV. Wastewater Treatment Rates (Reserved)

Article XV. Miscellaneous Provisions

13.14.780    Wastewater discharge and pretreatment program charges and fees.

13.14.790    Severability.

13.14.800    Conflicts.

Article I. General Provisions


13.14.010 Purpose and policy.

(1) This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) for the city of St. Helens and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.), the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR Part 403) and OAR Chapter 340. The objectives of this chapter are:

(a) To address inconsistencies, conflicts, and redundancies in this title:

(i) Chapter 13.12 SHMC, Sewer Use Regulations; and

(ii) Chapter 13.16 SHMC, Wastewater Pretreatment Regulations;

(b) To replace Chapters 13.12 and 13.16 SHMC with a single comprehensive Chapter 13.14 SHMC;

(c) To repeal Ordinances 2570, 2576, 2584, 2623, 2630 and 3169;

(d) To provide control of construction and use of the POTW;

(e) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will interfere with operation of the system;

(f) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will pass through the POTW, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW;

(g) To protect both POTW personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and to protect the health and safety of the general public;

(h) To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge from the POTW;

(i) To provide requirements for permitting discharge of wastewater into the POTW, in accordance with local, state and federal requirements and standards;

(j) To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the POTW in compliance with state and federal requirements;

(k) To assure the self-sufficiency of the POTW; and

(l) To enable the city to comply with its National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the POTW is subject.

(2) This chapter shall apply to all persons and contributing jurisdictions using the POTW. This chapter authorizes the issuance of industrial wastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.020 Administration.

Except as otherwise provided herein, the superintendent shall administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and the superintendent or the city attorney shall direct enforcements to be taken under the program. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the superintendent may be delegated by the superintendent to other city personnel. The city’s industrial pretreatment operation and program implementation manual, and any amendments thereto, is adopted and incorporated by reference. If there is a conflict between the provisions in the manual and this chapter, the provisions in this chapter apply. The superintendent has the authority to update the manual. The city council adopts any rules or requirements that are necessary to implement the pretreatment program or to comply with any federal, state, or city requirements. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.030 Abbreviations.

The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:

	ASP/SCP 	Accidental Spill Prevention/Slug Control Plan

	BOD 	Biochemical Oxygen Demand

	BMP 	Best Management Practice

	BMR 	Baseline Monitoring Report

	CFR 	Code of Federal Regulations

	CIU 	Categorical Industrial User

	COD 	Chemical Oxygen Demand

	DEQ 	Oregon Department of Environmental Quality

	EPA 	U.S. Environmental Protection Agency

	gpd 	gallons per day

	LC50 	Lethal Concentration for 50 percent of the test organisms

	IU 	Industrial User

	L 	Liter

	mg 	milligrams

	mg/L 	milligrams per Liter

	NPDES 	National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System

	NDCIU 	Nondischarging Categorical Industrial User

	NSCIU 	Nonsignificant Categorical Industrial User

	O&M 	Operation and Maintenance

	POTW 	Publicly Owned Treatment Works

	RCRA 	Resource Conservation and Recovery Act

	SIC 	Standard Industrial Classification

	SIU 	Significant Industrial User

	SNC 	Significant Noncompliance

	SWDA 	Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. 6901 et seq.)

	TSS 	Total Suspended Solids

	U.S.C. 	United States Code

(Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.040 Definitions.

Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated:

(1) “Accidental spill prevention/slug control plan (ASP/SCP)” means any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in SHMC 13.14.090. A “slug discharge” is any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause interference of pass through, or in any other way violates the POTW’s regulations, local limits or permit conditions.

(2) “Act” or “the Act” means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.

(3) “Approval authority” means the State of Oregon Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ).

(4) “Authorized representative of the user” means

(a) If the user is a corporation:

(i) The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or

(ii) The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities, provided, the manager is authorized to make management decisions which govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for control mechanism requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.

(b) If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively.

(c) If the user is a federal, state or local governmental facility: a superintendent or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee.

(d) The individuals described in subsections (4)(a) through (c) of this section may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing by the individual described in subsections (4)(a) through (c) of this section, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the city.

(5) “Best management practices (BMPs)” means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in SHMC 13.14.090. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, drainage from raw materials storage, or alternative means (i.e., management plans) of complying with, or in place of, certain established categorical pretreatment standards and effluent limits.

(6) “Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD)” means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five days at 20 degrees centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/L).

(7) “Building drain” means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, being five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.

(8) “Building sewer” means that part of the horizontal piping of a drainage system which extends beyond the end of the building drain and receives the discharge of the building drain and conveys it to a public sewer, private sewer, or individual sewage disposal system. Building sewers are also referred to as “service laterals.”

(9) “Categorical pretreatment standard” or “categorical standard” means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471.

(10) “Categorical industrial user” or “CIU” means an industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard.

(11) “Chemical oxygen demand” or “COD” means a measure of the oxygen required to oxidize all compounds, both organic and inorganic, in water.

(12) “City” means the city of St. Helens, Oregon, a municipal corporation of the state of Oregon, acting through its city council or any board, committee, body, official, or person to whom the council shall have lawfully delegated the power to act for or on behalf of the city.

(13) “City administrator” means the city administrator of the city of St. Helens, Oregon, or the city administrator’s designee.

(14) “Combined sewer” means a sewer that is designated as both a sanitary sewer and a storm sewer.

(15) “Composite sample” means the sample resulting from the combination of individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an increment of either flow or time.

(16) “Control authority” means the city of St. Helens, Oregon.

(17) “Cooling water” means the water discharged from any user to which the only pollutant added is heat.

(18) “Daily maximum” means the arithmetic average of all effluent samples for a pollutant collected during a calendar day.

(19) “Daily maximum limit” means the maximum allowable discharge of a pollutant during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course of the day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in terms of a concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day, except for pH.

(20) “Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)” means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the regional water management division superintendent, or other duly authorized official of said agency.

(21) “Existing source” means any source of discharge that is not a new source.

(22) “FOG” means fats, oils and grease.

(23) “FOG, nonpolar” means fats, oils and grease that are petroleum based.

(24) “FOG, polar” means fats, oils and grease generated from animal and vegetable origins.

(25) “Garbage” means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce.

(26) “Grab sample” means a sample that is taken from a wastestream without regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes.

(27) “Hauled waste” means any trucked or hauled wastes, including septic tank wastes, chemical toilet wastes, and nonseptic wastes with hazardous characteristics.

(28) “Indirect discharge” or “discharge” means the introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act.

(29) “Industrial wastes” means the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade, or business, as distinct from sanitary sewage.

(30) “Instantaneous limit” means the maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composite sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.

(31) “Interceptor” means a device designed and installed so as to adjust, separate and retain deleterious, hazardous or undesirable matter from wastewater and to permit normal sewage or liquid wastes to discharge from the user’s premises into the POTW.

(32) “Interference” means discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and, therefore, is a cause of a violation of the city’s NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations: Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II, commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act.

(33) “Local limit” means specific discharge limits developed and enforced by the city upon industrial or commercial facilities to implement the general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b).

(34) “Manual” or “the manual” refers to the city’s industrial pretreatment operation and program implementation manual, and any amendments thereto.

(35) “Medical waste” means unwanted or unused medications, isolation wastes, biocremation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes.

(36) “Monthly average” means the arithmetic mean of the effluent samples collected during a calendar month.

(37) “Monthly average limit” means the limit that applies to the monthly average of all effluents.

(38) “National pretreatment standard” means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act, which applies to industrial users. This term includes prohibitive discharge limits established pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5.

(39) “Natural outlet” means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or ground water.

(40) “New source” means:

(a) Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act, which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section; provided, that:

(i) The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or

(ii) The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or

(iii) The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered.

(b) Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (40)(a)(ii) or (iii) of this section but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment.

(c) Construction of a new source as defined under this subsection has commenced if the owner or operator has:

(i) Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction program:

(A) Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or

(B) Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or

(ii) Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which is intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies, do not constitute a contractual obligation under this definition.

(41) “Noncontact cooling water” means water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product.

(42) “Nondischarging categorical industrial user (NDCIU)” means industries that have industrial processes that would otherwise be subject to national categorical pretreatment standards and requirements, including industries with zero discharge categorical standards. NDCIUs that have a potential to discharge must be issued no-discharge control mechanisms.

(43) “Nonresidential user” means any person who is not a residential user.

(44) “North American industry classification system (NAICS)” means the standard used by federal statistical agencies in classifying business establishments for the purpose of collecting, analyzing, and publishing statistical data related to the U.S. business economy, which was developed under the auspices of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) and adopted in 1997 to replace the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) system.

(45) “Pass through” means a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, are a cause of a violation of any requirement of the city’s NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation.

(46) “Person” means any individual, owner, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities.

(47) “pH” means a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units.

(48) “Pollutant” means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).

(49) “Pollution” means the degradation of the chemical, physical, biological, or radiological quality of the ground, surface, subsurface, or storm drainage waters by man, or the activities thereof.

(50) “Potential to discharge” means hard plumbing connected to the POTW’s sanitary sewer. This includes plumbing with shut-off valves and plumbing that has been plugged with temporary or removable plugs. Plumbing that has been permanently disconnected or cemented shut would not constitute a potential to discharge.

(51) “Pretreatment” means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard.

(52) “Pretreatment requirements” means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard.

(53) “Pretreatment regulations” means prohibited discharge regulations and standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits.

(54) “Prohibited discharge standards” or “prohibited discharges” means absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in SHMC 13.14.090.

(55) “Properly shredded garbage” means the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.

(56) “Publicly owned treatment works (POTW)” means a treatment works, as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1292), which is owned by the city. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant.

(57) “Residential user” means the occupant or lessee of a residence intended for permanent or semi-permanent occupancy.

(58) “Return to compliance” means user is complying with the pretreatment requirements outlined in a discharge permit, compliance schedule, or other agreement or order as outlined by the city and is discharging in compliance with applicable effluent limits.

(59) “Sanitary sewer” means a conduit intended to carry liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions together with minor quantities of ground, storm and surface water that are not intentionally admitted.

(60) “Septic tank waste” or “septage” means any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, cesspools, or other similar residential wastewater treatment system, or a holding tank when the system is cleaned or maintained.

(61) “Service lateral” means that part of the horizontal piping of a drainage system which extends beyond the end of the building drain and receives the discharge of the building drain and conveys it to a public sewer, private sewer, or individual sewage disposal system. Service laterals are also referred to as “building sewers.”

(62) “Sewer user” means any person discharging wastewater into the publicly operated treatment works, whether that person be residential, nonresidential, commercial, industrial or a significant industrial user.

(63) “Significant industrial user (SIU)” means (except as provided in subsection (63)(c) of this section):

(a) An industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N; or

(b) An industrial user that:

(i) Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater);

(ii) Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant;

(iii) Is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.

(c) The city may determine that an industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N is a nonsignificant categorical industrial user rather than a significant industrial user on a finding that the industrial user never discharges more than 100 gallons per day (gpd) of total categorical wastewater (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater, unless specifically included in the pretreatment standard) and the following conditions are met:

(i) The industrial user, prior to the city’s finding, has consistently complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment standards and requirements;

(ii) The industrial user annually submits the certification statement required in 40 CFR 403.12(q), signed and certified in accordance with SHMC 13.14.270, together with any additional information necessary to support the certification statement; and

(iii) The industrial user never discharges any untreated concentrated wastewater.

(d) Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (63)(b) of this section has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user.

(64) “Slug load” or “slug discharge” means any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in SHMC 13.14.090. A “slug discharge” is any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge which had a reasonable potential to cause interference and pass through or in any way otherwise violate the POTW’s regulations, local limits or permit conditions.

(65) “Shall” is mandatory; “may” is permissive.

(66) “Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) code” means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the United States Office of Management and Budget, as amended from time to time.

(67) “STEP system” means a septic tank effluent pump system.

(68) “Storm water” means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, surface runoff or drainage, and resulting from such precipitation, including but not limited to snowmelt.

(69) “Superintendent” means the person designated by the city to supervise the operation of the POTW, and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this chapter, or a duly authorized representative.

(70) “Total suspended solids (TSS)” means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering.

(71) “Toxic pollutants” means any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the EPA, or as identified by the city administrator.

(72) “Unit of government” means a county, city, district or other public corporation, commission, authority or entity organized and existing under state statute or city or county charter.

(73) “User” or “industrial user” means a source of indirect discharge.

(74) “Wastewater” or “sewage” means liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, and ground water, surface water, or storm water that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed to the POTW.

(75) “Wastewater discharge permit” means an industrial wastewater discharge permit issued pursuant to Article IV of this chapter.

(76) “Wastewater treatment plant” or “treatment plant” means that portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of sewage and wastewater. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)

Article II. General Sewer Use Requirements


13.14.050 General organization and operation.

Standards, Rules and Regulations. The standards, rules and regulations established in this chapter are deemed to be consistent with the preservation of the public health, safety and welfare, to prevent pollution of the environment, and to fulfill the obligations of the city with respect to state and federal law and all rules and regulations adopted in conformance with same. The discharge into the system of any substance which exceeds the limitations contained herein, or which, in any manner, fails to conform with requirements of this chapter, is declared to be a public nuisance and a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.060 Use of public sewers required.

(1) It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the city of St. Helens or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city any human or animal excretion, garbage, or other objectionable waste that creates an offensive odor or health hazard.

(2) It is unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city of St. Helens or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city any domestic, commercial, or industrial wastewater, or other polluted water, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with provisions of this chapter.

(3) Except as hereinafter provided, it is unlawful to construct any privy, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater.

(4) The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purpose, situated within the city of St. Helens, and abutting on any street, alley, easement, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a sanitary sewer of the city, is required at his or her expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper publicly operated treatment works in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 90 days after date of official notice to do so; provided, that the sewer is within 160 feet of the property line.

(5) The city engineer may require owner to design, build, and install a STEP system in order to gain access to the public sewer system. Owner will be required to enter into a sewer agreement with the city. Such agreement shall contain the following conditions:

(a) The design of the system, the equipment to be installed, and the materials to be used must be approved by the city engineer;

(b) The installation of the system must be approved by the city;

(c) The costs of the system, direct and indirect, shall be paid by owner. Special fees are authorized and are to be based on administrative costs incurred by the city. Such fees shall be set by resolution;

(d) When the system is completed and installed, owner shall transfer ownership of pump, lines, and appurtenances thereto to the city. Owner shall execute an easement where the pump, lines and appurtenances are on private property;

(e) Owner shall be responsible for the maintenance and repair of such lines and equipment. Any such work must be done with the approval of the city engineer. Failure to maintain or repair shall be deemed to be a breach of the agreement;

(f) Owner shall pay all other fees as normally required by this chapter; and

(g) The city engineer may set any other conditions that are consistent with the purpose of this chapter. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.070 Private wastewater disposal.

(1) Where a public sewer or publicly operated treatment works is not available under the provisions of SHMC 13.14.060 the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater system complying with the provisions of this section.

(2) Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit from the DEQ or another agency having jurisdiction.

(3) At such time as a public sewer or POTW becomes available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system, a connection shall be made to the public sewer or POTW in compliance with SHMC 13.14.060 and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall be abandoned and after pumping filled with suitable material at the time of said connection.

(4) The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.080 Building sewers and connections.

(1) No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the superintendent.

(2) There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:

(a) For residential and commercial service; and

(b) For service to establishments producing industrial or nonresidential wastes. The owner of the sewer or his or her duly authorized agent shall make application for the permit to the city. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the superintendent. A permit and inspection fee shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. The city will require proof of receipt of a plumbing permit.

(3) All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.

(4) A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building receiving residential and commercial service; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. This prohibition does not apply to industrial service.

(5) Old building sewers, herein defined as those that have not been in use for two years, may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the city, to meet all requirements of this chapter. The fee for a permit shall be in addition to the plumbing inspection fee mandated by the currently adopted state building code.

(6) The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the state plumbing code and other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.

(7) Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer.

(8) No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or ground water to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.

(9) The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the city before installation.

(10) The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the city or his representative.

(11) All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.

(12) Service laterals from building structure to the main sewer line shall be maintained by the owner of said structure in such a manner as to prevent infiltration of ground water into the collection system.

(13) The city shall have permission to enter all private properties through which the city holds an easement for purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the publicly operated treatment works lying within said easement which shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.

(14) Service laterals constructed or comprised of any prohibited material, specifically bituminous fiber pipe, most commonly known as “Orangeburg pipe,” may constitute a threat to the efficient working and operation of the sanitary collection system and/or of the wastewater treatment plant and facilities of the city and may constitute a hazard to the health of the citizens of the city. In order to reduce or eliminate the risk, threat, and hazards posed by the existence of such unapproved pipe, prohibition is necessary. Building sewers constructed or comprised of unapproved materials, including “Orangeburg” or bituminous fiber pipe, shall be deemed in need of repair or replacement when:

(a) The service lateral is in failure as determined by the city engineer. A sewer lateral constructed of bituminous fiber pipe is considered to be in failure when certain conditions are present. Some of these conditions include, but are not limited to, collapsed pipe, blistering or peeling pipe, structure failure of the pipe, sags and bulges in line greater than 25 percent of pipe diameter, root intrusion, separated or leaking joints, visibly cracked or broken pipe, or pipe material deterioration.

(b) Any additions, repairs, alterations, renovations, replacements, or maintenance is made to the service lateral.

In all cases, the entire length of unapproved pipe material shall be removed and replaced and the costs and expenses incident to the repair and/or replacement of unapproved pipe shall be borne by the owner. Replacement or repaired pipe shall conform to current applicable regulations and the requirements of this code for building sewers. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.085 Use of portable privies.

(1) Portable privies shall not be allowed for use with permanent uses except per subsection (2)(a)(iv) of this section.

(2) Use of portable privies may be authorized as follows:

(a) The public works director may authorize the use of portable privies:

(i) Temporarily, when found necessary to serve workers on a construction project;

(ii) Temporarily, to serve community events;

(iii) Temporarily, for emergencies; or

(iv) On an on-going basis to serve public parks or public open space that does not have access to a public sewer or the POTW.

(b) The planning director may authorize the temporary use of portable privies associated with approved temporary uses pursuant to Chapter 17.116 SHMC when there are no alternatives commensurate with the type, duration and extent of the temporary use.

(c) Location of portable privy(ies) subject to city approval. Location consideration shall include public health, safety and welfare factors, and when possible, avoiding obstructing principal business facades both physically and visually.

(3) Portable privies shall have watertight, completely closed tanks for storage of wastes that are serviced as often as necessary to prevent overflow. (Ord. 3236 § 1, 2019)


13.14.090 Prohibited discharge standards.

(1) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.

(2) No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or ground water to a public sanitary sewer.

(3) No person shall make connection of any cesspool, septic tank, seepage pit, or drain field to the public sewer or to a building sewer leading to such public sewer.

(4) Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the city. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the city and appropriate state and federal agencies, to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet.

(5) Discharge of industrial wastes into the POTW is prohibited unless in compliance with this chapter. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater that causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements.

(6) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any pollutant to any public sewers in a quantity which may interfere with the operation or performance of the city sewerage system, including but not limited to any of the following substances:

(a) Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius) using test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21;

(b) Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 9.0, or which may otherwise cause corrosive structural damage to the POTW;

(c) Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference but in no case solids greater than one-half inch in any dimension;

(d) Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, COD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW;

(e) Any wastewater having a temperature greater than 131 degrees Fahrenheit (55 degrees Celsius), or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius);

(f) Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through;

(g) Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems;

(h) Any trucked or hauled pollutants; except at discharge points designated by the city in accordance with SHMC 13.14.200(5);

(i) Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, is sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair;

(j) Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except as specifically approved by the superintendent in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;

(k) Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the superintendent;

(l) Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes or industrial processes;

(m) Any medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the superintendent;

(n) Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant’s effluent to fail a toxicity test;

(o) Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW;

(p) Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in concentrations capable of bulking together and causing collection blockage;

(q) Any discharge that, in the opinion of the superintendent, could cause the city to violate the terms of its NPDES permit or could constitute a violation of state or federal laws;

(r) Discharges of AOX (absorbable organic halogens) and TCDD (2, 3, 7, 8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin) shall be in compliance with the city’s NPDES permit.

Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that it could be discharged to the POTW. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.100 National categorical pretreatment standards.

(1) Users must comply with the categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471, and amendments thereto, which are adopted and incorporated herein by reference.

(2) When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the superintendent shall impose an alternative limit in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e).

(3) A CIU may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with the following subsections of this section:

(a) Categorical pretreatment standards may be adjusted to reflect the presence of pollutants in the industrial user’s intake water in accordance with this section. Any industrial user wishing to obtain credit for intake pollutants must make application to the city. Upon request of the industrial user, the applicable standard will be calculated on a “net” basis (i.e., adjusted to reflect credit for pollutants in the intake water) if the requirements of subsection (3)(b) of this section are met.

 

(b) Criteria.

(i) Either (A) the applicable categorical pretreatment standards contained in 40 CFR Subchapter N specifically provide that they shall be applied on a net basis; or (B) the industrial user demonstrates that the control system it proposes or uses to meet applicable pretreatment standards would, if properly installed and operated, meet the standards in absence of pollutants in the intake waters.

(ii) Credit for generic pollutants such as BOD, TSS, and oil and grease should not be granted unless the industrial user demonstrates that the constituents of the generic measure in the user’s effluent are substantially similar to the constituents of the generic measure in the intake water or unless appropriate additional limits are placed on process water pollutants either at the outfall or elsewhere.

(iii) Credit shall be granted only to the extent necessary to meet the applicable categorical pretreatment standard(s), up to a maximum value equal to the influent value. Additional monitoring may be necessary to determine eligibility for credits and compliance with standard(s) adjusted under this section.

(iv) Credit shall be granted only if the user demonstrates that the intake water is drawn from the same body of water as that into which the POTW discharges. The city may waive the requirement if it finds that no environmental degradation will result. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.110 State pretreatment standards.

Industrial users must comply with all applicable state pretreatment standards and requirements, which are located in OAR Chapter 340 and are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.120 Local limits.

(1) Authority to Establish Local Limits. The city is authorized to establish and revise local limits pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5(c).

(2) Local limits are established to protect against pass through and interference. No nonresidential user shall discharge to the POTW wastewater containing pollutants in excess of limitations specified in an issued industrial wastewater discharge permit, any categorical pretreatment standards, or other pollutant limits established by the city.

(3) Unless the city determines that public health or safety requires an earlier implementation, any modification the superintendent establishes to the local limits in Table 2.8-1 shall not go into effect until 30 days after reasonable notice of the changes is provided to the public and to affected dischargers who may discharge wastewater containing analytes or pollutants subject to such local limits.

(4) Where an industrial user is subject to a categorical pretreatment standard and a local limit for a given pollutant, the more stringent limit or applicable pretreatment standard shall apply.

(5) The local limits in Table 2.8-1 apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged into the POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances are for total metal unless indicated otherwise. The superintendent may impose mass limitations in addition to the concentration-based limitations.

Table 2.8-1  

	Analyte/Pollutant	Daily Maximum Concentration Limit

	Arsenic	0.13    mg/L

	Cadmium	0.05    mg/L

	Chromium	1.3    mg/L

	Copper	0.54    mg/L

	Cyanide	0.13    mg/L

	Lead	1.3    mg/L

	Mercury	0.013    mg/L

	Nickel	1.3    mg/L

	Oil and Grease, Total	300    mg/L

	pH, Minimum	5.0    S.U.

	pH, Maximum	9.0    S.U.

	Selenium	0.17    mg/L

	Silver	0.03    mg/L

	Zinc	0.25    mg/L

(6) The superintendent may develop and implement best management practices (BMPs) by ordinance or in industrial wastewater discharge permits to implement local limits and the requirements of SHMC 13.14.090. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.130 Dilution.

No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment, to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation under any circumstances unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The superintendent may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.140 City’s right of revision.

The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in industrial wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW consistent with the purpose of this chapter. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.150 Special agreement.

The city may enter into special agreements, or control mechanisms, with users setting out special terms under which they may discharge to the POTW. In no case will a special agreement waive compliance with a categorical pretreatment standard or federal pretreatment requirement. However, the user may request a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. They may also request a variance from the categorical pretreatment standard from the EPA in accordance with 40 CFR 403.13. A special agreement may contain requirements in addition to those specified in this chapter.

Nondischarging categorical industrial users (NDCIUs) may be issued a no-discharge control mechanism or annual certification requirement. All significant industrial users shall be controlled via permits or equivalent control mechanisms. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.160 Tenant responsibility.

Any person who occupies the user’s premises as a tenant under any rental or lease agreement shall be jointly and severally responsible for compliance with the provisions of this chapter in the same manner as the user. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)

Article III. Pretreatment of Wastewater


13.14.170 Pretreatment facilities.

(1) Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in Article II of this chapter within the time limitations specified by the EPA, the state, or the superintendent, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user’s expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the superintendent for review and shall be acceptable to the superintendent before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the city under the provisions of this chapter.

(2) Appeals.

(a) Users shall have 14 days to appeal the requirement to provide wastewater pretreatment.

(b) Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal.

(c) In its petition, the user must indicate which wastewater pretreatment standards are objected to and the reasons for this objection.

(d) If the superintendent fails to act within 15 days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a pretreatment requirement shall be considered final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review.

(e) Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative pretreatment requirement decision must do so by filing a complaint with the Columbia County Circuit Court within 30 days. Failure to file the complaint within 30 days will bar any alternative or subsequent appeals. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.180 Additional pretreatment measures.

(1) Whenever deemed necessary, the superintendent may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user’s compliance with the requirements of this chapter.

(2) The superintendent may require any person discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. An industrial wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.

(3) Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided where it is determined by the superintendent that they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception units shall be installed in conformance with the most recent revision of the Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code, the rules adopted thereunder, and any statute or rule of general applicability administered by the State of Oregon Building Codes Division and located so as to be easily accessible for cleaning, maintenance, and inspection. Such interceptor units shall be inspected, cleaned, repaired, and maintained in continuously efficient operating condition at all times by the user at their expense. Each user will need to determine the adequate maintenance schedule for their interceptor(s). The user is required to provide information if requested by the city of the determined maintenance schedule, and keep records verifying the maintenance provided. Acceptable maintenance means pumping out the entire interceptor. If at any time the city finds that a user’s maintenance schedule is inadequate to provide for efficient operation, the city shall require a more frequent maintenance schedule.

(4) Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter.

(5) Users may be required to install a control manhole, or other sampling device approved by the superintendent, when deemed necessary by the superintendent, to facilitate observation, sampling and flow measurement of the user’s discharge. Such manholes, or other sampling devices approved by the superintendent, shall be accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city. The manhole, or other sampling device approved by the superintendent, shall be installed and maintained by the user at their expense.

(6) In the event the city, during maintenance of public sewer lines, records situations of grease accumulation in lines sufficient to restrict the normal flow of waste, upstream users shall be inspected. If the superintendent determines that an upstream user is responsible for the grease or oil discharge, the user will be required to cease discharge of the prohibited waste. Additionally, the user may be required to install an interceptor, maintain the interceptor, and may be charged for the cost of cleaning the line. When an obstruction of the public line occurs, a violation of 40 CFR 403.5(b)(3) or (6) and SHMC 13.14.090, Prohibited discharge standards, has occurred. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.190 Accidental spill prevention/slug control plans.

(1) General Provisions. All users, as required by the superintendent, shall provide protection from accidental or intentional discharges of materials, which may cause interference or pass through, or in any way violate the POTW’s regulations, local limits, or permit conditions. Facilities necessary to prevent the discharge of prohibited or restricted substances shall be provided and maintained at the user’s cost and expense.

(2) Specific Provisions. The superintendent may require any user to develop, submit for approval to the city, and implement an accidental spill prevention/slug control plan (ASP/SCP) or take such other action that may be necessary to control slug discharges. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures by the city shall not relieve the user from the responsibility to modify its facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter. The ASP/SCP shall be posted and available for inspection at the facility during normal business hours. An ASP/SCP shall address, at a minimum, the following:

(a) Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges;

(b) Description of stored chemicals;

(c) Procedures for immediately notifying the superintendent of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by SHMC 13.14.420; and

(d) Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response hauled wastewater. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.200 Sector control programs.

(1) The city may establish specific sector control programs for nonresidential sewer users to control specific pollutants as necessary to meet the objectives of this chapter. Pollutants subject to these sector control programs shall generally be controlled using best management practices (BMPs).

(2) The city has identified commercial and industrial users (users) for inclusion into applicable sector control programs. Once identified and included into one or more sector control programs, such users shall be required to comply with the applicable sector control program requirements.

(3) FOG and sand/oil sector consists of any facility that has the potential to discharge fats, oil, and grease (FOG) or sand/oil, including but not limited to nonresidential users where preparation, manufacturing, processing of food or washing/sanitizing of dishes or equipment occurs and includes, but are not limited to, restaurants, cafes, fast food outlets, quick-service restaurants, pizza outlets, delicatessens, sandwich shops, coffee shops, mobile food establishments, schools, nursing homes and other facilities that prepare, service, or otherwise make foodstuffs available for consumption, collectively described as food service establishments (FSEs). Since these pollutants can contribute to sewer blockages, causing sanitary sewer overflows and backups into homes and businesses, all facilities in this sector must comply with the requirements which include both the requirement for installation and proper operation and maintenance of an interceptor or separator and other reporting requirements. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided in accordance with SHMC 13.14.180.

(a) Definitions.

(i) “Best management practices (BMPs)” means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the general and specific prohibitions listed in SHMC 13.14.090. BMPs are pretreatment standards and may include, but are not limited to, treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage.

(ii) “Fats, oil and grease (FOG)” means nonpetroleum organic polar compounds derived from animal or plant sources such as fats, nonhydrocarbons, fatty acids, soaps, waxes, and oils that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules. These substances are detectable and measurable using analytical procedures established in 40 CFR Part 136.

(iii) “Gravity grease interceptor (GGI)” means a plumbing appurtenance or appliance that is installed in a sanitary drainage system to intercept FOG (fats, oil and grease) from a wastewater discharge and is designed for gravity separation. Such interceptors are usually an in-ground interceptor that is located outside the facility.

(iv) “Hydromechanical grease interceptor (HGI)” means a plumbing appurtenance or appliance that is installed in a sanitary drainage system to intercept FOG (fats, oil and grease) from a wastewater discharge and is identified by flow rate, separation and retention efficiency. The design incorporates air entrainment, hydromechanical separation, interior baffling, and/or barriers in combination or separately. These devices are commonly described as “grease traps” and are usually inside the facility.

(b) General Control Requirements.

(i) A grease interceptor shall be required for all FSEs for the proper handling of liquid wastes which may be harmful to, or cause obstruction in, the wastewater collection system or cause or contribute to interference or pass through. Mobile food establishments (food carts) may be exempt from the requirement to install and maintain a grease interceptor, provided the following conditions are met for each food cart operated:

(A) The food cart(s) is not discharging directly into the city’s POTW;

(B) The owner/operator of such food cart(s) shall submit a mobile vendor wastewater management plan with the superintendent for review and shall not commence sale or preparation of food in the food cart(s) until such plan is approved;

(C) Wastewater and other liquid wastes shall be removed from the food cart by a hauled waste (septage) transport vehicle permitted in accordance with subsection (5) of this section in such a way that a public health hazard or nuisance is not created;

(D) The wastewater collection device(s) for the food cart shall be designed and intended to hold and transport such wastewater without leaks or spills and have sufficient capacity to hold no less than 20 gallons;

(E) The owner/operator of such food cart(s) shall remove wastewater and other liquid wastes at a frequency sufficient to prevent exceeding capacity of the wastewater collection device(s).

(ii) It shall be the responsibility of the user and owner of the property, business or industry or an authorized representative of the industrial user to contact the city for the purpose of obtaining a plan review. The plan review shall determine the need, size, location, and other requirements of the interceptor required to control discharges into the POTW. Written approval from the city must be obtained prior to installation of the interceptor. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the city under the provisions of this chapter.

(iii) The design and sizing of interceptors shall be in accordance with requirements established by the most recent State of Oregon Specialty Plumbing Code. The interceptor shall be designed, sized, installed, maintained and operated so as to accomplish its intended purpose of intercepting pollutants from the industrial user’s wastewater and minimizing the discharge of such pollutants to the city’s wastewater collection system.

(iv) Upon change of ownership of any existing facility which would be required to have an interceptor under this section, the applicant for sanitary sewer service shall have the burden to demonstrate that a properly sized and functioning grease interceptor is installed.

(v) Toilets, urinals and similar fixtures shall not discharge wastewater through an interceptor. Such fixtures shall be plumbed directly into the building sewer and waste system, not through an interceptor.

(vi) All fixtures connected to an interceptor which are not equipped with a garbage disposal (garbage grinder) shall be equipped with a fixed or removable mesh or screen which shall catch garbage and food debris and prevent it from entering the interceptor, and such screen shall be in service when the fixture is in use.

(vii) The user shall implement procedures that minimize the discharge of food solids to the POTW or a grease interceptor. In no case shall food waste be discharged that exceeds one-half inch in any dimension. It is prohibited to use garbage grinders for disposal of any nonfood waste.

(viii) The user must ensure interceptors are easily accessible for inspection, cleaning, and removal of FOG.

(ix) The user must maintain interceptors at their expense and keep in efficient operating condition at all times by the regular removal of accumulated FOG.

(c) Required Maintenance.

(i) Interceptors shall be maintained by regularly scheduled cleaning so that they will properly operate as intended to efficiently intercept the fats, oil and grease from the facility’s wastewater and prevent the discharge of said materials into the city’s municipal wastewater collection system. Interceptors must be cleaned whenever the combined thickness of the floating greases and settled solids is greater than 25 percent of the design hydraulic depth of the interceptor.

(ii) The city may require more frequent cleaning than that prescribed in subsection (3)(c)(i) of this section. A variance from the requirement for more frequent cleaning may be obtained if the user can demonstrate less frequent cleaning is sufficient.

(iii) In the event an interceptor is not properly maintained by the user, owner, lessee, or other authorized representative of the facility, the city may authorize such maintenance work be performed on behalf of the user. The costs of such maintenance shall be billed directly to the tenant/owner and shall become part of the charges due and owed to the city.

(iv) Biological treatment or enzyme treatment shall not be a substitute for the servicing of gravity interceptors or grease traps at the frequency required by the city. Use of enzymes or any other chemical or biological treatment or product that emulsifies or acts to emulsify FOG is strictly prohibited.

(v) The user must document all maintenance activities using a city-approved log sheet or a waste manifest ticket which must be provided to the city as required and kept by the user on site for at least three years.

(vi) The user must take reasonable steps to assure that all waste generated at the facility is properly disposed of at a facility in accordance with federal, state and local regulations (i.e., through a certification by the hauler included on the waste manifest or trip ticket for each load).

(4) Mercury Sector. Mercury sector consists of all facilities that have the potential to discharge mercury and/or amalgam. Mercury best management practices (BMPs) shall apply to any facility that has the potential to discharge mercury and/or amalgam. All facilities subject to these BMPs must comply with the requirements which include both the requirement for installation and proper operation and maintenance of an amalgam separator and other reporting requirements.

(a) Definitions.

(i) “Amalgam” or “dental amalgam” means any mixture or blending of mercury with another metal or with an alloy used in dental applications.

(ii) “Amalgam separator” means a type of wastewater treatment equipment that is designed to remove solids, including amalgam-associated solids, from the wastewater discharged by a dental facility.

(iii) “Amalgam waste” means any waste containing mercury or residues from the preparation, use or removal of amalgam. This includes, but is not limited to, any mercury waste generated or collected by chair-side traps, screens, filters, vacuum systems filters, amalgam separators, elemental mercury, amalgam capsules and autoclaves or other equipment that comes in contact with dental amalgam.

(iv) “Dental facility” means any facility used for the practice of dentistry or dental hygiene that discharges wastewater to the POTW containing amalgam. This includes facilities that place or remove amalgam.

(v) “Exempt dental practice” means any dental facility in which no amalgam is placed or removed nor is amalgam used at any time in the dental practice.

(b) Regulation and Discharge to the City.

(i) The city may control through permit, authorization to discharge, letter or other means discharges to the POTW by a dental facility.

(ii) New Dental Facilities. BMPs shall be implemented by the dental facility upon discharge to the POTW. Within 30 days after discharge, the dental facility shall report to the city that an appropriate amalgam separator has/has not been installed and required BMPs implemented. Change of ownership shall be considered a new dental facility.

(iii) Existing Dental Facilities. Dental facilities that are already operating and discharging upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article shall install an appropriate amalgam separator and implement required BMPs within 90 days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article.

(iv) Exempt Dental Facility. These BMPs are not required for dental facilities meeting the definition of an exempt dental facility.

(c) Best Management Practices (BMPs) for the Acceptance of Dental Amalgam. All dental facilities that discharge wastewater generated from the placement or removal of amalgam to the POTW are required to comply with the most recent version of the Oregon Dental Association best management practices of dental wastes.

(d) Recordkeeping. All records shall be kept on site for a minimum of three years and shall be made available to the city on request as required by SHMC 13.14.490. Each dental facility shall maintain records of:

(i) Name of manufacturer, model and date of installation for each amalgam separator;

(ii) Amalgam Disposal. Records shall include the date, name and address of the facility to which any waste amalgam is shipped and the amount shipped;

(iii) Records (logs) shall include, at a minimum, the date and time of the visual inspection, initials of person conducting the inspection and whether or not the level of solids is such that the unit needs to have maintenance or other problems are identified (e.g., leaks);

(iv) Amalgam Waste. Records of all maintenance and service completed on the amalgam separator;

(v) Best Management Practices. Records shall include any and all best management practices activities performed to comply with local, state, or federal regulations.

(e) The dental facility shall inform the city prior to:

(i) Sale or transfer of ownership of the business;

(ii) Change in the trade name under which the business is operated;

(iii) Change in the nature of the services provided that affect the potential to discharge amalgam; or

(iv) Remodeling of the facility that may result in an increase in flow or pollutant loading or that otherwise requires the facility to submit plans or specifications for approval through a building or zoning department or any other formal approval process by the jurisdiction in which the dental facility is located.

(f) Inspections and Data Collection.

(i) The city may conduct inspections or require written waste surveys for any dental facility. Inspection may be conducted with or without notice for the purpose of determining applicability and/or compliance with this chapter.

(ii) If any inspection reveals noncompliance with any provision of these dental facility BMPs, corrective action shall be required.

(g) Closure. The city may require the dental facility and/or facility owner to take specific action in the case of closure of the dental facility. This may include special handling of potentially contaminated plumbing, treatment devices or storage components.

(5) Hauled waste sector consists of all haulers of septic tank waste (septage). Septage will only be accepted into the municipal wastewater system at a designated receiving structure specified by the superintendent. Waste will be accepted at such times as are established by the city, provided such wastes do not contain hazardous wastes or otherwise violate any provision of SHMC 13.14.090. RV dump stations on private property are subject to periodic monitoring and permitting to ensure compliance with applicable standards of this chapter. Additionally, any person proposing to be a mobile waste hauler or any person the superintendent has determined is likely to be a mobile waste hauler must obtain a septage waste hauler discharge permit from the city prior to discharging into the POTW. Permits for hauled waste vehicles to use such facilities shall be issued by the city. Any discharge into the city’s POTW, or any contributing jurisdiction, by a mobile waste hauler without a permit is a violation of this chapter.

(a) All waste haulers, regardless of the origin of the hauled wastes, shall be considered “industrial users” for the purposes of this chapter.

(b) Septage waste shall be discharged at one designated location at the POTW.

(c) Septage waste shall not violate SHMC 13.14.090.

(d) The discharge of hauled industrial wastes requires prior approval and a wastewater permit from the city issued to the source of industrial wastewater. The superintendent shall have authority to prohibit the disposal of such wastes.

(e) Fees for the discharge of septage will be established as part of the user fee system as authorized in Article XV of this chapter.

(f) The superintendent may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The superintendent may also require the mobile waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. The discharge of a hauled waste that is identified as hazardous waste is prohibited. If a load is refused as hazardous waste the waste hauler must file a manifest stating when, where, and how the load was discharged. This manifest must be filed with the pretreatment office/wastewater treatment plant before any further hauled wastes are accepted from that contractor.

(g) Application for Permit. Any new mobile waste hauler shall apply for a septage waste hauler permit at least 30 days prior to its initial discharge. Applications shall be made to the superintendent in writing on forms provided by the city and shall include the following information:

(i) Name, address, telephone number and authorized representative of the applicant;

(ii) Proof of state or federal license numbers;

(iii) A description of the vehicle(s) that will store or discharge septage;

(iv) Signatory and certification required by SHMC 13.14.270.

(h) The superintendent shall evaluate the data furnished by the applicant and may determine that additional information or sampling of wastewater characteristics is necessary. If such a determination is made, the applicant, unless the time period is extended, will be given 30 days to provide the required information or sampling. If it is not provided within the designated time period, the application shall be denied. After determining that the submitted application contains all the information required by this subsection, the superintendent shall consider the submission, any additional evidence that may have been requested, and any other available information relevant to the application. If the superintendent determines that the proposed discharge meets the requirements of this chapter and the additional septage does not otherwise overload or cause damage to any portion of the POTW, or will not create an imminent or potential hazard to personnel, the superintendent shall, within 30 days after determining that the application is complete, issue a septage waste hauler discharge permit subject to appropriate conditions.

(i) Modification of Permit. Conditions included in a septage waste hauler discharge permit shall remain in effect for that permit until it expires, except that they may be revised by the superintendent whenever the superintendent deems a revision is necessary in order to effectively implement the pretreatment program, to reflect changes in state or federal regulations, or to meet any emergency. The permit holder shall be informed of any proposed change in its permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of the change except in the event of an emergency.

(j) Duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years. The permit holder shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of its existing permit if it desires to continue to discharge. An expired permit will continue to be in effect until the city takes final action on the renewal application to issue or deny the permit if:

(i) The permit holder has submitted a complete permit application at least 90 days prior to the expiration of its permit; and

(ii) The failure to take final action is not due to any act or failure to act on the part of the permit holder.

(k) Transfer. A mobile septage waste hauler discharge permit shall be issued to a specific mobile waste hauler for a specific operation. A septage waste hauler discharge permit shall not be assigned, transferred or sold without the approval of the superintendent. Any successor mobile waste hauler shall agree to comply with the terms and conditions of the existing permit as a condition precedent to the approval by the superintendent of a transfer, sale or assignment of the permit.

(6) New Construction or Remodeling. The city shall review new construction and existing facilities undergoing any physical change, change in ownership, change in operations, or other change that could alter the nature, properties, or volume of wastewater discharge, to ensure that appropriate sector control program requirements are implemented and maintained. The user shall inform the city prior to:

(a) Sale or transfer of ownership of the business; or

(b) Change in the trade name under which the business is operated; or

(c) Change in the nature of the services provided that affect the potential to discharge sector control program pollutants; or

(d) Remodeling of the facility that may result in an increase in flow or pollutant loading or that otherwise requires the facility to submit plans or specifications for approval through a building or zoning department, or any other formal approval process of a city, county, or other jurisdiction.

(7) Inspections.

(a) The city may conduct inspections of any facility with or without notice for the purpose of determining applicability and/or compliance with sector control program requirements.

(b) If any inspection reveals noncompliance with any provision of a sector control program requirement, corrective action shall be required pursuant to the applicable sector control program.

(c) Inspection results will be provided in writing to the inspected facility.

(8) The city may require closure of plumbing, treatment devices, storage components, containments, or other such physical structures that are no longer required for their intended purpose. Closure may include the removal of equipment, the filling in and/or cementing, capping, plugging, etc.

(9) Restitution. Any extraordinary costs incurred by the city due to interference, damage, pass through, or maintenance necessary in the treatment and/or collection system shall be paid by the user to the city. The direct costs of all labor, equipment and materials incurred in rectifying the interference or damage, including reasonable attorney’s fees, shall be billed directly to the property owner or the user by the city, and such costs shall become part of the total charges due and owing to the city and shall constitute a lien on the property owner’s and/or user’s property until paid in full. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)

Article IV. Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permits


13.14.210 Wastewater permit eligibility.

Issuance of an industrial wastewater discharge permit shall be determined by submission and review of an environmental survey form. When requested by the city, nondomestic users must submit information on the nature and characteristics of their wastewater by completing an environmental survey form and, if required, an industrial wastewater discharge permit application prior to commencing their discharge. The city is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require industrial users to update a previously submitted survey. Failure to complete this survey shall be reasonable grounds for terminating service to the user and shall be considered a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.220 Wastewater analysis.

When requested by the superintendent, a user shall submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within 30 days of the request. The user shall sample and analyze in accordance with SHMC 13.14.460 and 13.14.470. The superintendent is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information. Failure to submit this information shall be reasonable grounds for terminating service to the user and shall be considered a violation of this chapter. All wastewater analyses must be signed and certified in accordance with SHMC 13.14.500(A). (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.230 Individual wastewater discharge permit requirement.

(1) No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining an industrial wastewater discharge permit from the superintendent, except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely application pursuant to SHMC 13.14.240 may continue to discharge for the time period specified therein.

(2) The superintendent may require other users to obtain industrial wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.

(3) Any violation of the terms and conditions of an industrial wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and subjects the permittee to the enforcement actions identified in Articles X, XI, and XII of this chapter. Obtaining an industrial wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state, and local law. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.240 Wastewater discharge permitting – Existing connections.

Any user required to obtain an industrial wastewater discharge permit who was discharging wastewater into the POTW without a permit prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future shall, within 90 days after said date, apply to the superintendent for an industrial wastewater discharge permit in accordance with SHMC 13.14.270, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after 90 days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter except in accordance with an industrial wastewater discharge permit issued by the superintendent. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.250 Wastewater discharge permitting – New connections.

Any user required to obtain an industrial wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this industrial wastewater discharge permit that complies with SHMC 13.14.260 must be filed at least 90 days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.260 Wastewater discharge permit application contents.

(1) All users required to obtain an industrial wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit application. The superintendent may require all users to submit as part of an application the following information:

(a) Identifying Information.

(i) The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner;

(ii) Contact information, description of activities, facilities, and plant production processes on the premises;

(b) A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility, including but not limited to air quality or storm water discharge permits;

(c) Signatory and certification required by SHMC 13.14.270;

(2) Description of Operations.

(a) A brief description of the nature, average rate of production (including each product produced by type, amount, processes, and rate of production), and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram, which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes;

(b) Types of wastes generated, and a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW;

(c) Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation;

(d) Type and amount of all raw materials processes (average and maximum per day);

(e) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location and elevation, and all points of discharge;

(f) Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production;

(3) Time and duration of discharges;

(4) The location for monitoring process wastewaters, not to be located prior to the end of process or after the introduction of sanitary wastewaters;

(5) Flow Measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow the use of the combined wastestream formula set out in SHMC 13.14.100(3);

(6) Measurement of Pollutants.

(a) The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process and any new categorically regulated processes for existing sources.

(b) The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the superintendent, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process.

(c) Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported.

(d) The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in SHMC 13.14.460 and 13.14.470. Where the standard requires compliance with a BMP or pollution prevention alternative, the user shall submit documentation as required by the superintendent or the applicable standards to determine compliance with the BMP or pollution prevention alternative standard.

(e) Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in SHMC 13.14.470;

(7) Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the superintendent to evaluate the industrial wastewater discharge permit application;

(8) Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.270 Application signatories and certification.

(1) All industrial wastewater discharge permit applications, user reports and certification statements must be signed by an authorized representative, as defined in SHMC 13.14.040(4), of the user and contain the certification statement in SHMC 13.14.500(1).

(2) If the designation of an authorized representative is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new written authorization satisfying the requirements of this section must be submitted to the superintendent prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative.

(3) A facility determined to be a nonsignificant categorical industrial user by the superintendent pursuant to 40 CFR 403.3(v)(2) must annually submit the signed certification statement in SHMC 13.14.500(2). Such certification statement must accompany any alternative or periodic report required by the city. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)

Article V. Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit Issuance Process


13.14.280 Industrial wastewater discharge permit decisions.

The superintendent will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within 60 days of receipt of a complete industrial wastewater discharge permit application, the superintendent will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The superintendent may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit. Appeals of the superintendent’s decision are subject to the provisions of SHMC 13.14.310. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.290 Industrial wastewater discharge permit duration.

An industrial wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. An industrial wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five years at the discretion of the superintendent. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.300 Industrial wastewater discharge permit contents.

An industrial wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the superintendent to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant’s effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW.

(1) Industrial wastewater discharge permits must contain:

(a) A statement that indicates the industrial wastewater discharge permit issuance date, expiration date, and effective date;

(b) A statement that indicates industrial wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five years;

(c) A statement that the industrial wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification and approval from the city in accordance with SHMC 13.14.330, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing industrial wastewater discharge permit;

(d) Effluent discharge limitations, including best management practices (BMPs), based on applicable federal pretreatment standards or local limits, whichever is most restrictive;

(e) Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants (or BMP) to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law;

(f) A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law; and

(g) Requirement to control slug discharge, if determined by the superintendent to be necessary.

(2) Industrial wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions:

(a) Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;

(b) Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works;

(c) Requirement to develop and implement an accidental spill plan/slug control plan (ASP/SCP) or other special condition, including BMPs, necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges;

(d) Development and implementation of waste minimization or pollution prevention plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;

(e) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;

(f) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment;

(g) Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types, and standards for tests, and reporting schedules;

(h) Requirements for immediate reporting of any instance of noncompliance and for automatic resampling and reporting within 30 days where self-monitoring indicates a violation(s);

(i) Compliance schedules for meeting pretreatment standards and requirements;

(j) Requirements for maintaining and retaining facility records relating to wastewater discharge and affording the superintendent, or his representatives, access thereto;

(k) Requirements for prior notification and approval by the superintendent of any new introduction of wastewater pollutants or of any change in the volume or character of the wastewater prior to introduction in the system;

(l) Requirements for the prior notification and approval by the superintendent of any change in the manufacturing and/or pretreatment process used by the permittee;

(m) Requirements for immediate notification of excessive, accidental or slug discharges, or any discharge which could cause any problems to the POTW;

(n) A statement that compliance with the industrial wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit;

(o) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the superintendent to ensure compliance with this chapter, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.310 Industrial wastewater discharge permit appeals.

Any person, including the permittee, may petition to the city to reconsider the terms of the permit within 30 days of the issuance of the final permit.

(1) Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal.

(2) In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative conditions, if any, it seeks to place in the industrial wastewater discharge permit.

(3) The effectiveness of the industrial wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal.

(4) If the superintendent fails to act within 30 days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider an industrial wastewater discharge permit, not to issue an industrial wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify an industrial wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final administrative action for purposes of judicial review.

(5) Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative industrial wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a written complaint with the city of St. Helens. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.320 Industrial wastewater discharge permit modifications.

(1) The superintendent may modify an industrial wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:

(a) To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements;

(b) To address significant alterations or additions to the user’s operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of industrial wastewater discharge permit issuance;

(c) A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;

(d) Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the city’s POTW, city personnel, or the receiving waters;

(e) Violation of any terms or conditions of the industrial wastewater discharge permit;

(f) Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the industrial wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting;

(g) Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;

(h) To correct typographical or other errors in the industrial wastewater discharge permit; or

(i) To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator in accordance with SHMC 13.14.330.

(2) The filing of a request by the permittee for an industrial wastewater discharge permit modification does not stay any industrial wastewater discharge permit condition. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.330 Industrial wastewater discharge permit transfer.

(1) Industrial wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least 30 days’ advance notice to the superintendent and the superintendent approves the industrial wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the superintendent must include a provision for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing permit and a written certification by the new owner or operator which:

(a) States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility’s operations and processes;

(b) Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and

(c) Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit.

(2) Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the industrial wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer.

(3) Industrial wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All industrial wastewater discharge permits issued to an industrial user are void upon the issuance of a new industrial wastewater discharge permit to that industrial user. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.340 Industrial wastewater discharge permit revocation.

The superintendent may revoke an industrial wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:

(1) Failure to notify the superintendent of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge;

(2) Failure to provide prior notification to the superintendent of changed conditions pursuant to SHMC 13.14.410;

(3) Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the industrial wastewater discharge permit application;

(4) Falsifying self-monitoring reports and certification statements;

(5) Tampering with monitoring equipment;

(6) Refusing to allow the superintendent timely access to the facility premises and records;

(7) Failure to meet effluent limitations;

(8) Failure to pay fines;

(9) Failure to pay sewer charges or permit fees;

(10) Failure to meet compliance schedules;

(11) Failure to complete an environmental survey or industrial wastewater discharge permit application;

(12) Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; or

(13) Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the industrial wastewater discharge permit or this chapter. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.350 Industrial wastewater discharge permit reissuance.

A user with an expiring industrial wastewater discharge permit shall apply for industrial wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete industrial wastewater discharge permit application, in accordance with SHMC 13.14.260, a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of the user’s existing industrial wastewater discharge permit. A user whose existing industrial wastewater discharge permit has expired, and who has submitted an application in the time period specified in this section, shall be deemed to have an effective industrial wastewater discharge permit until the city reissues or denies a new industrial wastewater discharge permit. A user whose existing industrial wastewater discharge permit has expired and who failed to submit its reapplication in the time period specified herein will be deemed to be discharging without an industrial wastewater discharge permit and shall be in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.360 Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions.

(1) If another unit of government, or user located within another unit of government, contributes wastewater to the POTW, the city shall enter into an intergovernmental agreement with the contributing unit of government.

(2) Prior to entering into an agreement required by subsection (1) of this section, the superintendent shall request the following information from the contributing municipality:

(a) A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to the POTW by the contributing municipality;

(b) An inventory of all users located within the contributing municipality that are discharging to the POTW; and

(c) Such other information as the superintendent may deem necessary.

(3) An intergovernmental agreement, as required by subsection (1) of this section, shall contain the following conditions:

(a) A requirement for the contributing unit of government to adopt a sewer use ordinance, or other governing document, with minimum standards which are at least as stringent as this chapter and local limits which are at least as stringent as those set out in SHMC 13.14.120. The requirement shall specify that such ordinance and limits must be revised as necessary to automatically adopt additional regulations or other changes made to the city’s ordinance or local limits;

(b) A requirement for the contributing unit of government to submit a revised user inventory on at least an annual basis;

(c) A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation activities, including industrial wastewater discharge permit issuance, inspection and sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted by the contributing unit of government; which of these activities will be conducted by the superintendent; and which of these activities will be conducted jointly by the contributing unit of government and the superintendent;

(d) A requirement for the contributing unit of government to provide the superintendent with access to all information that the contributing unit of government obtains as part of its pretreatment activities;

(e) Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing unit of government’s wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW;

(f) Requirements for monitoring the contributing unit of government’s discharge;

(g) A provision ensuring the superintendent access to the facilities of users located within the contributing unit of government’s jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any other duties deemed necessary by the superintendent to enforce this chapter; and

(h) A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of the intergovernmental agreement. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)

Article VI. Reporting Requirements


13.14.370 Baseline monitoring reports.

(1) Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical industrial users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the superintendent a report which contains the information listed in subsection (2) of this section. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources and sources that become categorical industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard shall submit to the superintendent a report which contains the information listed in subsection (2) of this section. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged.

(2) Users described above shall submit the information set forth below:

(a) All information required in:

(i) SHMC 13.14.260(1)(a)(i);

(ii) SHMC 13.14.260(1)(b);

(iii) SHMC 13.14.260(2)(a); and

(iv) SHMC 13.14.260(5).

(b) Measurement of Pollutants.

(i) The user shall provide the information required in SHMC 13.14.260(6)(a) through (e).

(ii) The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to compile the data necessary to comply with the requirements of this subsection.

(iii) Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment, the user should measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e) to evaluate compliance with the pretreatment standards. Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e), this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted to the control authority.

(iv) Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with SHMC 13.14.460.

(v) The superintendent may allow the submission of a baseline monitoring report which utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides information sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures.

(vi) The baseline monitoring report shall indicate the time, date and place of sampling and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and analysis are representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW.

(c) Compliance Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user’s authorized representative as defined in SHMC 13.14.040(4) and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.

(d) Compliance Schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M must be provided. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in SHMC 13.14.380.

(e) Signature and Report Certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with SHMC 13.14.270 and signed by an authorized representative as defined in SHMC 13.14.040(4). (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.380 Compliance schedule progress reports.

The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedules required by SHMC 13.14.370(2)(d):

(1) The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation);

(2) No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months;

(3) The user shall submit a progress report to the superintendent no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule;

(4) In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the superintendent; and

(5) If compliance dates are not met, or reports not submitted when due, the city may take appropriate enforcement action for lack of satisfactory progress toward compliance. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.390 Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline.

Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the superintendent a report containing the information described in SHMC 13.14.260(5) and (6), and 13.14.370(2)(b). For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user’s long-term production rate. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in SHMC 13.14.100, this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user’s long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user’s actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with SHMC 13.14.500. All sampling will be done in conformance with SHMC 13.14.470. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.400 Periodic compliance reports.

(1) All industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the superintendent but in no case less than twice per year (in June and December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best management practice (BMP) or pollution prevention alternative, the significant industrial user must submit documentation required by the superintendent or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the industrial user.

(2) The city may reduce the requirement in subsection (1) of this section to a requirement to report no less frequently than once a year, unless required more frequently by an applicable categorical pretreatment standard or by the approval authority, where the user meets all of the following conditions:

(a) The user’s total categorical wastewater flow does not exceed any of the following:

(i) One one-hundredth percent of the design dry weather hydraulic capacity of the POTW, or 5,000 gallons per day, whichever is smaller, as measured by a continuous effluent flow monitoring device unless the user discharges in batches;

(ii) One one-hundredth percent of the design dry weather organic treatment capacity of the POTW; and

(iii) One one-hundredth percent of the maximum allowable headworks loading for any pollutant regulated by the applicable categorical pretreatment standard for which approved local limits were developed by a POTW in accordance with SHMC 13.14.120;

(b) The user has not been in significant noncompliance, as defined in Article IX of this chapter, for any time in the past two years;

(c) The user does not have daily flow rates, production levels, or pollutant levels that vary so significantly that decreasing the reporting requirement for this user would result in data that are not representative of conditions during the reporting period;

(d) The user must notify the city immediately of any changes at its facility causing it to no longer meet conditions of subsection (2)(a)(i) or (ii) of this section. Upon notification, the user must immediately begin complying with the minimum reporting in subsection (1) of this section; and

(e) The city must retain documentation to support the city’s determination that a specific user qualifies for reduced reporting requirements under subsection (2)(a) of this section for a period of three years after the expiration of the term of the control mechanism.

(3) All periodic compliance reports submitted must be signed and certified in accordance with SHMC 13.14.270 and signed by an authorized representative as defined in SHMC 13.14.040(4).

(4) All wastewater samples must be representative of the user’s discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge.

(5) If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any regulated pollutant at a required monitoring location more frequently than required by the industrial wastewater discharge permit, using the procedures prescribed in SHMC 13.14.470, the results of such monitoring shall be included in the report. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.410 Reports of changed conditions.

(1) Industrial users must inform the POTW of any change in spill/slug potential. Each user must notify the superintendent of any planned significant changes to the user’s operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater, including facility closure at least 10 days before the change.

(2) The superintendent may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of an industrial wastewater discharge permit application under SHMC 13.14.260.

(3) The superintendent may issue an industrial wastewater discharge permit under SHMC 13.14.280 or modify an existing industrial wastewater discharge permit under SHMC 13.14.320 in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions.

(4) For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of 20 percent or greater and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.420 Reports of potential problems.

(1) In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug discharge or slug load, that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the superintendent of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, date and time thereof, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user.

(2) Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the superintendent, submit to the superintendent a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this chapter or other applicable law.

(3) A notice shall be permanently posted in conspicuous places advising the user’s employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in subsection (1) of this section. Employers shall ensure that all affected employees who may cause such a discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure and that such advisory is adequately documented.

(4) Users must notify the superintendent immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for a slug discharge. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.430 Reports from unpermitted users.

All users not required to obtain an industrial wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the superintendent as the superintendent may require. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.440 Notice of violation – Repeat sampling and reporting.

(1) If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation of this chapter, the user must notify the superintendent within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation.

(2) The user shall repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the superintendent within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation.

(3) The user shall be deemed to be out of compliance with this chapter until repeat analysis confirms that compliance has been achieved.

(4) The city may confirm compliance or sample to determine results. If the city results demonstrate compliance the city shall allow the user to use the results for compliance. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.450 Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste.

(1) All users shall immediately notify the superintendent, DEQ, and EPA in writing of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification shall also contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user:

(a) An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes;

(b) An estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during that calendar month; and

(c) An estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months.

(2) All notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this section need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under SHMC 13.14.410. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of SHMC 13.14.370, 13.14.390 and 13.14.400.

(3) Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsections (1) and (2) of this section during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the industrial user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification.

(4) In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree that it has determined to be economically practical.

(5) This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.460 Analytical requirements.

All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of an industrial wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures suggested by the superintendent or other parties approved by the EPA. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.470 Sample collection.

Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements must be based on data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the period covered by the report based on the data that is representative of conditions occurring during the reported period.

(1) Except as indicated in subsections (2) and (3) of this section, the user must collect wastewater samples using 24-hour flow-proportional composite sampling techniques, unless the superintendent authorizes time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling. Where time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the city, the samples must be representative of the discharge. Using protocols (including appropriate sample preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a 24-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous limits.

(2) Samples for oil and grease, pH, cyanide, total phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques.

(3) For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and 90-day compliance reports required in SHMC 13.14.370 and 13.14.390, a minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist; for facilities for which historical sampling data are available, the superintendent may authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required by SHMC 13.14.400, the user is required to collect the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.

(4) All sample results shall indicate the time, date and location of sampling; methods of analysis, date of and person performing analysis; and a certification that such sampling and analysis are representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges from the user. If a user sampled and analyzed, using methodologies in 40 CFR Part 136, more frequently than what was required in its wastewater discharge permit, user shall submit all results of sampling and analysis of the discharge as part of user’s self-monitoring report.

(5) The possession and handling of all samples destined for transport and analysis at off-site laboratories shall be documented from the time of collection through the time of disposal on a chain of custody (COC) form. Samples collected for analysis at the user’s in-house laboratory do not require a COC, provided the information required in SHMC 13.14.490 is documented. The chain of custody record shall be retained by the user and shall become part of the analysis documentation. If the user fails to retain proper and complete chain of custody documentation, analysis for the sample in question will be invalidated and the user shall sample again. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.480 Date of receipt of reports.

Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.490 Recordkeeping.

Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this chapter, any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements, and documentation associated with the best management practices established under SHMC 13.14.100 or 13.14.120. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the city, or where the superintendent has specifically notified the user of a longer retention period. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.500 Certification statements.

(1) Certification of permit applications, user reports and initial monitoring waiver certification statements are required to be signed and submitted by:

(a) Users submitting permit applications in accordance with SHMC 13.14.260;

(b) Users submitting baseline monitoring reports under SHMC 13.14.370;

(c) Users submitting reports on compliance with the categorical pretreatment standard deadlines under SHMC 13.14.390;

(d) Users submitting periodic compliance reports required by SHMC 13.14.400; and

The following certification statement must be signed by an authorized representative as defined in SHMC 13.14.040(4):

I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.

(2) Annual Certification for Nonsignificant Categorical Industrial Users. A facility determined to be a nonsignificant categorical industrial user by the superintendent pursuant to SHMC 13.14.040(63)(c) and 13.14.270(3) must annually submit the following certification statement signed in accordance with the signatory requirements in SHMC 13.14.040(4). This certification must accompany an alternative report required by the superintendent:

Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing compliance with the categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40 CFR ____, I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief that during the period from __________, ________ to ________, ________ [months, days, year]:

(a) The facility described as ____________________ [facility name] met the definition of a Non-Significant Categorical Industrial User as described in SHMC 13.14.040(63)(c);

(b) The facility complied with all applicable Pretreatment Standards and requirements during this reporting period; and (c) the facility never discharged more than one-hundred (100) gallons of total categorical wastewater on any given day during this reporting period.

This compliance certification is based on the following information.

__________________________________________________________________ 

(Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)

Article VII. Compliance Monitoring


13.14.510 Right of entry – Inspection and sampling.

The superintendent and other duly authorized employees shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this chapter and any industrial wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the superintendent ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties.

(1) Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city, state, or U.S. EPA will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.

(2) The city, state, or U.S. EPA shall have the right to inspect and/or install sampling equipment on the user’s property or require installation of such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user’s operations.

(3) The superintendent may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility’s sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated no less frequently than twice per year to ensure their accuracy.

(4) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the superintendent and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user.

(5) Unreasonable delays in allowing city personnel access to the user’s premises shall be a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.520 Search warrants.

If the superintendent has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the superintendent may seek issuance of a search warrant from the applicable presiding jurisdiction. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)

Article VIII. Confidential Information


13.14.530 Confidential information.

Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, industrial wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from the superintendent’s inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the superintendent, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report.

Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other effluent data as defined by 40 CFR 403.14 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)

Article IX. Publication of Users in Significant Noncompliance


13.14.540 Publication of users in significant noncompliance.

The superintendent shall publish annually in January, in a newspaper of general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdiction served by the POTW, a list of the users which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term “significant noncompliance” shall mean:

(1) Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits and instantaneous limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of all of the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirements including instantaneous limits, as defined by Article II of this chapter;

(2) Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined by Article II of this chapter, multiplied by the applicable criteria:

(a) TRC = 1.4x for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease; and

(b) TRC = 1.2x for all other pollutants except pH;

(3) Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as defined by Article II of this chapter that the superintendent determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public;

(4) Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the superintendent’s exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;

(5) Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in an industrial wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance;

(6) Failure to provide, within 45 days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;

(7) Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or

(8) Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of best management practices (BMPs), which the superintendent determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.

(9) All the above violations apply to SIUs but IUs are only required to be in SNC if they violate subsection (3), (4), or (8) of this section. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)

Article X. Administrative Enforcement Remedies


13.14.550 Generally.

Whenever the city finds that a user has violated any of the provisions in this chapter, an industrial wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the user shall be subject to an enforcement action using any of the remedies and sanctions that are authorized in this chapter and state law. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.560 Notification of violation.

If the industrial user is out of compliance the superintendent may take the first level of enforcement action, which is typically a phone call to the user. This telephone call allows the staff to inform the IU that they are in violation and that they need to take immediate steps to stop the noncompliance event. If the superintendent finds that a user continues to violate any provisions of this chapter or an industrial wastewater discharge permit, the superintendent may serve upon that user a written notice of violation (NOV). This NOV shall include an explanation of the violation and the requirement that the user submit a report to the superintendent within 10 days of receiving the NOV stating the reason for the violation and the specific steps that will be taken to ensure the satisfactory correction and prevention of future violations. Submission of this report in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the superintendent to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.570 Consent orders.

The city attorney or superintendent may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to SHMC 13.14.590 and 13.14.600 and shall be judicially enforceable. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.580 Show cause hearing.

The city attorney or superintendent may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, an industrial wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the city attorney or superintendent and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least 10 days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user as defined in SHMC 13.14.040(4) and required by SHMC 13.14.270(1). A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.590 Compliance orders.

When the city attorney finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, an industrial wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city attorney or superintendent may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.600 Cease and desist orders.

When the city attorney or superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user’s past violations are likely to recur, the city attorney or superintendent may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to:

(1) Immediately comply with all requirements; and

(2) Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.

Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.610 Administrative fines.

(1) When the city attorney or superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, an industrial wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city attorney or superintendent may fine such user in an amount no less than $1,000 but not to exceed $25,000. Such fines shall be assessed on a per violation, per day basis. In the case of monthly or other long-term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation.

(2) Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after 30 calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of 12 percent of the unpaid balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of one percent per month. A lien against the user’s property will be sought for unpaid charges, fines, and penalties.

(3) Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the city attorney or superintendent to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount within 10 days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has merit, the city attorney or superintendent may convene a hearing on the matter. In the event the user’s appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. The superintendent may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine.

(4) Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.620 Emergency suspensions.

The city attorney or superintendent may immediately suspend a user’s discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge, which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The city attorney or superintendent may also immediately suspend a user’s discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment.

(1) Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user’s failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city attorney or superintendent may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The city attorney or superintendent may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the superintendent that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in SHMC 13.14.630 are initiated against the user.

(2) A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the superintendent prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under SHMC 13.14.580 or 13.14.630.

Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.630 Termination of discharge.

In addition to the provisions in SHMC 13.14.340, any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination:

(1) Violation of industrial wastewater discharge permit conditions;

(2) Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge;

(3) Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge;

(4) Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or

(5) Violation of the pretreatment standards in Article II of this chapter.

Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under SHMC 13.14.580 why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the superintendent shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)

Article XI. Judicial Enforcement Remedies


13.14.640 Injunctive relief.

When the city attorney or superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, an industrial wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city attorney or superintendent may petition the city of St. Helens municipal court, or other court of competent jurisdiction, for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this chapter on activities of the user. The city attorney or superintendent may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.650 Civil penalties.

(1) A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the city for a maximum civil penalty of no less than $1,000 but not to exceed $25,000 per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation.

(2) The city attorney or superintendent may recover reasonable attorneys’ fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages or fines incurred by the city.

(3) In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user’s violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor the court deems relevant, after due consideration.

(4) Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.660 Criminal prosecution.

(1) A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of at least $1,000 but not more than $25,000 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than one year, or both.

(2) A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty of at least $1,000 but not more than $25,000 or be subject to imprisonment for not more than one year, or both. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under state law.

(3) A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this chapter, wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this chapter, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of at least $1,000 but not more than $25,000 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than one year, or both.

(4) In the event of a second conviction, a user shall be punished by a fine of at least $1,000 but not more than $25,000 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than three years, or both. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.670 Remedies nonexclusive.

The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive. The city may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city’s industrial pretreatment program’s enforcement response plan. However, the superintendent may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the superintendent is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.680 Protection from damages.

No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is part of the publicly operated treatment works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct or other applicable charges. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)

Article XII. Supplemental Enforcement Action


13.14.690 Performance bonds.

The city attorney or superintendent may decline to issue or reissue an industrial wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this chapter, a previous industrial wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the city, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the city attorney or superintendent to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.700 Liability insurance.

The city attorney or superintendent may decline to issue or reissue an industrial wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this chapter, a previous industrial wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the POTW caused by its discharge. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.710 Payment of outstanding fees and penalties.

The superintendent may decline to issue or reissue an industrial wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to pay any outstanding fees, fines or penalties incurred as a result of any provision of this chapter, a previous individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.720 Water supply severance.

Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, an industrial wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user may be severed. Service will only recommence, at the user’s expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.730 Public nuisances.

A violation of any provision of this chapter, an industrial wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, is hereby declared a public nuisance. The city attorney or superintendent may require any person with authority to remedy a violation of this chapter and correct or abate such nuisance. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to any and all of the nuisance abatement procedures and remedial provisions of the city of St. Helens Municipal Code, including, but not limited to, this chapter and Chapter 8.12 SHMC, governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the city for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.740 Contractor listing.

Users which have not achieved compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements are not eligible to receive a contractual award for the sale of goods or services to the city. Existing contracts for the sale of goods or services to the city held by a user found to be in significant noncompliance with pretreatment standards or requirements may be terminated at the discretion of the superintendent. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)

Article XIII. Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations


13.14.750 Upset.

(1) For the purposes of this section, “upset” means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An “upset” does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation.

(2) An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of subsection (3) of this section are met.

(3) A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs or other relevant evidence, that:

(a) An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset;

(b) The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and

(c) The user has submitted the following information to the superintendent within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days):

(i) A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance;

(ii) The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and

(iii) Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.

(4) In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.

(5) Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only if an enforcement action is brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards.

(6) Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.760 Prohibited discharge standards.

A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in SHMC 13.14.090(1) or the specific prohibitions in SHMC 13.14.090(6)(c) through (r) if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either:

(1) A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or interference; or

(2) No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user’s prior discharge when the city was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and, in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.770 Bypass.

(1) For the purposes of this section:

(a) “Bypass” means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user’s treatment facility.

(b) “Severe property damage” means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.

(2) A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of subsections (3) and (4) of this section.

(3) Notice of a bypass shall be provided as follows:

(a) If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the superintendent at least 10 days before the date of the bypass, if possible.

(b) A user shall submit oral notice to the superintendent of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The superintendent may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours.

(4) Bypass.

(a) Bypass is prohibited, and the superintendent may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:

(i) The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage;

(ii) There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and

(iii) The user submitted notices as required under subsection (3) of this section.

(b) The superintendent may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the superintendent determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in subsection (4)(a) of this section. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)

Article XIV. Wastewater Treatment Rates (Reserved)

Article XV. Miscellaneous Provisions


13.14.780 Wastewater discharge and pretreatment program charges and fees.

(1) The city shall charge fees to users based on cost of service for sewer service. Such fees shall be set by resolution and the city may, from time to time, change the fee amount.

(2) The city may charge fees to industrial users based on the costs the city incurs to implement and maintain the city’s industrial pretreatment program, including monitoring inspections, performing surveillance, sampling and analyzing a user’s discharge, reviewing reports from industrial users, investigating complaints, reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction, enforcing compliance with the provisions in this chapter, and for any other costs the city may incur for activities associated with provisions in this chapter. Such fees shall be set by resolution and the city may, from time to time, change the fee amount. Such fees shall include but not be limited to:

(a) Industrial pretreatment program administration fee;

(b) Industrial wastewater discharge permit issuance and/or renewal fee;

(c) Demand inspection fees for facility inspections performed by the city resulting from violations of this chapter;

(d) Demand sampling and monitoring fees for sampling, monitoring, and surveillance performed by the city resulting from violations of this chapter;

(e) Any fees assessed to the city by the approval authority for specific industrial operations by any user, such as pulp and paper mill operations;

(f) Enforcement activities, such as incurred legal costs;

(g) Fees for filing appeals; and

(h) Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein.

(3) The wastewater discharge and pretreatment program charges and fees imposed in this section are separate from all other fees, fines and penalties that are chargeable by the city. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.790 Severability.

If any provision of this chapter is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be affected and shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


13.14.800 Conflicts.

All other ordinances and parts of other ordinances inconsistent or conflicting with any part of the ordinance codified in this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency or conflict. (Ord. 3233 § 2, 2018)


Chapter 13.16 WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT REGULATIONS

(Repealed by Ord. 3233)


Chapter 13.20       STORM WATER UTILITY

Sections:

13.20.010  Short title.

13.20.020  Findings.

13.20.030  Definitions.

13.20.040  Storm drainage policy.

13.20.050  Establishment of storm drainage utility.

13.20.060  Establishment of storm drainage utility fee.

13.20.070  Storm drainage utility fee – Dedicated.

13.20.080  Enforcement.

13.20.090  Administrative review – Appeals.

13.20.100  Notice of decision.

13.20.110  Exemptions.


13.20.010      Short title.

This chapter shall be known as the "storm water utility ordinance." (Ord. 2887 § 1, 2003)


13.20.020      Findings.

(1)  The city provides a valuable public service by providing storm drainage facilities for the collection and disposal of storm water discharged from properties and public rights-of-way within the city. The storm drainage facilities constitute a public utility owned and operated by the city. The utility exists for the benefit of any person within the city who wants to have the public storm drainage facilities available for the diversion, collection and/or disposal of storm drainage and other runoff water from the person’s property and represents a municipal service in a developed urban environment which is essential to the public health, safety and welfare.

(2)  Persons who use the public storm drainage facilities ought to be charged fees that reflect the cost of the management, maintenance, extension and construction of the public storm drainage facility as a public utility in the city. Persons ought not be compelled to use this utility, nor to pay monthly utility fees, if the utility is not to be used by the person responsible. Persons who undertake the installation of runoff control facilities on their property that reduce or eliminate the discharge of storm water into public storm drainage facilities ought to be given credit, in proportion to the degree of reduction, against storm drainage utility fees that would otherwise be due.

(3)  Accordingly, the structure of the storm drainage utility is intended to be a fee for service and not a charge against the property. Although this structure is intended to constitute a service fee, even if it is viewed as a fee against property or against the person responsible, as a direct consequence of ownership of that property, the utility’s fee structure should allow the person responsible to have the ability to control the amount of the fee.

Similarly, the utility fee structure should reflect the actual cost of providing the service and not impose fees on persons not receiving a service. The actual costs may include all costs the utility might incur were it in private ownership.

(4)  Persons using water from the city potable water facilities use substantial amounts of water for irrigating lawns and gardens, washing structures, sidewalks, driveways and parking lots, and for other activities which result in the discharge of runoff into the public storm drainage facilities. These uses of water demonstrate a substantial relationship between persons’ use of these water facilities and their use of the public storm drainage facilities. (Ord. 2887 § 2, 2003)


13.20.030      Definitions.

Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions contained in this section shall govern the construction of this chapter.

(1)  "Commercial or industrial use" means any use, as defined in Ordinance No. 2875, in the following zones: mixed use (MU), highway commercial (HC), general commercial (GC), marine commercial (MC), light industrial (LI), and heavy industrial (HI).

(2)  "Development" means any constructed changes to improved or unimproved property including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, private storm drainage facilities, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations.

(3)  "Director" means the city engineering manager or city engineer or the person designated by the engineering manager.

(4)  "Duplex" means as defined in Ordinance No. 2875, community development code, or its successor, "dwelling: duplex or two units (two family)."

(5)  "Equivalent residential unit (ERU)" means an area which is estimated to place approximately equal demand on the public storm drainage facilities as defined in Ordinance No. 2875, community development code, or its successor, "dwelling: single unit (one family)." One ERU shall be equal to 2,500 square feet of impervious surface.

(6)  "Impervious surfaces" means those surface areas which either prevent or retard saturation of water into the land surface and cause water to run off the land surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow from that present under natural conditions preexistent to development. Examples of impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, concrete or asphalt sidewalks, walkways, patio areas, driveways, parking lots or storage areas and gravel, oil, macadam, or other surfaces which similarly impact the natural saturation or runoff patterns which existed prior to development.

(7)  "Improved property" means any area which has been altered such that the runoff from the site is greater than that which could historically have been expected. Such a condition shall be determined by the director.

(8)  "Master Plan" means the "City of St. Helens Storm Water Master Plan" prepared by Murray, Smith and Associates, Inc., dated February 1999, including such amendments to such plan.

(9)  "Mobile home park" means as defined in Ordinance No. 2875, community development code, or its successor, "manufactured dwelling (mobile home) park."

(10)  "Multiple-family unit (MFU)" means as defined in Ordinance No. 2875, community development code, or its successor, "dwelling: multidwelling unit, apartment (multifamily)."

(11)  "Open drainageway" means a natural or constructed path, ditch or channel which has the specific function of transmitting natural stream water or storm water from a point of higher elevation to a point of lower elevation.

(12)  "Person responsible" means the owner, agent, occupant, lessee, tenant, contract purchaser, or other person having possession or control of property or the supervision of an improvement on the property.

(13)  "Runoff control" means any measure approved by the director that reduces storm water runoff from land surfaces on which development exists.

(14)  "Single-family unit (SFU)" means as defined in Ordinance No. 2875, community development code, or its successor, "dwelling, attached: single unit," "dwelling, detached: single unit (one family)," or an individual unit as "condominium unit." An SFU is presumed to have 2,500 square feet of impervious surface area for purposes of this chapter. The term "SFU" shall be inclusive of those units identified as detached single-family residences, attached single-family residences, and condominiums.

(15)  "Storm drainage facilities" means any structure(s) or configuration of the ground that is used or by its location becomes a place where storm water flows or is accumulated including, but not limited to, pipes, sewers, gutters, manholes, catch basins, ponds, open drainageways and their appurtenances. Milton Creek, McNulty Creek, and the Columbia River are not storm drain facilities.

(16)  "Storm water" means water from precipitation, surface or subterranean water from any source, drainage and nonseptic wastewater. (Ord. 2887 § 3, 2003)


13.20.040      Storm drainage policy.

(1)  Council declares its intention to acquire, own, manage, construct, equip, operate, and maintain within the city open drainageways, underground storm drains, equipment and appurtenances, necessary, useful, or convenient for public storm drainage facilities. The council also declares its intention to manage, maintain and extend existing public storm drainage facilities.

(2)  The improvement of both public and private storm drainage facilities through or adjacent to a new development shall be the responsibility of the person responsible. The improvements shall comply with all applicable city ordinances, policies, standards, and the Master Plan.

(3)  No portion of this chapter or statement or subsequent council interpretation or policies shall relieve the person responsible of assessments levied against their property for public facility improvement projects.

(4)  It is the policy of the city to participate in improvements to storm drainage facilities when authorized by the director. To be considered for approval by the director, a storm drainage facility must:

(a)  Be public; and

(b)  Be a major benefit to the community; and

(c)  Be located in or on a city property, city right-of-way or city easement; and

(d)  If a piped system, be a design equivalent to larger than a 24-inch diameter circular concrete pipe; and

(e)  Be identified as a project in the Master Plan; or

(f)  Be a rehabilitation and/or replacement of existing public storm drainage facilities.

(5)  The city shall maintain public storm drainage facilities located on city property, city right-of-way or city easements. Public storm drainage facilities to be managed by the city include, but are not limited to:

(a)  Open drainageways serving a drainage basin of at least 100 acres, when on city property, city right-of-way or city easement;

(b)  A piped drainage system and related appurtenances which has been designed and constructed expressly for use by the general public and accepted by the director;

(c)  Roadside drainage ditches along unimproved city streets;

(d)  Flood control facilities (levees, dikes, overflow channels, detention basins, retention basins, dams, pump stations, groundwater recharging basins, etc.) that have been designed and constructed expressly for use by the general public and accepted by the city.

(6)  Storm drainage facilities not to be maintained by the city include, but are not limited to:

(a)  Storm drainage facilities not located on city property, city right-of-way or city easement;

(b)  Private parking lot storm drainages;

(c)  Roof, footing, and area drainages;

(d)  Drainages not designed and constructed for use by the general public;

(e)  Drainage swales which collect storm water from a basin less than 100 acres that are not located on city property, city right-of-way or city easement;

(f)  Access drive culverts. (Ord. 2887 § 4, 2003)


13.20.050      Establishment of storm drainage utility.

A storm drainage utility is created for the purpose of providing funds for the management, maintenance, extension and construction of public storm drainage facilities within the city. Council finds, determines and declares the necessity of providing for the management, maintenance, extension and construction of city storm drainage facilities for its inhabitants. (Ord. 2887 § 5, 2003)


13.20.060      Establishment of storm drainage utility fee.

A storm drainage utility fee shall be paid by each person(s) responsible and shall be established by resolution of the council for commercial or industrial uses, duplexes, mobile home parks, multiple-family units, single-family units, and equivalent residential units.

(1)  Such fee shall be established in amounts which will provide sufficient funds to properly manage and maintain public storm drainage facilities.

(2)  Such fee may be used for the construction of new storm drainage facilities or for the extension of existing storm drainage facilities.

(3)  Council may from time to time by resolution change the fees based upon revised estimates of the cost of properly managing, maintaining, extending, and constructing public storm drainage facilities.

(4)  Credit will be allowed for runoff control measures. When approved by the director, storm drainage utility fees may be reduced for a property where approved runoff control measures have been taken. A fee reduction shall be on a straight line basis with conditions existing on the date of the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter, being considered as starting or initial conditions. If the person responsible establishes, to the satisfaction of the director, that all runoff from a property is disposed of without utilizing public storm drainage facilities either directly or indirectly, there will be no fees charged under the provisions of this chapter.

(5)  Property not used for single-family dwelling purposes shall be considered to be furnished service in proportion to the amount of the property’s impervious surface, and that for each 2,500 square feet (or increment of 100 square feet) of impervious surface, the property is furnished service equivalent to that furnished a single-family unit and that the minimum service charge shall be that established for a single-family unit. (Ord. 2887 § 6, 2003)


13.20.070      Storm drainage utility fee – Dedicated.

All fees collected for the purposes specified in this chapter shall be paid into the storm drainage accounts and accounted for by dedicated line items including, but not limited to, storm drainage maintenance and storm drainage construction. Such revenues shall be used for the purposes of the management, maintenance, extension, and construction of public storm drainage facilities. (Ord. 2887 § 7, 2003)


13.20.080      Enforcement.

Any fee due which is not paid when due may be recovered in an action at law by the city. In addition to any other remedies or penalties provided by this chapter or any other city ordinance, failure of any person responsible to pay fees promptly when due shall subject the person responsible to discontinuance of any utility services provided by the city and the city administrator is empowered and directed to enforce this provision against such delinquent users. The employees of the city shall, at all reasonable times, have access to any improved property served by the city for inspection, repair, or the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2887 § 8, 2003)


13.20.090      Administrative review – Appeals.

(1)  Any person responsible who disputes the amount of the fee, or disputes any determination made by or on behalf of the city pursuant to and by the authority of this chapter may petition the council for a hearing on a revision or modification of such fee or determination. Such petitions may be filed only once in connection with any fee for determination, except upon the showing of changed circumstances sufficient to justify the filing of an additional petition.

(2)  Such petitions, including all facts and figures, shall be submitted in writing and filed with the city recorder at least 14 days prior to a hearing scheduled by the council. The petitioner shall have the burden of proof.

(3)  Within 30 days of filing of the petition, the council shall make findings of fact based on all relevant information, shall make a determination based upon such findings and, if appropriate, modify such fee or determination accordingly. Such determination by the council shall be considered a final order. (Ord. 2887 § 9, 2003)


13.20.100      Notice of decision.

Every determination of the council shall be in writing, and notice shall be mailed to or served upon the petitioner within a reasonable time from the date of such action. Service by certified mail, return receipt requested, shall be conclusive evidence of service for the purpose of this chapter. (Ord. 2887 § 10, 2003)


13.20.110      Exemptions.

The council may, by resolution, exempt any class of user when the council determines that the public interest deems it necessary or that the contribution to storm drainage facility use by the class to be insignificant. (Ord. 2887 § 11, 2003)


Chapter 13.24 SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGES

Sections:

13.24.010    Purpose.

13.24.020    Scope.

13.24.030    Definitions.

13.24.040    System development charge established.

13.24.050    Methodology.

13.24.060    Authorized expenditures.

13.24.070    Expenditure restrictions.

13.24.080    Improvement plan.

13.24.090    Collection of charge.

13.24.100    Delinquent charges – Hearing.

13.24.110    Installment payment.

13.24.120    Exemptions.

13.24.130    Credits.

13.24.140    Notice.

13.24.150    Segregation and use of revenue.

13.24.160    Appeals procedure.

13.24.170    Prohibited connection.

13.24.180    Penalty.

13.24.190    Construction.


13.24.010 Purpose.

The purpose of the system development charge is to impose a portion of the cost of capital improvements for water, wastewater, drainage, streets, flood control, and parks upon those developments that create the need for or increase the demand on capital improvements. (Ord. 2836 § 1, 2001)


13.24.020 Scope.

The system development charge imposed by this chapter is separate from and in addition to any applicable tax, assessment, charge, or fee otherwise provided by law or imposed as a condition of development. (Ord. 2836 § 2, 2001)


13.24.030 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following mean:

“Capital improvements” means:

(a) Facilities or assets used for:

(i) Water supply, treatment and distribution;

(ii) Wastewater collection, transmission, treatment and disposal;

(iii) Drainage and flood control;

(iv) Transportation; or

(v) Parks and recreation.

(b) “Capital improvement” does not include costs of the operation or routine maintenance of capital improvements.

“Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations.

“Development permit” means any city of St. Helens permit to authorize development.

“Improvement fee” means a fee for costs associated with capital improvements to construction after the date the fee is adopted pursuant to SHMC 13.24.040.

“Land area” means the area of a parcel of land as measured by projection of the parcel boundaries upon a horizontal plane with the exception of a portion of the parcel within a recorded right-of-way or easement subject to a servitude for a public street or scenic or preservation purposes.

“Owner” means the owner or owners of record title or the purchaser or purchasers under a recorded sales agreement, and other persons having an interest of record in the described real property.

“Parcel of land” means a lot, parcel, block, or other tract of land that is occupied or may be occupied by a structure or structures or other use, and that includes the yards and other open spaces required under the zoning, subdivision, or other development ordinances.

“Permittee” means the person to whom a building permit, development permit, a permit or plan approval to connect to the sewer or water system, or right-of-way access permit is issued.

“Qualified public improvement” means a capital improvement that is:

(a) Required as a condition of development approval;

(b) Identified in the plan adopted pursuant to SHMC 13.24.080, and either:

(i) Not located on or contiguous to a parcel of land that is the subject of the development approval; or

(ii) Located in whole or in part on or contiguous to property that is the subject of development approval and required to be built larger or with greater capacity than is necessary for the particular development project to which the improvement fee is related;

(c) For purposes of this definition, “contiguous” means in a public way which abuts the parcel.

“Reimbursement fee” means a fee for costs associated with capital improvements constructed or under construction on the date the fee is adopted pursuant to SHMC 13.24.040.

“System development charge” means a reimbursement fee, an improvement fee or a combination thereof assessed or collected at the time of increased usage of a capital improvement, at the time of issuance of a development permit or building permit, or at the time of connection to capital improvement. “System development charge” includes that portion of a sewer or water system connection charge that is greater than the amount necessary to reimburse the city for its average cost of inspecting and installing connections with water and sewer facilities. “System development charge” does not include fees assessed or collected as part of a local improvement district or a charge in lieu of a local improvement district assessment, or the cost of complying with requirements or conditions imposed by a land use decision, expedited land division or limited land use decision. (Ord. 3082 § 1, 2008; Ord. 2836 § 3, 2001)


13.24.040 System development charge established.

(1) System development charges shall be established and may be revised by resolution of the council. The resolution shall set the amount of the charge, the type of permit to which the charge applies, and, if the charge applies to a geographic area smaller than the entire city, the geographic area subject to the charge.

(2) Unless otherwise exempted by the provisions of this chapter or other local or state law, a system development charge is hereby imposed upon all development within the city, and upon all development outside the boundary of the city that connects to or otherwise uses the sewer facilities, storm sewers, or water facilities of the city. (Ord. 2836 § 4, 2001)


13.24.050 Methodology.

(1) The methodology used to establish the reimbursement fee shall consider the cost of then-existing facilities, prior contributions by then-existing users, the value of unused capacity, rate-making principles employed to finance publicly owned capital improvements, and other relevant factors identified by the council. The methodology shall promote the objective that future system users shall contribute no more than an equitable share of the costs of then-existing facilities.

(2) The methodology used to establish the improvement fee shall consider the cost of projected capital improvements identified in the plan adopted pursuant to SHMC 13.24.080 that are needed to increase the capacity of the system to which the fee is related and the need for increased capacity that will be required to serve the demands placed on the system by future users.

(3) The methodology used to establish the improvement fee or the reimbursement fee, or both, shall be available for public inspection at least 60 days prior to the first public hearing and shall be contained in an ordinance adopted by the council. (Ord. 3082 § 2, 2008; Ord. 2836 § 5, 2001)


13.24.060 Authorized expenditures.

(1) Reimbursement fees shall be applied only to capital improvements associated with the system for which the fees are assessed, including expenditures relating to repayment of indebtedness.

(2) Improvement fees shall be spent only on capacity-increasing capital improvements, including expenditures relating to repayment of debt for such improvements. An increase in system capacity occurs if a capital improvement increases the level of performance or service provided by existing facilities or provides new facilities. The portion of the capital improvement funded by improvement fees must be related to demands created by projected development.

(3) System development charges shall not be expended for costs associated with the construction of administrative office facilities that are more than an incidental part of other capital improvements or for the expenses of the operation or maintenance of the facilities constructed with system development charge revenue.

(4) A capital improvement being funded wholly or in part from system development charge revenues shall be included in the plan adopted by the city pursuant to SHMC 13.24.080.

(5) Notwithstanding subsections (1) and (2) of this section, system development charge revenues may be expended on the costs of complying with the provisions of this chapter, including the costs of developing system development charge methodologies and providing an annual accounting of system development charge and collections expenditures. (Ord. 3082 § 3, 2008; Ord. 2836 § 6, 2001)


13.24.070 Expenditure restrictions.

(1) System development charges shall not be expended for costs associated with the construction of administrative office facilities that are more than an incidental part of other capital improvements.

(2) System development charges shall not be expended for costs of the operation or routine maintenance of capital improvements. (Ord. 2836 § 7, 2001)


13.24.080 Improvement plan.

The council shall adopt a plan that:

(1) Lists the capital improvements that may be funded with improvement fee revenues;

(2) Lists the estimated cost and time of construction of each improvement;

(3) Lists the percentage of costs eligible to be funded with revenues from the improvement fee for each improvement; and

(4) Describes the process for modifying the plan.

(5) In adopting this plan, the council may incorporate by reference all or a portion of any public facilities plan, master plan, capital improvements plan or similar plan that contains the information required by this section. (Ord. 3082 § 4, 2008; Ord. 2836 § 8, 2001)


13.24.090 Collection of charge.

(1) The system development charge shall be paid upon issuance of:

(a) A building permit;

(b) Any other permit for development not requiring the issuance of a building permit;

(c) A permit to connect to the water system;

(d) A permit to connect to the sewer system; or

(e) A right-of-way access permit.

(2) If no building, development, or connection permit is required, the system development charge is payable at the time the usage of a capital improvement is increased.

(3) If development is commenced or connection is made to the water or sewer system without an appropriate permit, the system development charge is immediately payable upon the earliest date that a permit was required.

(4) The permittee shall pay applicable system development charges when a building permit is issued or when a connection to the water or sewer system of the city is made.

(5) No permit shall be issued or connection allowed until the charge has been paid in full, until provision for installment payment has been made pursuant to SHMC 13.24.110, or unless an exemption is granted pursuant to SHMC 13.24.120. (Ord. 3082 § 5, 2008; Ord. 2836 § 9, 2001)


13.24.100 Delinquent charges – Hearing.

(1) When, for any reason, the system development charge has not been paid, the finance officer shall report to the council the amount of the uncollected charge, the description of the real property to which the charge is attributed, the date upon which the charge was due, and the name of the owner.

(2) The city council shall, by motion, schedule a public hearing on the matter and direct that notice of the hearing be given to each owner with a copy of the finance officer’s report concerning the unpaid charge. Notice of the hearing shall be given either personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by both personal and mailed notice, and by posting notice on the parcel at least 10 days before the date set for the hearing.

(3) At the hearing, the council may accept, reject, or modify the determination of the finance officer as set forth in the report. If the council finds that a system development charge is unpaid and uncollected, it shall, by motion, place a lien on the property in the appropriate form. Upon completion of the docketing, the city shall have a lien against the described land for the full amount of the unpaid charge, together with interest at the legal rate of 10 percent and with the city’s actual cost of serving notice of the hearing on the owners. The lien shall be enforceable in the manner provided in ORS Chapter 223. (Ord. 2836 § 10, 2001)


13.24.110 Installment payment.

(1) Except as provided for in SHMC 13.24.090(3), when a system development charge of $25.00 or more is due and collectible, the owner of the parcel of land subject to the development charge may apply for payment in 20 semiannual installments, to include interest on the unpaid balance, in accordance with ORS 223.210 and 223.215.

(2) The city administrator shall provide application forms for installment payments, which shall include a waiver of all rights to contest the validity of the lien, except for the correction of computational errors.

(3) An applicant for installment payments shall have the burden of demonstrating the applicant’s authority to assent to the imposition of a lien on the parcel and that the interest of the applicant is adequate to secure payment of the lien.

(4) The city administrator shall report to the city finance officer the amount of the system development charge, the dates on which the payments are due, the name of the owner, and the description of the parcel.

(5) The finance officer shall docket the lien in the lien docket. From that time, the city shall have a lien upon the described parcel for the amount of the system development charge, together with interest on the unpaid balance at the rate established by the council. The lien shall be enforceable in the manner provided in ORS Chapter 223. (Ord. 3082 § 6, 2008; Ord. 2836 § 11, 2001)


13.24.120 Exemptions.

(1) Structures and uses established and existing on or before June 19, 1991, are exempt from a system development charge, except water and sewer charges, to the extent of the structure or use then existing and to the extent of the parcel of land as it is constituted on that date. Structures and uses affected by this subsection shall pay the water or sewer charges pursuant to the terms of this chapter upon the receipt of a permit to connect to the water or sewer system.

(2) Additions to single-family dwellings that do not constitute the addition of a dwelling unit, as defined by the State Uniform Building Code, are exempt from all portions of the system development charge.

(3) Alterations, additions, replacements, or changes in use that do not increase the parcel or structure’s use of the public improvement facility are exempt from all portions of the system development charge.

(4) A project financed by city revenues is exempt from all portions of the system development charge. (Ord. 2836 § 12, 2001)


13.24.130 Credits.

(1) When development occurs that is subject to a system development charge, the system development charge for the existing use, if applicable, shall be calculated and if it is less than the system development charge for the use that will result from the development, the difference between the system development charge for the existing use and the system development charge for the proposed use shall be the system development charge. If the change in the use results in the system development charge for the proposed use being less than the system development charge for the existing use, no system development charge shall be required. No refund or credit shall be given unless provided for by another subsection of this section.

(2) A credit shall be given to the permittee for the cost of a qualified public improvement upon acceptance by the city of the public improvement. The credit shall only be for the improvement fee charged for the type of improvement being constructed, and the applied credit shall not exceed the amount of the improvement fee. When the construction of a qualified public improvement gives rise to a credit amount greater than the improvement fee, the excess credit may be applied against improvement fees that accrue in subsequent phases of the project.

(3) If a qualified public improvement is located in whole or in part on or contiguous to the property that is the subject of development approval and is required to be built larger or with greater capacity than is necessary for the particular development project, a credit shall be given for the cost of the portion of the improvement that exceeds the city’s minimum standard facility size or capacity needed to serve the particular development project or property. The applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating that a particular improvement qualifies for credit under this section. The request for credit shall be filed in writing no later than 60 days after acceptance of the improvement by the city.

(4) Notwithstanding subsection (3) of this section, when establishing a methodology for a system development charge, the city may provide for a credit against the improvement fee, the reimbursement fee, or both, for capital improvements constructed as part of the development which reduce the development’s demand upon existing capital improvements and/or the need for future capital improvements, or a credit based upon any other rationale the council finds reasonable.

(5) Credit shall not be transferable from one development to another except in compliance with standards adopted by the city council.

(6) Credit shall not be transferable from one type of system development charge to another.

(7) Credits shall be used within 10 years from the date the credit is given. (Ord. 3082 § 7, 2008; Ord. 2836 § 13, 2001)


13.24.140 Notice.

(1) The city shall maintain a list of persons who have made a written request for notification prior to adoption or amendment of a methodology for any system development charge. Written notice shall be mailed to persons on the list at least 90 days prior to the first hearing to adopt or amend a system development charge, and the methodology supporting the adoption or amendment shall be available at least 60 days prior to the first hearing to adopt or amend. The failure of a person on the list to receive a notice that was mailed shall not invalidate the action of the city council.

(2) If a system development charge will increase due to the modification of the plan adopted pursuant to SHMC 13.24.080 to include a capacity-increasing capital improvement, the city shall provide notice of at least 30 days prior to the adoption of the modification to the persons who have requested written notice as described in subsection (1) of this section.

(3) The city may periodically delete names from the list, but at least 30 days prior to removing a name from the list must notify the person whose name is to be deleted that a new written request for notification is required if the person wishes to remain on the notification list. No legal action intended to contest the methodology used for calculating a system development charge shall be filed after 60 days following adoption or modification of the system development charge ordinance or resolution by the city. A person shall contest the methodology used for calculating a system development charge only as provided in ORS 34.010 through 34.100, and not otherwise. (Ord. 3082 § 8, 2008; Ord. 2836 § 14, 2001)


13.24.150 Segregation and use of revenue.

(1) All funds derived from a particular type of system development charge are to be segregated by accounting practices from all other funds of the city. That portion of the system development charge calculated and collected on account of a specific facility system shall be used for no purpose other than those set forth in SHMC 13.24.060.

(2) The finance officer shall provide the city council with an annual accounting, based on the city’s fiscal year, for system development charges showing the total amount of system development charge revenue collected for each type of facility and the projects funded from each account. (Ord. 2836 § 15, 2001)


13.24.160 Appeals procedure.

(1) A person challenging the propriety of an expenditure of system development charge revenues may appeal the decision or the expenditure to the city council by filing a written request with the city administrator describing with particularity the decision of the city council and the expenditure from which the person appeals. An appeal of an expenditure must be filed within two years of the date of the alleged improper expenditure.

(2) Appeals of any other decision required or permitted to be made by the city administrator under this chapter must be filed within 10 days of the date of the decision.

(3) After providing notice to the appellant, the council shall determine whether the city administrator’s decision or the expenditure is in accordance with this chapter and the provisions of ORS 223.297 through 223.314 and may affirm, modify, or overrule the decisions. If the council determines that there has been an improper expenditure of system development charge revenues, the council shall direct that a sum equal to the misspent amount shall be deposited within one year to the credit of the account or fund from which it was spent. The decision of the council shall be reviewed only as provided in ORS 34.010 through 34.100, and not otherwise. (Ord. 3082 § 9, 2008; Ord. 2836 § 16, 2001)


13.24.170 Prohibited connection.

No person may connect to the water or sewer system of the city unless the appropriate system development charge has been paid or the lien or installment payment method has been applied for and approved. (Ord. 2836 § 17, 2001)


13.24.180 Penalty.

Violation of this chapter is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00, or any other remedy as provided by law. (Ord. 2836 § 18, 2001)


13.24.190 Construction.

The rules of statutory construction contained in ORS Chapter 174 are adopted and by reference made a part of this chapter. (Ord. 2836 § 19, 2001)


Chapter 13.28       BELTON ROAD ADVANCED FINANCIAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT

Sections:

13.28.010  District created.

13.28.020  Applicability of district.

13.28.030  Benefits to connected properties.

13.28.040  Reimbursement of property owners.

13.28.050  Charges for connectors.

13.28.060  Interest on contribution costs.

13.28.070  Expiration of connector charges.

13.28.080  STEP system cost.


13.28.010      District created.

The council hereby creates the Belton Road advanced financing district. (Ord. 2593 § 1, 1990)


13.28.020      Applicability of district.

The district involves any owners that connect to the Belton Road public sanitary sewer force main extension, as described in Exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 2593 § 2, 1990)


13.28.030      Benefits to connected properties.

The city finds that all properties that connect to the extension will benefit from the construction of the public sewer force main extension as described and shown in Exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 2593 § 3, 1990)


13.28.040      Reimbursement of property owners.

Some of the property owners will finance the construction costs of extending the public sewer main.

These property owners should receive reimbursement for their contribution costs. (Ord. 2593 § 4, 1990)


13.28.050      Charges for connectors.

The city will charge new connectors to the public sanitary sewer line extension for the advanced financial cost in the following manner:

(1)  Original connectors shall be those who pay for the costs of construction of the main extension.

(2)  New connectors shall pay an assessment charge of $2,300 when payment is made prior to September 1, 1991.

(3)  If connection is desired after September 1, 1991, new connectors shall pay a cost of $3,300.

(4)  These costs, as established in subsections (2) and (3) of this section, include the $800.00 standard system development charge.

(5)  The city shall collect the connection charge from new connectors until original connectors have recovered their contribution costs.

(6)  Based on estimated future connection, the city finds that fair share costs for original connectors is $1,500.

(7)  Contribution costs will be the sum of moneys needed to subsidize the project in order to construct the force main. It is the intent of this chapter that the original connectors be reimbursed, if and when there are additional connections, for the subsidized amount. But in no event should original connectors receive payments that exceed original connector’s fair share costs of the project.

(8)  Reimbursement to original connectors shall not include any system development charge (SDC) amount. (Ord. 2593 § 5, 1990)


13.28.060      Interest on contribution costs.

Interest shall accrue on contribution costs at 10 percent annual percentage rates. (Ord. 2593 § 6, 1990)


13.28.070      Expiration of connector charges.

The right to charge new connectors the contribution costs shall expire 10 years from the date of the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter or at such time as when the contribution costs, including the interest as established in SHMC 13.28.060, are fully paid. (Ord. 2593 § 7, 1990)


13.28.080      STEP system cost.

Each owner shall pay the entire cost of the STEP system that serves their property. (Ord. 2593 § 8, 1990)


Title 14       (Reserved)




Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION

Chapters:

15.04    State Building Codes

15.08    Fire Code

15.12    Street Development Charges

15.16    Moorages and Floating Structures Code

15.20    Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings


Chapter 15.04 STATE BUILDING CODES

Sections:

Article I. Administration and Enforcement

15.04.010    Title.

15.04.020    Purpose.

15.04.030    Scope.

15.04.040    Definitions.

15.04.050    Alternate materials and methods.

15.04.060    Modifications.

15.04.070    Tests.

15.04.080    Powers and duties of building official.

15.04.090    Appeals.

15.04.100    Plans and permits.

Article II. Various Codes

15.04.110    Structural code.

15.04.120    Mechanical code.

15.04.130    Plumbing code.

15.04.140    Electrical code.

15.04.150    One- and two-family dwelling code.

15.04.160    Manufactured dwelling code.

15.04.170    Recreational park and organizational camp regulations.

15.04.180    Dangerous buildings code.

15.04.190    Abatement of buildings damaged by earthquake.

15.04.195    Moorages and floating structures.

Article III. Fees

15.04.200    Fees.

Article IV. OAR and ORS References

15.04.210    OAR and ORS references.

Article V. Penalties

15.04.220    Penalties.

Article I. Administration and Enforcement


15.04.010 Title.

These regulations shall be known as the St. Helens building code, may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as “this code.” (Ord. 3011 § 2, 2006)


15.04.020 Purpose.

The purpose of this code is to establish uniform performance standards providing reasonable safeguards for health, safety, welfare, comfort and security of the residents of this jurisdiction who are occupants and users of buildings and for the use of modern methods, devices, materials, techniques and practicable maximum energy conservation. (Ord. 3011 § 2, 2006)


15.04.030 Scope.

(1) This code shall apply to the construction, alteration, moving, demolition, repair, maintenance and work associated with any building or structure except structures such as public utility poles, mechanical equipment not specifically regulated in this code, hydraulic flood control structures and other public improvements located in a public right-of-way.

(2) Where, in any specific case, different sections of this code specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable.

(3) Where, in any specific case, there is a conflict between this code and Oregon Revised Statute, the statute shall govern.

(4) These procedures apply to all codes contained in this title. If, in a specific case, there is a conflict between this code and a given code, the procedures within that code shall govern. If, in a specific case, a given code is silent on a matter within this code, this code shall govern. (Ord. 3011 § 2, 2006)


15.04.040 Definitions.

For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply:

“Appointing authority” shall mean the governing body of the city of St. Helens or his or her authorized representative. Building department inspectors are considered authorized representatives without any formal order of the appointing authority.

“Building official” shall mean the building official for the city of St. Helens.

“Code enforcement agency” shall mean the building department for the city of St. Helens. (Ord. 3011 § 2, 2006)


15.04.050 Alternate materials and methods.

(1) The provisions of this code are not intended to prevent the use of any alternate material, design, or method of construction not specifically proscribed by this code, provided such alternate has been approved and its use authorized by the building official.

(2) The building official may approve any such alternate material, design or method, provided the building official finds that the proposed material, design or method complies with the provisions of this code and that it is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this code in suitability, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, safety and sanitation.

(3) The building official shall require that evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claims that may be made regarding its use. The details of any approval of any alternate material, design, or method shall be recorded and entered in the files of the agency. (Ord. 3011 § 2, 2006)


15.04.060 Modifications.

When there are practical difficulties in carrying out the provisions of this code, the building official may grant modifications provided the building official finds that the modification is in conformance with the intent and purpose of this code and that said modification does not lessen any fire protection requirements nor the structural integrity of the building involved. Any action granting modification shall be recorded in the files of the code enforcement agency. (Ord. 3011 § 2, 2006)


15.04.070 Tests.

(1) Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of this code or that any material, method or design does not conform to the requirements of this code, the building official may require tests as proof of compliance to be made at no expense to this jurisdiction.

(2) Test methods shall be as specified by this code or by other recognized test standards. If there are no recognized and accepted test methods for the proposed alternate, the building official shall determine test procedures.

(3) All tests shall be made by an approved testing agency. Reports of such tests shall be retained by the building official for the period required for the retention of public records. (Ord. 3011 § 2, 2006)


15.04.080 Powers and duties of building official.

(1) General.

(a) In addition to, and not in lieu of, any other enforcement mechanism authorized by this code, upon a determination by the building official that any person, firm, corporation or other entity however organized has violated a provision of this chapter or a rule adopted thereunder, the building official may issue a notice of civil violation and impose upon the violator and/or any other responsible person an administrative civil penalty as provided by subsections (1)(a)(i) through (x) of this section. For purposes of this subsection, a responsible person includes the violator, and if the violator is not the owner of the building or property at which the violation occurs, may include the owner as well.

(i) Prior to issuing an order to correct a violation under this section, the building official may pursue reasonable attempts to secure voluntary correction.

(ii) Prior to issuing a notice of civil violation and imposing an administrative civil penalty under this section, the building official shall issue an order to correct a violation to one or more of the responsible persons. Except where the building official determines that the violation poses an immediate threat to health, safety, environment, or public welfare, the time for correction shall be not less than five calendar days.

(iii) Following the date or time by which the correction must be completed as required by an order to correct a violation, the building official shall determine whether such correction has been completed. If the required correction has not been completed by the date or time specified in the order, the building official may issue a notice of civil violation and impose an administrative civil penalty to each responsible person to whom an order to correct was issued.

(iv) Notwithstanding subsections (1)(a)(i) and (ii) of this section, the building official may issue a notice of civil violation and impose an administrative civil penalty without having issued an order to correct violation or made attempts to secure voluntary correction where the building official determines that the violation was knowing or intentional or a repeat of a similar violation.

(v) In imposing an administrative civil penalty authorized by this section, the building official shall consider:

(A) The person’s past history in taking all feasible steps or procedures necessary or appropriate to correct the violation;

(B) Any prior violations of statutes, rules, orders, and permits;

(C) The gravity and magnitude of the violation;

(D) Whether the violation was repeated or continuous;

(E) Whether the cause of the violation was an unavoidable accident, negligence, or an intentional act;

(F) The violator’s cooperativeness and efforts to correct the violation; and

(G) Any relevant rule of the building official.

(vi) Any notice of a civil violation that imposes an administrative civil penalty under this section shall either be served by personal service or shall be sent by registered or certified mail and by first class mail. Any such notice served by mail shall be deemed received for purposes of any time computations hereunder three days after the date mailed if to an address within this state, and seven days after the date mailed if to an address outside this state. Every notice shall include:

(A) Reference to the particular code provision or rule involved;

(B) A short and plain statement of the matters asserted or charged;

(C) A statement that the city intends to assess an administrative civil penalty for the violation and states the amount of the penalty or penalties imposed;

(D) The date on which the order to correct was issued and time by which correction was to be made, or if the penalty is imposed pursuant to subsection (1)(a)(iv) of this section, a short and plain statement of the basis for concluding that the violation was knowing, intentional, or repeated; and

(E) A statement of the party’s right to appeal the administrative civil penalty to the administrative hearings officer and a description of the means by which an appeal may be filed and a deadline for informing the municipality that the party intends to appeal the imposition of the administrative civil penalty.

(vii) Any person, firm, corporation or other entity however organized who is issued a notice of administrative civil penalty may appeal the penalty to the administrative hearings officer. The provisions of SHMC 15.04.090(4) shall govern any requested appeal.

(viii) An administrative civil penalty imposed hereunder shall become final upon expiration of the time for filing an appeal, unless the responsible person appeals the penalty to the administrative hearings officer pursuant to, and within the time limits established by, SHMC 15.04.090(4).

(ix) Each day the violator fails to remedy the code violation shall constitute a separate violation.

(x) The civil administrative penalty authorized by this section shall be in addition to: (A) assessments or fees for any costs incurred by the city in remediation, cleanup, or abatement, and (B) any other actions authorized by law.

(b) The building official shall have the power to render written and oral interpretations of this code and to adopt and enforce administrative procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, rules, and regulations shall be in conformance with the intent and purpose of this code.

(2) Right of Entry. When it may be necessary to inspect to enforce the provisions of this code, or the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a building or upon a premises a condition which is contrary to or in violation of this code or which otherwise makes the building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official, in accordance with administrative policy, may enter said building or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this code; provided, that if such building or premises be occupied, that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such building or premises is unoccupied, the building official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry.

(3) Inspections. Any defects or code violations the building official finds in installation, workmanship, or materials pursuant to an applicable code shall be corrected, and an inspection request shall be made within 30 calendar days of the date of actual notice of deficiency. It is a violation to fail to request an inspection within 30 days of actual notice.

(a) For purposes of this section, actual notice is given when the inspecting jurisdiction does everything required in OAR 918-785-0220.

(4) Postings. The building official shall have authority to post notices, stop work orders, condemnation signs, dangerous building signs, and other necessary postings on any subject property. It is a violation to remove a posting of the building official.

(5) Stop Work Orders. Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this code or other pertinent laws or ordinances, including specifically, but not limited to, the St. Helens Community Development Code, the building official may order the work stopped by posting the subject property and subsequent notice in writing served on any person(s) engaged in the doing or causing of such work to be done. Such person(s) shall stop such work until specifically authorized by the building official to proceed. The stop work order shall be posted on the subject property in a conspicuous location; removal of the stop work order is prohibited and shall be a violation of this code, except when removal is performed by building department personnel or when removal is authorized in writing.

(6) Authority to Disconnect Utilities in Emergencies.

(a) The building official or the building official’s authorized representative shall have the authority to disconnect fuel-gas utility service and/or other energy supplies to a building, structure, premises or equipment regulated by this code when necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall, whenever possible, notify the serving utility, the owner and occupant of the building, structure or premises of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action and shall notify such serving utility, owner and occupant of the building, structure or premises in writing of such disconnection within a reasonable time thereafter.

(b) The building official or the building official’s authorized representative shall have the authority to disconnect or discontinue the operation of a plumbing utility service to a building, structure or equipment in case of an emergency where it is necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property.

(7) Authority to Abate Hazardous Equipment.

(a) When the building official ascertains that equipment, or any portion thereof, regulated by this code has become hazardous to life, health or property, the building official shall order the equipment either removed from its location or restored to a safe and/or sanitary condition, as appropriate. The notice shall be in writing and contain a fixed time limit for compliance. Persons shall not use the defective equipment after receiving the notice;

(b) When equipment or an installation is to be disconnected, written notice of the disconnection (and causes therefor) shall be given within 24 hours to the involved utility, the owner and/or occupant of the building, structure or premises. When equipment is maintained in violation of this code and in violation of a notice issued pursuant to the provisions of this section, the building official may institute such action as he/she deems necessary to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate the violation.

(8) Connection after Order to Disconnect. No person shall make a connection to or from an energy, fuel, power supply or water or wastewater service, to any equipment regulated by this code which has been disconnected or ordered disconnected or discontinued by the building official until the building official specifically authorizes the reconnection and/or use of such equipment.

(9) Maintenance. All buildings and structures, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards which are required by this code shall be maintained in conformance with the code edition under which installed. The owner or the owner’s designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings and structures. To determine compliance with this section, the building official may cause a structure to be reinspected.

(10) Occupancy Violations. Whenever any building, structure or equipment therein regulated by this code is used contrary to the provisions of this code, the building official may order such use discontinued and the structure (or portion thereof) vacated. All persons using the structure (or portion thereof) shall discontinue the use within the time prescribed by the building official in his notice and make the structure, or portion thereof, comply with the requirements of this code. (Ord. 3124 § 1, 2010; Ord. 3011 § 2, 2006)


15.04.090 Appeals.

(1) Board of Appeals.

(a) In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals consisting of five members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to building construction and who are not employees of the city of St. Helens; however, if the order, decision or determination being appealed is the imposition of an administrative civil penalty, the appeal shall be heard by an administrative hearings officer. The building official shall be an ex officio member of and shall act as secretary to said board but shall have no vote on any matter before the board. The board of appeals shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to consent of the council, and shall hold office at its pleasure. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the building official.

(b) The building official shall schedule a meeting of the board within 60 days of the filing of the appeal. The board of appeals shall grant a hearing or dismiss the appeal. The appeal shall be dismissed if the board finds that the appeal does not meet the criteria in subsection (2) of this section. If the appeal is dismissed, the board’s decision is final. The hearing shall be held as soon as reasonable, after the board meeting.

(c) The board of appeals shall have no authority relative to interpretation of the administrative provisions of this code nor shall the board be empowered to waive requirements of this code.

(2) General Appeal Procedure. Any decision relating to: (a) the suitability of alternate materials and methods of construction or (b) an interpretation or decision by the building official with regard to the St. Helens building code may be appealed to the board of appeals in conformance with procedures provided in the applicable section of the St. Helens building code. A decision relating to the imposition of an administrative civil penalty may be appealed to an administrative hearings officer in conformance with the procedures provided in subsection (4) of this section. No appeal shall be accepted without the applicable appeal fee. Failure to strictly comply with the applicable appeal requirements, including but not limited to time for filing and payment of the applicable appeal fee, shall be a jurisdictional defect and shall subject the appeal to summary dismissal in accordance with subsection (4) of this section. When the specific applicable code does not contain an appeal timeframe, the time to appeal a decision or interpretation shall be 30 days, unless an order to vacate has been posted, in which case it shall be within 10 days. In either case, the calculation of time starts the day following service of written notice of the decision or interpretation, consistent with Oregon Revised Statutes computation of time (ORS 174.120 and 174.125). The board of appeals may charge an unsuccessful appellant the cost of the appeal, including the cost of a hearing examiner, if the board makes findings that the appeal is frivolous and either finds against the appellant after a hearing or dismisses the appeal. Failure to pay the costs within 60 days of receipt of said billing shall result in a lien on the property which is the subject of the appeal.

(3) Filing Parties.

(a) Appeals of decisions other than the imposition of an administrative civil penalty may only be filed by the following parties affected by a decision:

(i) The owner or authorized agent;

(ii) Any resident or property owner within 150 feet of a parcel of land that is the subject of the decision;

(iii) Any agency, officer, or department of the city which has the responsibility for providing city facilities and/or services to the parcel of land; or

(iv) Ten adult residents of the city.

(b) Appeals of decisions to impose an administrative civil penalty may only be filed by the person, firm, corporation or other entity however organized, aggrieved by the imposition of an administrative civil penalty.

(4) Procedures for Appeal of Decision to Impose Administrative Civil Penalty.

(a) A person, firm, corporation or other entity however organized aggrieved by a decision of the building official to impose an administrative civil penalty may, within 30 days after the date of notice of the action, appeal in writing to the administrative hearings officer. The written appeal shall be accompanied by the appeal fee as determined by city council and shall include:

(i) The name and address of the appellant;

(ii) The nature of the determination being appealed;

(iii) The reason the determination is incorrect; and

(iv) What the correct determination of the appeal should be.

(b) Unless the appellant and the city agree to a longer period, an appeal shall be heard by the administrative hearings officer within 30 days of the receipt of the notice of intent to appeal. At least 10 days prior to the hearing, the city shall mail notice of the time and location thereof to the appellant.

(c) The administrative hearings officer shall hear and determine the appeal on the basis of the appellant’s written statement and any additional evidence the administrative hearings officer deems appropriate. At the hearing, the appellant may present testimony and oral argument personally or by counsel. The burden of proof shall be on the building official. The rules of evidence as used by courts of law do not apply.

(d) The administrative hearings officer shall issue a written decision within 10 days of the hearing date. The written decision of the administrative hearings officer is final.

(e) Other than as provided in this subsection, the appeal fee is not refundable. The administrative hearings officer may make a determination on the motion of the appellant that the appeal fee shall be refunded to the appellant upon a finding by the administrative hearings officer that the appeal was not frivolous.

(f) Failure to pay a penalty imposed hereunder within 60 days after the penalty becomes final as provided in subsection (4)(d) of this section shall constitute a violation of this code. Each day the penalty is not paid shall constitute a separate violation. The building official is authorized to collect the penalty by any administrative or judicial action or proceeding authorized by SHMC 15.04.220, other provisions of this code, or state statutes. (Ord. 3124 § 2, 2010; Ord. 3011 § 2, 2006)


15.04.100 Plans and permits.

(1) Issuance.

(a) The application, plans, specifications, computations and other data filed by an applicant for a permit shall be reviewed by the building official. Such plans may be reviewed by other departments of this jurisdiction to verify compliance with any applicable laws under their jurisdiction. If the building official finds that the work described in application for a permit and the plans, specifications and other data filed therewith conform to the requirements of this code and other pertinent laws and ordinances and that the fees have been paid, the building official shall issue a permit therefor to the applicant.

(b) When the building official issues a permit where plans are required, the building official shall endorse in writing or stamp the plans and specifications “APPROVED.” Such approved plans and specifications shall not be changed, modified or altered without authorizations from the building official, and all work regulated by this code shall be done in accordance with the approved plans.

(c) The building official may issue a permit for the construction of part of a building or structure before the entire plans and specifications for the whole building or structure have been submitted or approved, provided adequate information and detailed statements have been filed complying with all pertinent requirements of this code. The holder of a partial permit shall proceed without assurance that the permit for the entire building or structure will be granted.

(2) Retention of Plans. One set of approved plans, specifications and computations shall be retained by the building official for a period of not less than 90 days from date of completion of the work covered therein, and one set of approved plans and specifications shall be returned to the applicant, and said set shall be kept on the site of the building or work at all times during which the work authorized thereby is in progress.

(3) Validity of Permit.

(a) The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans, specifications and computations shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this code or of any other ordinance of the city of St. Helens or any other federal, state, or local law, statute, rule, regulation, or ordinance.

(b) The issuance of a permit based on plans, specifications and other data shall not prevent the building official from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in said plans, specifications and other data, or from preventing building operations being carried on thereunder when in violation of this code or of any other ordinances of the city of St. Helens.

(4) Expiration of Plan Reviews. Applications for which no permit is issued within 180 days following the date of the application shall expire by limitation, and plans and other data submitted for review may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed by the building official. The building official may extend the time for action by the applicant for a period not exceeding 180 days on request by the applicant showing that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have prevented action from being taken. No application shall be extended more than once. In order to renew action on an application after expiration, the applicant shall resubmit plans and pay a new plan review fee.

(5) Permit Expiration, Extension and Reinstatement.

(a) Every permit issued by the building official under the provisions of this code shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the building or work authorized is not commenced within the time limitations set forth in this section.

(b) Every permit issued by the building official shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the building or work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180 days from the date of such permit or if the building or work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of 180 days. The work shall not be considered suspended or abandoned where the permittee has pursued activities deemed by the building official to indicate the intent to start and complete the project. The building official may require the permittee to document these activities.

(c) Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension of the time within which work is to be completed under that permit when the permittee is unable to complete work within the time required by this section for good and satisfactory reasons. The building official may extend the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding 180 days on written request by the permittee showing that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have prevented work from being completed. No permit shall be extended more than once.

(d) Every permit issued by the building official shall expire by limitation and become null and void 24 months after the date of permit issuance. If the building or work authorized by such permit has not received final inspection approval prior to the permit expiration date, all work shall stop until a new permit is obtained for the value of the work remaining unfinished.

EXCEPTION: At the time of permit issuance the building official may approve a period exceeding 24 months for completion of work when the permittee can demonstrate that the complexity or size of the project makes completing the project within 24 months unreasonable.

(e) Where a permit has expired, the permit can be reinstated and the work authorized by the original permit can be commenced, provided the following are met:

(i) The building code under which the original permit was issued and other laws, which are enforced by the code enforcement agency, have not been amended in any manner which affects the work authorized by the original permit.

(ii) No changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work.

(iii) The original permit expired less than one year from the request to reinstate.

The fee for a reinstated permit shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit. Where the request for reinstatement does not comply with the preceding criteria, a new permit at full permit fees shall be required. The building official may waive the reinstatement fee or any portion thereof, not to exceed a total of $100.00, if the permittee demonstrates indigence in a sworn financial statement or demonstrates, by sworn affidavit, delay occasioned by circumstances beyond the control of the permittee.

(6) Work without a Permit – Investigation Fees.

(a) Whenever any work for which a permit is required by this code has been commenced without first obtaining said permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work.

(b) An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, may be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this code nor from any penalty prescribed by law.

(7) Not Transferable. A permit issued to one person or firm is not transferable and shall not permit any other person or firm to perform any work thereunder.

(8) Suspension/Revocation. The building official may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this code whenever the permit is issued in error on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or if its issuance (or activity thereunder) is in violation of any ordinance or regulation of any other provisions of the laws and ordinances of the city of St. Helens.

(9) Inspections.

(a) It shall be the duty of the permit holder or authorized agent to request all inspections that may be necessary or otherwise required in a timely manner, provide access to the site, and to provide all equipment as may be deemed necessary or appropriate by the building official. The permit holder shall not proceed with construction activity until authorized to do so by the building official. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to cause the work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Any expense incurred by the permit holder to remove or replace any material required for proper inspection shall be the responsibility of the permit holder or his agent.

(b) Work requiring a permit shall not be commenced until the permit holder or an agent of the permit holder has posted or otherwise made available an inspection record card such as to allow the building official to conveniently make the required entries thereon regarding inspection of the work. This card shall be maintained available by the permit holder until final approval has been granted by the building official.

(10) Minor Label Program. The state of Oregon minor label program for plumbing can only be used for exposed accessible plumbing and water heaters. Sewer laterals and water lines supplying the building, home, or structure are concealed in the ground and are not readily accessible at future dates to comply with a possible inspection required by the minor label program. (Ord. 3134 § 1, 2010; Ord. 3011 § 2, 2006)

Article II. Various Codes


15.04.110 Structural code.

(1) Enforcement of State Code. The currently adopted Oregon Structural Specialty Code, as amended, as adopted by OAR 918-460-0010 through 918-460-0016, except as modified in this chapter, is enforced as part of this code. The following appendices are specifically adopted: Appendices J and F. The following appendices are excluded from this adoption: Appendices A, B, D, E, G, H, I and K.

(2) Excavation and Grading/Erosion Control. Appendix J of the currently adopted Oregon Structural Specialty Code, as adopted above, govern excavation and grading/erosion control. The fees set forth in the currently adopted St. Helens fee schedule shall apply. All references to Figure 1808.7.1 entitled “Foundation Clearance From Slopes” in the currently adopted Oregon Structural Specialty Code and Figure R403.1.9.1, entitled “Foundation Clearance From Slopes,” of the currently adopted Oregon Residential Specialty Code are adopted and enforced as part of this code. (Ord. 3218 § 1, 2017; Ord. 3086 § 2, 2008; Ord. 3011 § 2, 2006)


15.04.120 Mechanical code.

(1) Enforcement of State Rules. The currently adopted edition of the Oregon Mechanical Specialty Code, as adopted by OAR 918-440-0010 through 918-440-0015, except as modified in this chapter, is adopted and enforced as part of this code. (Ord. 3218 § 2, 2017; Ord. 3086 § 2, 2008; Ord. 3011 § 2, 2006)


15.04.130 Plumbing code.

(1) Enforcement of State Code. The currently adopted Oregon Plumbing Specialty Code, as adopted by OAR 918-750-0010 through 918-750-0190, except as modified in this chapter, is enforced as part of this code. (Ord. 3218 § 3, 2017; Ord. 3086 § 2, 2008; Ord. 3011 § 2, 2006)


15.04.140 Electrical code.

(1) Enforcement of State Code. The currently adopted edition of the Oregon Electrical Specialty Code, as adopted by OAR 918-305-0000 through 918-305-0700, except as modified in this chapter, is enforced as part of this code. (Ord. 3218 § 4, 2017; Ord. 3086 § 2, 2008; Ord. 3011 § 2, 2006)


15.04.150 One- and two-family dwelling code.

(1) Enforcement of State Code. The currently adopted Oregon Residential Specialty Code, as adopted by OAR 918-480-0005 through 918-480-0130, including Mechanical and Structural Sections and all appendices, except as modified in this chapter, are enforced as part of this code. 

(2) Notwithstanding R602 (Wall Construction) of the above-referenced Residential Specialty Code, the upper limit of the moisture content of lumber shall not exceed 19 percent as recognized in the AF&PA’s NDS. (Ord. 3218 § 5, 2017; Ord. 3086 § 2, 2008; Ord. 3011 § 2, 2006)


15.04.160 Manufactured dwelling code.

(1) Parks.

(a) Enforcement of State Rules. The currently adopted edition of the Oregon Manufactured Dwelling and Park Specialty Code, as adopted by OAR 918-600-0005 through 918-600-0030, except as modified in this chapter, is adopted and enforced as part of this code.

(2) Manufactured Home Installations.

(a) Enforcement of State Rules. The current edition of the Oregon Manufactured Dwelling Installation Specialty Code, adopted by OAR 918-500-0005 through 918-500-0470, 918-525-0005 through 918-525-0520, and 918-530-0005 through 918-530-0340, except as modified in this chapter, is adopted and enforced as part of this code. (Ord. 3218 § 6, 2017; Ord. 3011 § 2, 2006)


15.04.170 Recreational park and organizational camp regulations.

(1) Enforcement of State Rules. The Recreational Park and Organizational Camp Rules, adopted by OAR 918-650-0005 through 918-650-0080, except as modified in this chapter, is adopted and enforced as part of this code. (Ord. 3011 § 2, 2006)


15.04.180 Dangerous buildings code.

(1) Unsafe Buildings.

(a) All buildings or structures regulated by this code which are structurally unsafe, fail to provide adequate means of egress, constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life are, for the purpose of this section, unsafe. Any use of buildings or structures constituting a hazard to safety, health or public welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, fire hazard, disaster, damage or abandonment is, for the purpose of this section, an unsafe use. Parapet walls, cornices, spires, towers, tanks, statuary and other appendages or structural members which are supported by, attached to, or a part of a building and which are in deteriorated condition or otherwise unable to sustain the design loads which are specified in this code are hereby designated as unsafe building appendages.

(b) All such unsafe buildings, structures or appendages are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal in accordance with the procedures set forth in the Dangerous Buildings Code or such alternate procedures as may have been or as may be adopted by this jurisdiction. As an alternative, the building official, or another employee or official of the city of St. Helens as designated by the governing body, may institute any other appropriate action to prevent, restrain, correct or abate the violation.

(2) Adoption of Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings. The currently adopted edition of the International Existing Building Code is hereby adopted and will be enforced as part of this code. References to the currently adopted edition of the International Existing Building Code in Chapter 15.20 SHMC shall be to the corresponding sections in the applicable adopted specialty code, including but not limited to the Oregon Structural Specialty Code and the International Existing Building Code. (Ord. 3218 § 7, 2017; Ord. 3011 § 2, 2006)


15.04.190 Abatement of buildings damaged by earthquake.

(1) Enforcement of State Code. The earthquake abatement rules adopted by OAR 918-470-0010 through 918-470-10110, except as modified in this chapter, are enforced as part of this code.

(2) Standards and Methodology for Seismic Evaluation of Existing Buildings.

(a) General. The provisions of this section shall prescribe the seismic design requirements for existing buildings undergoing changes of occupancy, additions, or alterations. The requirements of this section only apply to buildings for which a building permit has been applied for to change the occupancy classification, add square footage to the building, or alter the building.

(b) Definitions.

(i) “FEMA 178” means the “NEHRP Handbook for the Seismic Evaluation of Existing Buildings” (hereinafter “FEMA 178”) published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The city adopts and incorporates FEMA 178 by this reference.

(ii) “FEMA 178 evaluation” means the process of evaluation of an existing building for the potential earthquake-related risk to human life posed by that building, or building component, and the documentation of that evaluation, performed and written according to the provisions of the “NEHRP Handbook for the Seismic Evaluation of Existing Buildings,” published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and approved by the building official.

(iii) “Net floor area” means the area of a building measured from the inside of the permanent outer building walls, excluding any major vertical penetrations of the floor, such as elevator and mechanical shafts.

(iv) “Roof covering repair or replacement,” as used in this section, shall mean the installation of a new roof covering following the removal of 50 percent or more of the roof covering layers.

(c) Design Standards. Except as specifically provided for herein, changes of occupancy and structural additions the design standard shall be the current edition of the Oregon Structural Specialty Code adopted and enforced as part of this code. For other work covered by this section (e.g., voluntary work), the design standard shall be “FEMA 178, NEHRP Handbook for the Seismic Evaluation of Existing Buildings,” published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. FEMA 178 shall be used under this section with the effective peak velocity-related acceleration and effective peak acceleration coefficients (Av and Aa) of 0.3 used in place of figure 2.1a and 2.1c.

(d) Change of Occupancy. The following table shall be used to classify the relative hazard of all building occupancies:

	Relative Hazard	Occupancy Classification

	5 (Highest)	A, E, I-1.1, I-3, H-1, H-2, H-3, H-6, H-7

	4	R-1, SR, I-2, I-3.1

	3	B, I-1.2, I-1.3, M 

	2	F, S, H-4, H-5

	1 (Lowest)	R-3, U

An occupancy change to the same or a lower relative hazard classification number will not require seismic improvements in accordance with the Oregon Structural Specialty Code, unless the change results in an occupant load increase of more than 20 percent. Changes to the same or lower relative hazard classification shall require compliance with FEMA 178, at a minimum. All changes to a higher relative hazard occupancy will require seismic improvements using the current edition of the Oregon Structural Specialty Code. All structures which are being converted to essential facilities as defined in the Oregon Structural Specialty Code, shall comply with current state code seismic requirements, regardless of other requirements in this section.

(e) Building Additions. An addition that is not structurally independent from an existing building shall be designed and constructed such that the entire building conforms to the seismic force resistance requirements for new buildings as set forth in the Oregon Structural Specialty Code and other applicable codes, unless the following three conditions are met:

(i) The addition shall comply with the requirements for new buildings; and

(ii) The addition shall not increase the seismic forces in any structural element of the building by more than five percent unless the capacity of the element subject to the increased forces is equal to or greater than that required for new buildings; and

(iii) The addition shall not decrease the seismic resistance of any structural element of the existing building unless the reduced seismic resistance of the element is equal to or greater than that required for new buildings.

(f) Fire Damaged Structural Systems. If a building is damaged by fire, all damaged lateral load resisting components of a building’s structural system must be designed and rebuilt to current provisions of the Oregon Structural Specialty Code. These components must also be connected to the balance of the undamaged lateral load resisting system in conformance with current code provisions. Undamaged components need not be upgraded to current lateral load provisions of the current code, unless required by other provisions of this title.

(g) Building Alterations – General. When an alteration, for which a building permit is required, has a value of more than $100,000, a FEMA 178 evaluation is required. A letter of intent to have a FEMA 178 evaluation performed may be submitted along with the permit application. The evaluation must be completed before any future permits will be issued. The following shall be exempted from this requirement:

(i) Buildings constructed or renovated to seismic zone D2 under a prior government permit.

(ii) One- and two-family dwellings.

(iii) Single story, light metal buildings less than 5,000 square feet in area.

(iv) Light wood buildings less than 5,000 square feet in area.

A previously prepared seismic study may be submitted for consideration to the building official as equivalent to a FEMA 178 evaluation.

(h) Building Alterations – Unreinforced Masonry. Seismic hazards shall be mitigated in conjunction with building alterations and repairs in unreinforced masonry buildings, as follows:

(i) When a roof covering is repaired or replaced, as defined in subsection (2)(b)(iv) of this section, the building structural roof system, anchorage, and parapets shall be repaired or rehabilitated per Appendix C of FEMA 178; or

(ii) When the cost of alteration work which requires a building permit in a two-year period exceeds $15.00 per square foot for the total net floor area in the building, then the building shall be improved seismically per subsection (2)(c) of this section. Costs for site improvements, mandated FM41 agreements, mandated ADA improvements, mandated landscaping and mandated or voluntary seismic improvements will not be included in the $15.00 per square foot amount.

(i) Application of Other Requirements. Building permit applications to improve the seismic capability of a building shall not trigger: accessibility improvements so long as the seismic improvement does not lessen accessibility; fire life safety improvements so long as the seismic improvement does not lessen the building’s fire resistance or exiting capability. Conformance with these standards does not exempt buildings from future seismic regulations. Conformance with these standards does not excuse compliance with other applicable portions of the St. Helens building code and St. Helens Community Development Code.

(j) Appeals. Local appeals shall be addressed through the board of appeals. See SHMC 15.04.090(1). (Ord. 3011 § 2, 2006)


15.04.195 Moorages and floating structures.

The city adopts and will enforce Chapter 15.16 SHMC, Moorages and Floating Structures Code, as part of the structural specialty code in SHMC 15.04.110(1). Within 90 days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the St. Helens building official, after consultation with the fire marshal, will report to the council with recommendations for changes, if any, to the moorages and floating structures code. (Ord. 3011 § 2, 2006)

Article III. Fees


15.04.200 Fees.

(1) Fees charged under this code shall be as provided by resolution.

(2) The building official may authorize the refunding of fees paid in accordance with the refund policy in effect in the jurisdiction.

(3) The determination of value or valuation under any provisions of this code shall be made by the building official. The value to be used in computing the building permit and plan review fees shall be the total value of all construction work for which the permit is issued as well as all finish work, painting, roofing, electrical, plumbing, heating, air conditioning, elevators, fire-extinguishing systems and any other permanent equipment. (Ord. 3011 § 2, 2006)

Article IV. OAR and ORS References


15.04.210 OAR and ORS references.

Reference to Oregon Administrative Rules and Oregon Revised Statutes in this code refers to the most recent rules in effect. (Ord. 3011 § 2, 2006)

Article V. Penalties


15.04.220 Penalties.

(1) In addition to an order requiring remedial action, any person violating any of the provisions herein for which a special penalty has not been expressly provided shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000 per violation. Each day that a violation exists is a separate offense. Except in the case of an administrative civil penalty, the minimum and maximum fines for corporations are double the fines given in this section.

(2) Notwithstanding any other provision of the St. Helens Municipal Code or regulations enacted pursuant thereto, matters pertaining to the imposition of an administrative civil penalty shall not be filed in or adjudicated by the municipal court.

(3) The remedies in this code are not exclusive. The city may institute any other appropriate judicial action or administrative proceedings to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate any violation of this code.

(4) Unpaid Penalties.

(a) Failure to pay an administrative civil penalty imposed pursuant to this code within 60 days after the penalty becomes final shall constitute a violation of this code. Each day the penalty is not paid shall constitute a separate violation. The building official is authorized to collect the penalty by any administrative or judicial action or proceeding authorized by subsection (4)(b) of this section, other provisions of this code, or state statutes.

(b) If an administrative civil penalty is imposed on a responsible person because of a violation of any provision of this code resulting from prohibited use or activity on real property, and the penalty remains unpaid 60 days after such penalty become final, the building official shall assess the property the full amount of the unpaid fine and shall enter such an assessment as a lien against the property in the city lien docket. At the time such an assessment is made, the building official shall notify the responsible person that the penalty has been assessed against the real property upon which the violation occurred and has been entered in the city lien docket. The lien shall be enforced in the same manner as all city liens. Interest at the rate of nine percent per annum shall commence from the date of entry of the lien in the lien docket.

(c) In addition to enforcement mechanisms authorized elsewhere in this code, failure to pay an administrative civil penalty imposed pursuant to this code shall be grounds for withholding issuance of requested permits or licenses, issuance of a stop work order, if applicable, or revocation or suspension of any issued permits or certificates of occupancy. (Ord. 3214 § 3, 2010; Ord. 3011 § 2, 2006)


Chapter 15.08 FIRE CODE

Sections:

15.08.010    Adoption of fire code, fire and life safety standards.

15.08.020    Definitions.

15.08.030    Establishment and duties of fire prevention bureau.

15.08.040    Bulk storage of flammable or combustible liquids in aboveground tanks.

15.08.050    Bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases.

15.08.060    Storage of explosives and blasting agents.

15.08.070    Deletions to the Oregon Fire Code.

15.08.080    Amendments to the Oregon Fire Code.

15.08.090    Appeals.

15.08.100    Penalties.

15.08.110    Acceptance of CRFR Ordinance 2014-15-04, with exhibits.


15.08.010 Adoption of fire code, fire and life safety standards.

For the purpose of prescribing minimum regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire, panic, or explosion, the city hereby adopts the following:

(1) The 2014 Oregon Fire Code, based on the 2012 International Fire Code, as adopted by OAR 837-040-0010, is adopted and enforced as part of this code. (Ord. 3186 § 13, 2015; Ord. 3086 § 2, 2008; Ord. 2961 § 3, 2005)


15.08.020 Definitions.

(1) Whenever the word “administrator” is used in the Oregon Fire Code, and the other codes incorporated herein, it shall be held to mean the fire chief of the Columbia River Fire and Rescue or his or her authorized representative.

(2) Whenever the term “building department” is used, it shall be held to mean the building department of the city of St. Helens.

(3) Whenever the term “building official” is used, it shall mean the building official of the city of St. Helens.

(4) Whenever the term “chief of police” is used, it shall be held to mean the chief of police of the city of St. Helens.

(5) Whenever the word “code” is used in this chapter, it shall be held to mean all the codes adopted and incorporated by this chapter to form the city of St. Helens fire code. Whenever a reference is made to any portion of this code or any other applicable law or ordinance, the reference applies to all amendments and additions now or hereafter adopted by the State Fire Marshal and the city of St. Helens.

(6) Whenever the term “city council” or “council” is used, it shall be held to mean the governing body of the city of St. Helens, Oregon.

(7) Whenever the term “corporate counsel” or “city attorney” or “attorney” is used, it shall be held to mean the attorney for the city of St. Helens.

(8) Whenever the terms “fire prevention bureau” or “bureau of fire prevention” or “fire district” or “district” are used in the code, the same shall be held to mean Columbia River Fire and Rescue.

(9) Wherever the word “jurisdiction” is used in the Oregon Fire Code or other codes adopted herein, it shall be held to mean the city of St. Helens, Oregon.

(10) Whenever the term “International Building Code” or “building code” is used, it shall be held to mean the current edition of the State of Oregon Structural Specialty Code as adopted by the State Building Codes Division and the city of St. Helens. (Ord. 3186 § 14, 2015; Ord. 2961 § 4, 2005)


15.08.030 Establishment and duties of fire prevention bureau.

(1) The city of St. Helens hereby delegates to Columbia River Fire and Rescue the enforcement of the city of St. Helens fire code, including the Oregon Fire Code. Such delegation shall include, but shall not be limited to, fire prevention, fire suppression, fire safety, fire storage, fire escapes, and fire investigation. Nothing herein prohibits the city council, its officers or employees from enforcing this fire code through any available administrative or judicial means.

(2) The city of St. Helens fire code, including the Oregon Fire Code, shall be enforced by the fire prevention division of Columbia River Fire and Rescue, which shall be operated under the supervision of the fire marshal under the direction of the fire chief. The chief may detail or assign members of the fire department as inspectors, pursuant to the Oregon Fire Code and Oregon Statutes.

(3) Nothing herein prohibits the city council, its officers or employees from enforcing this fire code through any available administrative or judicial means, including but not limited to building department and planning department enforcement mechanisms. (Ord. 3186 § 15, 2015; Ord. 2961 § 5, 2005)


15.08.040 Bulk storage of flammable or combustible liquids in aboveground tanks.

The storage of flammable or combustible liquids in aboveground tanks located outside of buildings referred to in Section 3404.2.9.5 of the Fire Code is prohibited within the limits established by law as the limits of districts or municipalities in which such storage is prohibited. Specific exceptions are made for those areas identified as public lands, industrial or commercial (when the storage is not within 150 feet of a residential use) whenever a permit has been properly issued that fully complies with code provisions of Articles 23 and 57 of the Fire Code.

Storage of flammable or combustible liquids within all areas of the city, in containers totaling in aggregate over 60 gallons, shall be prohibited, except as provided in the districts identified above. (Ord. 3186 § 16, 2015; Ord. 2961 § 6, 2005)


15.08.050 Bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases.

Within the limits established by law restricting the storage of LP gas for the protection of heavily populated or congested areas, the aggregate capacity of any one installation shall not exceed a 2,000-gallon water capacity.

The bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas (installations where the aggregate capacity exceeds 2,000 gallons water capacity) is prohibited within all areas of the city, except those identified as heavy-industrial and light-industrial on the city of St. Helens zoning map. (Ord. 2961 § 7, 2005)


15.08.060 Storage of explosives and blasting agents.

Storage of explosive materials as defined in Chapter 56 of the Fire Code is prohibited in the entire fire district except for those areas specifically approved by the fire chief. This prohibition shall not apply to wholesale and retail stocks of small arms ammunition, explosive bolts, explosive rivets, or cartridges for explosive-actuated power tools in quantities involving less than 500 pounds of explosive materials unless otherwise regulated by other provisions of this code. (Ord. 3186 § 17, 2015; Ord. 2961 § 8, 2005)


15.08.070 Deletions to the Oregon Fire Code.

The following appendices of the 2012 IFC are excluded from the provisions of this code adoption:

(1) Appendix A, Board of Appeals. (Ord. 3186 § 18, 2015; Ord. 2961 § 9, 2005)


15.08.080 Amendments to the Oregon Fire Code.

(1) Section 101 is amended to add:

Whenever a reference is made to any portion of this code or any other applicable law or ordinance, the reference applies to all amendments and additions now or hereafter adopted by the State Fire Marshal and the Fire District.

(2) Section 105 is amended to add:

Permits: A permit shall be obtained from the Fire District for the following:

(1) Flammable/Combustible Liquids: To install tanks for flammable or combustible liquids above ground in excess of 500 gallons (individual or aggregate quantities).

(2) Agricultural Burning: To conduct open burning as defined on OAR 340-264-0030.

(3) Open Burning: To conduct open burning of yard trimmings.

(4) Public Assemblies: To conduct a fair, exhibition, or other special assembly event in any building, tent, or other structure involving large numbers of people.

(3) Section 111 is amended to add:

Stopping Uses, Evacuation. The Fire Chief is authorized to order an operation or use stopped or the evacuation of any premises, building or vehicle or portion thereof which has been, or is a fire hazard. The Fire Chief may also declare a premises, building, or vehicle or portion thereof dangerous due to the presence of hazardous materials when they create a condition hazardous to life, health or property. 

(Ord. 3186 § 19, 2015; Ord. 2961 § 10, 2005)


15.08.090 Appeals.

(1) When any person seeks relief from a decision of a fire official enforcing provisions of this code, including permits, waivers, alternative materials or methods, approval of variances or matters of interpretation, he/she may request reconsideration of the decision by first appealing to the fire marshal in writing within 10 days of the receipt of the decision. The fire marshal may affirm, modify, revoke or vacate the order under consideration.

(2) After reconsideration by the fire marshal, any person seeking relief from the decision of the fire marshal regarding the order may appeal to a board of appeals. Such appeal shall be filed in writing with the fire marshal within 30 days of the fire marshal’s decision. This requirement is jurisdictional. The board may, by majority vote, affirm, modify, or revoke the action of the fire marshal. The appeals board referenced herein and specified in Section 108 of the Fire Code shall be the building code board of appeals for the city, with the addition of an architect or other personnel with appropriate training or experience as recommended by the fire chief. Notwithstanding the above, the fire district with the concurrence of the city council may appoint by resolution a different appeal body to hear appeals under this code. (Ord. 2961 § 11, 2005)


15.08.100 Penalties.

(1) Enforcement Procedures – Notice of Violation. The fire marshal shall give written notice of any discovered fire code violation to a person who is responsible for correcting such violation. The notice shall state the time by which the violation is to be corrected and indicate the opportunity to appeal the notice of deficiency. The fire marshal may extend the time for complying and may issue one or more additional notices before giving notice of intent to seek judicial remedies. If, after written notice of code violations is given, a person having the duty to correct the violation refuses to do so, the fire marshal may issue a precomplaint letter to the person in question. This letter is a last-chance notice of a final inspection and will state the legal implications of continued noncompliance.

(2) Enforcement Procedures – Citation and Prosecution. If a specific penalty for a violation of the St. Helens fire code is not otherwise specifically provided, any person or entity who violates any of the provisions of the city of St. Helens fire code, including the Oregon Uniform Fire Code as adopted and amended herein, or fails to comply therewith, or who violates or fails to comply with any order issued pursuant to this fire code, or who builds in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved pursuant to this fire code, or who violates or fails to comply with any certificate or permit issued pursuant to this fire code, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who fails to comply with any such order as affirmed or modified by an administrative appellate body, or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the required time, shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor offense. Said misdemeanor is punishable upon conviction, by a fine of not more than $250.00 or imprisonment of not more than 30 days, or both. 

(3) The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue. All such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable period of time, and when not otherwise specified, each day that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing herein shall be interpreted as preventing or prohibiting the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.

(4) Refusal to remove a fire hazard by one responsible for conformity to the code (ORS 478.930) is punishable upon conviction as a “D” violation. Each day’s continued refusal to conform to the code or remove a fire hazard after notice by the inspecting officer is a separate offense.

(5) In case of fire resulting directly or indirectly from failure or neglect to promptly comply with the provisions of either a notice of violation or a permit issued by the fire district, the person or persons so notified shall be liable to civil action for the payment for all expenses incurred by the district in or about the use of apparatus, materials, and personnel in extinguishing any fire resulting from such cause.

(6) Reinspection Fee. A reinspection fee may be invoiced by the Columbia River Fire and Rescue District to persons who cause repeated reinspections due to noncompliance with provisions of the code. The chief may direct the fee to be charged following the second noncomplying reinspection.

(7) False Alarms. For violations of Section 401.3.1 of the Fire Code, the courts may order that the responsible person or persons pay for all the costs of responding fire personnel and apparatus as set by the State Fire Marshal’s schedule.

(8) The remedies in this code are not exclusive. The city may institute any other appropriate judicial action or administrative proceedings to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate any violation of this code. (Ord. 3219 § 7, 2017; Ord. 2961 § 12, 2005)


15.08.110 Acceptance of CRFR Ordinance 2014-15-04, with exhibits.

Pursuant to ORS 478.924, city of St. Helens accepts and approves CRFR Ordinance 2014-15-04, with all exhibits attached thereto and made a part thereof, for application within the city limits of the city of St. Helens, except that the more restrictive local requirements in this chapter prevail over CRFR Ordinance 2014-15-04, to the extent of such conflict. (Ord. 3186 § 20, 2015; Ord. 2961 § 13, 2005)


Chapter 15.12       STREET DEVELOPMENT CHARGES

Sections:

15.12.010  Purpose.

15.12.020  Definitions.

15.12.030  Street development charge imposed.

15.12.040  Exceptions.

15.12.050  Collection.

15.12.060  Use of proceeds.

15.12.070  Appeal.

15.12.080  Scope.

15.12.090  Penalty.


15.12.010      Purpose.

After review of various engineering, fiscal and staff analysis, and after hearing comments from the general public, the common council of the city of St. Helens does hereby determine that it is reasonable and necessary to enact a street development charge as a tax upon new development within the city. The object of the charge is to recover a fair share of the cost of additional capacity facilities for streets. This charge shall be imposed upon properties, which create additional needs for such facilities in order to protect the public health, peace, safety, and general welfare. (Ord. 2342 § 1, 1980)


15.12.020      Definitions.

(1)  "Commerce" means activities that Ordinance 2875 allows to occur in the C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, and C-5 zones and which are not allowed to occur as an outright use in any of the residential zones.

(2)  "Dwelling unit" means a structure having one or more rooms designed for occupancy by one family for living purposes and having only one cooking facility.

(3)  "Industry" means activities that Ordinance 2875 allows to occur in the LI and HI zones and which are not allowed to occur as an outright use in any of the residential or commercial zones.

(4)  "Institution" means an establishment organized for an educational, medical, religious, or charitable purpose.

(5)  "Residence" means a structure designed for human occupancy for living purposes.

(6)  "Street development charge" means a system development charge calculated according to the methodology as set out in Chapter 13.24 SHMC. (Ord. 2624, 1991; Ord. 2502, 1986; Ord. 2342 § 2, 1980)


15.12.030      Street development charge imposed.

Unless otherwise exempted by the provisions of this chapter, a system development charge may be imposed on all parcels of land within the city, and upon all lands outside the boundary of the city that connect to or otherwise use the sewer facilities, storm sewers, or water facilities of the city. Parcels include marina properties and multiple unit mobile home facilities. (Ord. 2624, 1991; Ord. 2502, 1986; Ord. 2342 § 3, 1980)


15.12.040      Exceptions.

(1)  Any structure located on a parcel of land inside the city shall be exempt from paying the street development charge to the extent of the structure then existing on the land or covered by a building permit issued on or before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

(2)  No street development charge shall be imposed where there is a modification, alteration, remodeling, addition or change to a structure if, as a result thereof, the number of residential dwelling units, commercial or institutional parking spaces, or industrial employees, are not increased. However, should an increase occur, the street development charge shall be imposed only on the value of the addition or alteration. (Ord. 2342 § 4, 1980)


15.12.050      Collection.

(1)  The street development charge is due and payable upon issuance of a building permit for the alteration, repair, addition, remodeling, modification, change, or construction of an improvement or structure inside the city limits, with the exception that the person responsible for paying the charge and the city may postpone, by written agreement, the payment until such time as the structure is occupied or sale is closed, whichever shall come first. In such cases, the city building inspector shall not grant an occupancy permit until such fees are paid.

(2)  As an alternative method of paying the street development charge exceeding $1,000, the developer and owner may agree with the city to pay the charge in equal, semiannual installments of at least $100.00, which includes interest on the unpaid balance at the rate of 10 percent per annum. In such event, the owner of the property shall consent to the voluntary imposition of a lien upon the premises for the full amount of the street development charge. In the application, the owner and developer shall expressly waive any claim concerning the validity of the street development charge, its correctness or any defect, jurisdictional or otherwise, in the proceeding for the imposition of the lien. Upon receipt of such application, the amount of the charge, together with the interest due thereon, shall be docketed in the city lien docket and from that time forward, the city shall have a lien upon that described land for the amount of the charge and interest upon that charge. The lien shall be enforced in the manner provided in ORS Chapter 223. The minimum semiannual payment will be either $100.00, or will be amortized for a period of 10 years together with interest thereon as herein provided, whichever is greater. Interest shall accrue from the date of the issuance of the building permit and payments shall be made upon the date agreed upon.

(3)  The street development charge herein imposed shall attach to the land being developed, and it shall be paid by the developer or owner of such land.

(4)  The street development charge may be collected by legal action in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction or by enforcement of the lien created hereinabove. (Ord. 2342 § 5, 1980) 


15.12.060      Use of proceeds.

Proceeds from the street development charges levied under this chapter shall be identified in separate accounts of the city. Proceeds from the street development charge shall be expended solely for new improvements to the city street system. (Ord. 2342 § 6, 1980)


15.12.070      Appeal.

Any person who is aggrieved by any decision made by administrative officers of the city may appeal that decision to the common council by filing a written request to the city administrator within 10 days after said decision, describing therein the grounds for appeal. The common council shall consider the appeal and may affirm, modify or overrule the decision of the administration. (Ord. 2342 § 7, 1980)


15.12.080      Scope.

The street development charge provided in this chapter is separate from and in addition to any applicable tax, assessment, charge, or fee otherwise provided by law or ordinance. (Ord. 2342 § 8, 1980)


15.12.090      Penalty.

No property or structure for which a street development charge is imposed, nor any part thereof, shall be erected, moved, altered, used or occupied until payment or agreement to pay is made. In addition to being subject to civil enforcement of this chapter, the developer of land, building, or premises where anything in violation of this chapter shall be placed, or shall exist, or be maintained or permitted, or who shall fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 for each violation for noncompliance upon having been deemed guilty, and/or revocation of their business license to do business within the city of St. Helens. (Ord. 2502, 1986; Ord. 2342 § 9, 1980)


Chapter 15.16       MOORAGES AND FLOATING STRUCTURES CODE

Sections:

15.16.010  Purpose.

15.16.020  Scope.

15.16.030  Definitions.

15.16.040  General code and fire compliance.

15.16.050  Floating structures.

15.16.060  Walkways and ramps.

15.16.070  Moorage exits.

15.16.080  Moorage identification.

15.16.090  Fire protection standpipe.

15.16.100  Portable fire protection equipment.

15.16.110  Fire apparatus access road.

15.16.120  Additional fire code requirements.

15.16.130  Distance between floating structures.

15.16.140  Occupancy separation.

15.16.150  Flotation.

15.16.160  Construction.

15.16.170  Additional provisions.


15.16.010      Purpose. 

The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards to safeguard life, limb, property, and public welfare regulating the design, construction, location, relocation, quality and use of materials, and use and occupancy of all floating structures, including but not limited to walks, ramps, buildings, and the moorage used in conjunction therewith. (Ord. 3011 Exh. 1 § 1, 2006)


15.16.020      Scope. 

The provisions of this chapter shall apply to construction, location, relocation, use and occupancy of all floating structures. This moorages and floating structures code shall not apply to vessels and unoccupied floating structures that are not in conflict with the purpose of this code as determined by the building official. (Ord. 3011 Exh. 1 § 2, 2006)


15.16.030      Definitions. 

For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms are defined as follows:

(1) “Addition” means an increase in the floor area or height of a structure or building.

(2) “Alteration” means any change or modification of an existing structure.

(3) “Berth” means the mooring of a boat alongside a bulkhead, pier, or between piles. See also “Slip.”

(4) “Boathouse (covered mooring site)” means a floating structure used to house or shelter a vessel or vessels.

(5) “Chapter” as used in this moorage and floating structures code means the current edition of the Oregon Structural Specialty Code adopted and enforced in the city of St. Helens by operation of city ordinance or state law.

(6) “Combo” means a boathouse-floating home combination. 

(7) “Dry hydrant” means a permanently installed suction pipe that extends from the water supply to a point above ground to make static suction water supply more accessible to fire district pumpers.

(8) “Fire apparatus access roads” means roads providing the driving surface for fire district vehicles responding to an emergency, extending from a public right-of-way to a point nearest a moorage or marine gangway or pier.

(9) “Floating structure” means any structure, supported wholly or partially by flotation, including but not limited to house boats, boathouses, floats, walkways, gangways, and ramps, but not including vessels.

(10) “Gangway” means a variable slope structure intended to provide pedestrian access between a fixed pier or shore and a floating structure.

(11) “House boat” means a floating structure used wholly or partially as a dwelling unit.

(12) “Marina” means floating structure(s) used primarily for the service, and/or repair, sale or moorage of vessels in berths, but may include other occupancies.

(13) “Moorage (marina)” means a site used for the mooring of one or more floating structures or vessels and includes the land used in conjunction therewith.

(14) “Moorage site” means a site within a moorage which is designed to be used, or which is used for the mooring of a vessel, boathouse, house boat, or any occupiable floating structure.

(15) “Mooring” means the fixing of a vessel or floating structure in one location temporarily or permanently by anchoring, grounding or any other means.

(16) “New construction” means a new building or structure or an addition to an existing building or structure. 

(17) “NFPA” as used in this chapter means the adopted rules and regulations of the National Fire Protection Association, including specifically without limitation NFPA 13 for sprinkler systems.

(18) “Pier” means a nonfloating fixed platform extending out over the water from shore to which gangways are usually attached. 

(19) “Ramp” means a fixed sloped structure providing pedestrian access between portions of a moorage which are at different elevations. 

(20) “Repair” means the reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing structure for the purpose of its maintenance.

(21) “Sewage” means all water carrying waste discharged for sanitary facilities.

(22) “Slip” is an area at a boatyard or marina that is used to moor a boat and is directly accessible from land and arranged to permit access to each boat from a fixed or floating pier. See also “Berth.”

(23) “Specialty codes” means a code of regulations adopted by Ordinance No. 3011 commonly referred to as the Structural Specialty Code, Mechanical Specialty Code, Plumbing Specialty Code and the Electrical Specialty Code.

(24) “Standard operating procedure” means basic operating principles routinely used by the building department in a particular situation.

(25) “Tender house” means a nonhabitable, floating accessory building. 

(26) “Transient tie-up” means a floating structure used exclusively for the open moorage of pleasure boats on a short-term, maximum 72-hour stay.

(27) “Vessel” means a water craft, barge, boat, or ship of any size used primarily for transportation means or conveyance.

(28) “Walk” means a fixed portion of a floating home structure providing access to and around a floating home.

(29) “Walkway” means a floating structure either covered or open and used as a means of access to a mooring site. There are three specific types referenced in this code: 

(a) “Fingerfloat” means a finger-like floating structure, usually attached perpendicular to a main walkway, which physically defines a berth and provides direct pedestrian access to and from a berthed boat or floating home. 

(b) “Main walkway” means a floating structure to which several fingerfloats are attached, thereby providing direct pedestrian access between the berths and marginal walkways or shore. 

(c) “Marginal walkway” means a floating structure which provides pedestrian access between two or more main walkways and shore.

(30) “Waterway” means an open unobstructed water available for vessel access to a mooring site. (Ord. 3011 Exh. 1 § 3, 2006)


15.16.040      General code and fire compliance.

(1) Floating structures and moorages shall comply with these specific regulations as well as all applicable specialty codes and all regulations of the city, county, state, and federal governments regarding floating structures. 

(2) Fire Marshal Inspections. Plans for marina fire-protection facilities shall be approved by the fire marshal prior to installation. The completed work shall be subject to final inspection and approval after installation. Existing floating structures moved to the fire district shall comply with the OFC as though they were new construction. (Ord. 3011 Exh. 1 § 4, 2006)


15.16.050      Floating structures.

(1) General. Every floating structure constructed, erected, enlarged, altered, conveyed, or moved into this jurisdiction after the effective date of this code shall be in compliance with this chapter and other pertinent laws and ordinances. Repair of an existing structure is an exception to this chapter.

(2) Permits Required. Prior to placement of a floating structure, the owner shall apply for a temporary permit from the building official. The owner shall furnish the building official with a location drawing, showing the general dimensions of the structure and its proposed place of location. If the proposed dimensions for siting are within the code, the building official shall issue a temporary permit to the owner. No owner of a floating structure shall place a floating structure in a moorage without having first obtained a temporary permit from the building department. No owner or person in control of a moorage shall permit or allow the placement of a floating structure in any moorage owned or controlled by them without a permit issued by the building department having been presented to them, and a copy thereof retained for their records. 

Within 30 days of placement of the floating structure, the owner shall apply for final inspection and approval with the building official. The final inspection shall be based on the following:

(a) Safety Inspection. The structure shall be determined to be in good repair, safe and sanitary condition, and constructed in accordance to sound engineering practices and in conformance with applicable building codes.

(b) Mechanical Inspection. All permits must have been granted and all hookups must have been performed in a satisfactory manner to receive the building official's approval.

(c) Electrical Inspection. All electrical work shall be designed and installed in accordance with the State of Oregon Electrical Specialty Safety Code and this section. The appropriate permits and inspections are required for all work. 

(i) Transformer pads shall not be located closer than eight feet to combustible surfaces and two feet to noncombustible surfaces. 

(ii) Overhead power drops shall be installed and maintained not less than 12 feet above walking surfaces and/or the ordinary high water line.

(d) Fire Safety Inspection. All fire safety requirements shall be in accordance with the Uniform Fire Code Appendix II-C, NFPA 303, and as required by this code.

(3) Occupancy Classification. The building official shall classify the occupancy of each floating structure.

(4) Construction Classification. The building official shall classify the construction type of each structure.

(5) Repair. All buildings and structures, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be kept in good repair, constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices, and in a safe and sanitary condition. All electrical, plumbing and mechanical installations and devices shall be maintained in good serviceable condition. Any other devices or safeguards which are required by this code shall be maintained in conformance with the code edition under which installed. The owner or his designated agent shall be responsible for the repair of buildings and structures to determine compliance with this subsection, the building official may cause any structure to be inspected.

(6) Dwelling Code. New residential structures shall be subject to the regulations and code requirements set forth in the Oregon 2005 Residential Specialty Code whenever those regulations are applicable. (Ord. 3011 Exh. 1 § 5, 2006)


15.16.060      Walkways and ramps.

(1) Construction. Walkways and ramps may be constructed of any materials allowed by this code.

(2) Design Criteria. Ramps and main walkways shall support a live load of 100 pounds per square foot with a maximum live load deflection of 1/240 of the span. Walkways shall support a live load of 50 pounds per square foot or a concentrated load of 1,000 pounds placed on any space 18 inches square. An example of a typical approved walkway section is shown in Exhibit A at the end of this section.

(a) Main walkways shall be a minimum of 72 inches for the primary pedestrian ingress and egress.

(b) Ramps shall be a minimum of 48 inches in width for exits.

(3) Gangways, Ramps, Walks and Walkways. Minimum two-foot-wide walks shall be provided around all floating homes except those portions of structures where boats will be docked. Walks and walkways shall have a nonslip surface or surface cleats securely fastened in place with a maximum spacing center to center of one foot, six inches. The maximum ramp slope shall be one foot vertical to two feet horizontal.

(4) Guardrails and Handrails. Guardrails and/or handrails shall be provided as per the State Building Code. For the application of the regulations, either land or water shall be deemed to be the adjacent surface.

(5) Illumination. Gangways, ramps, walks and walkways shall be illuminated by lights designed, constructed, and maintained to provide a minimum average of 2.5 foot candle of light per square foot at the walking surface at all times. This section applies to all gangways, ramps, and walkways except those used for recreational boat launching.

(6) Gangways shall have a minimum, unobstructed width of four feet and shall be provided with guardrails and handrails as required by the building code. Intermediate landings shall not be required for gangways. All gangways serving an occupant load less than 10, and gangways serving recreational boat launching and transient tie up facilities, need not be more than four feet in width. 

(7) Walkways shall have a minimum, unobstructed width of six feet, except for finger walkways, which may be three feet in width. Cleats, bull rails, mooring connectors, utility stands and the like may project into the required width of main and marginal walkways. 

(8) A two-foot-wide walk shall be provided on all sides of a floating home. 

Exhibit A


[IMAGE]


(Ord. 3011 Exh. 1 § 6, 2006) 


15.16.070      Moorage exits.

(1) General. When two exit gangways are required. They shall be separated by the maximum distance possible so as to avoid the possibility of fire cutting off exit or access to both exit gangways. Two gangway exits are required whenever any one of the following conditions apply: 

(a) The marginal walkway exceeds 250 feet. 

(b) Total distance from the nearest point of apparatus setup (usually at the head of a gangway) to the most remote portion of the moorage exceeds 800 feet. 

(2) Exception. Moorages used for the moorage of pleasure boats without covers (open moorage configuration) and having not more than two floating homes (for owner and caretaker, for example) need have only one gangway exit. (Ord. 3011 Exh. 1 § 7, 2006)


15.16.080      Moorage identification. 

All moorages shall have identification as follows: 

(1) All moorages shall be identifiable by name and address from the street or road on which they front, at or near the point of emergency vehicle access. 

(2) The head of the gangway providing access to the moorage shall be obviously identifiable from the point of emergency vehicle access.

(3) The location and identification of all floating structures shall be obvious from the head of the gangway, or a sign shall be posted clearly identifying the walkways and structures. 

(4) The walkway and structure identification shall be logical and obvious. 

(5) Moorage identification plans shall be approved by the fire district. (Ord. 3011 Exh. 1 § 8, 2006)


15.16.090      Fire protection standpipe.

(1) The fire protection standpipe system described in this section shall be required at all moorages.

(2) Exception. Installations for moorages used exclusively for loading boats or vessels shall not be required to meet the requirements of this section. 

(3) Moorages having any portion of a floating structure more than 250 feet from the point of fire apparatus set up shall have a dry standpipe system designed and installed in accordance with the fire code, building code, and the following:

(a) Have a water supply that complies with any one of the following:

(i) Municipal water providing 1,000 GPM at 20 psi operating pressure. 

(ii) A fire hydrant within 600 feet from the closest point of fire department access to a moorage site exit ramp. 

(iii) The Columbia River or associated bodies of water with pump or pumps capable of providing 250 GPM at 100 psi to any single outlet on the standpipe system. Pumps are to be powered with natural gas or propane and be listed by Underwriters Laboratory. 

(iv) A permanent dry hydrant system within 500 feet from the closest point of fire district access to a moorage site exit ramp sized to supply 1,000 GPM at draft. Site location approved by the fire district. 

(4) Have a fire district connection located within 150 feet of fire apparatus set up and access maintained at all times as described in 4.12 of this interpretation.

(5) Have pipe sized to provide 250 gallons per minute at 100 psi pressure to any single outlet with a maximum input pressure of 150 psi. 

(6) Have adequate drain valves installed to ensure complete drainage. 

(7) Have gate valve outlets made of noncorroding metal, two-and-one-half-inch I.D. with National Standard Threads spaced a distance apart at follows:

(a) For moorages having marine service stations, floating homes or other type of structures having permanent living quarters, valves are to be every 100 feet and within 50 feet of the end of walkways.

(b) For moorages serving only boathouses, valves are to be every 150 feet and within 75 feet of the end of the walkways. 

(c) For moorages having only open moorage of pleasure boats, standpipes shall only be required along the marginal walkway with valves required only at intersecting main walkways, or not less than every 200 feet and 100 feet from the end of marginal walkways not having intersecting main walkways. 

(8) All fire protection standpipe systems shall be installed with the approval of the fire district as required by this code. 

(9) Standpipe systems shall be tested in accordance with fire-district-approved procedures. An annual service test will be conducted by an approved testing agency to assure the continuity of the system. The fire district shall be notified at least 24 hours in advance of all tests. A record of the results of the test shall be supplied to the fire district. (Ord. 3011 Exh. 1 § 9, 2006)


15.16.100      Portable fire protection equipment.

(1) One fire extinguisher, 2A, 20-B:C rating minimum, shall be provided at each hose station required.

(2) The fire marshal shall designate the type and number of all other fire appliances to be installed and maintained in each marina. (Ord. 3011 Exh. 1 § 10, 2006)


15.16.110      Fire apparatus access road. 

Access to moorages shall be by fire apparatus access roads having all-weather driving surfaces capable of supporting a 75,000-pound load. Such roads shall be a minimum 20 feet wide with not less than 13 feet, six inches overhead clearance. They shall be provided from the nearest public right-of-way to the head of the gangway. Fire apparatus turnarounds shall be required on any fire access road having a dead end exceeding 150 feet. (Ord. 3011 Exh. 1 § 11, 2006)


15.16.120      Additional fire code requirements.

(1) Fixed Fire Extinguishment System. All fixed fire extinguishment systems, such as fire sprinklers, shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 303, 4.4.

(2) Fire Detectors. All fire detectors shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 303, 4.10.

(3) Transmission of Alarms. The means shall be available for immediate notification of the fire district at all times. (Ord. 3011 Exh. 1 § 12, 2006)


15.16.130      Distance between floating structures. 

(1) The separation between one floating home and another existing at the time of the adoption of the 1997 Fire Code is approved.

(2) Floating homes may be relocated within a moorage provided the distance between units is not diminished.

(3) A clear space of at least six feet will be provided between adjacent structures measured from building wall line horizontal to wall line. Roof eave projections shall be no closer than four feet. A variance may be granted, if approved by the fire department under the following criteria:

(a) When the wall-to-wall separation is less than six feet but more than four feet, or the roof-to-roof separation is less than four feet but more than two feet, the structure being moved or added to shall be equipped throughout with a complete automatic sprinkler system installed in compliance with NFPA 13 or all of the following:

(i) All windows in the affected wall or walls shall be one-quarter-inch thick, fixed, wireglass in 16 gauge steel frames, or alternative wood frames if approved by the fire chief. If this requirement negates natural ventilation requirements, a manually activated mechanical ventilation system providing two air changes per hour with 10 percent outside air shall be provided.

(ii) All doors in the affected wall or walls shall be one and three-quarters inches thick, solid core and be self-closing. Door lights shall be limited to 25 percent of the door area and be one-quarter-inch thick, fixed wireglass in 16 gauge steel frames.

(iii) A fire alarm system consisting of 110 volt rate of fire detectors placed on the outside of the exterior wall or walls in question and throughout the building interior shall be provided. All detectors are to be interconnected to an interior and exterior alarm. The number and placement of detectors shall be as determined by the fire marshal. The exterior alarm shall be capable of being heard for a distance of 150 feet.

(b) When the wall-to-wall separation is less than four feet or the roof separation is less than two feet, the structure being moved or added to shall be equipped throughout with a complete automatic sprinkler system in compliance with NFPA Standard 13. (Ord. 3011 Exh. 1 § 13, 2006)


15.16.140      Occupancy separation. 

A covered boatwell, in a floating home, enclosed on more than two sides shall be separated from the habitable space by a wall having five-eighths-inch thick type “X” gypsum board (water resistant or similar material) on the boatwell side. (Ord. 3011 Exh. 1 § 14, 2006)


15.16.150      Flotation.

(1) General. Floating structures shall be constructed and maintained to provide a flotation system that complies with the requirements of this section. The flotation devices shall be structurally sound and securely integrated with the framing for the superstructure. The external surfaces of all flotation devices shall be water resistant and protected from deterioration, or corrosion, and from damage by impact or chafing. The flotation system and decking shall provide access to and protection for the sewage holding tank or sewage pump.

(2) Freeboard. The normal freeboard as measured from the waterline to the top of the lowest point on the floor or deck, including all dead loads but not live loads, shall not be less than 14 inches. The freeboard under full live load plus dead load shall be not less than 25 percent of the freeboard required for dead load alone.

(3) Live Loads. In addition to dead load, the flotation system shall be adequate to support the following minimum live loads:

(a) Sixty-five pounds per square foot applied to the gross area; or

(b) A concentrated load of 1,000 pounds; or

(c) Twenty-five pounds per square foot applied to the gross, exposed plan area, plus 20 pounds per square foot applied to the lowest covered floor areas, plus 10 pounds per square foot on each upper floor or loft; or

(d) Use live loads required by Oregon Structural Specialty Code, Table 1607.1, for nonresidential occupancies. Pedestrian walkways do not have to comply with this subsection.

(e) Walkways serving areas of public assembly – 100 pounds per square foot.

(4) Hull Type Flotation. Watertight hulls, pontoons, floats, or any other compartment flotation system shall be fitted with transverse and/or longitudinal watertight bulkheads sufficient to keep the fully loaded hull afloat with positive stability with any one main compartment flooded.

The hull shall be fitted with at least one longitudinal bulkhead and two transverse bulkheads so that no compartment shall comprise more than 20 percent of the total available flotation volume. For pontoon type flotation, where more than one hull is placed under a single floating structure, the maximum spacing of bulkhead hull shall be eight feet. Longitudinal bulkheading is not required, but no single compartment shall contain more than 20 percent of the total flotation volume.

(5) Stability. The floating structure, when subject to off-center loading of the live loading, shall not exceed the following limitations:

(a) The maximum angle of list shall not exceed four degrees.

(b) The freeboard, when measured from the waterline to the top of the first floor or deck at a point where said freeboard has its least dimension, shall not be less than one-third of the normal freeboard required by Section 7106(b).

(c) The ratio of resisting moment (Mr) to applied moment (Mo or Mw) shall be equal or greater than unit:

	Mr	< = 1.0	or	Mr 	 <= 1.0

	Mo	Mw



Mw is defined in subsection (8) of this section.

Resisting moment due to buoyancy, M shall be computed about a longitudinal axis passing through the center of gravity at a list angle of not more than four degrees.

The off-center loading shall be considered as applicable to the completed structure including all dead loads, and shall consist of a live load of 10 pounds per linear foot (or five pounds per foot of width per linear foot, whichever is greater) at the first floor, and five pounds per lineal foot (or 2.5 pounds per foot of width, per lineal foot, whichever is greater) at each floor, habitable attic or loft, above the first floor. This uniform live load is to be applied halfway between the center of gravity and the outside edge of the deck. The dividing line is the longitudinal axis, and the over turning moment (Mo) resulting from the off-center loading shall be computed from the center of gravity. Stability, with the off-center loading applied, shall be tested on both sides of the longitudinal axis.

The flotation devices shall be constructed so that access to each is readily available from the first floor level of the completed floating structure. When the compartments are not filled with a permanent flotation as plastic foam, a bilge pump shall be on the floating structure.

(6) Log Type Flotation. Logs shall be free of bark and sound. Logs shall be securely framed with transverse stringers to resist flotation and differential movement. The clear distance between logs shall not exceed 22 inches.

(7) Stability. The metacentric height (MG) shall be equal or greater than plus 1.0 foot according to the following expression:
[IMAGE]


	WHERE:

	W5	=	Unit weight of water.

	w 	=	Total weight of floating structure including all dead loads plus a vertical load of 20 pounds per square foot of first floor area, and 10 pounds per square foot of all first floors, habitable attics, or lofts above the first floor.

	Iy	=	Moment of inertia of the area encompassed by the waterline around the hull or flotation when loaded with load “w” and taken about the longitudinal axis.

	L	=	The distance between the center of gravity and the center of buoyancy of the hull of flotation.

(8) Wind Loading. Mw is defined in this subsection to determine and apply the formula in subsection (5) of this section. Wind loading shall be applied to the complete structure, including all dead loads. The moment due to the wind shall be computed as:

	Mw = (P)(A)(H)

	WHERE:

	P	=	Wind pressure in pounds per square foot is as follows:

	 	 	10 PSF for the first 10 feet above the water line;

	 	 	15 PSF for the next 15 feet;

	 	 	20 PSF for the next 20 feet; etc.

	A	=	Area, in square feet, of the total projected elevation of the structure above the waterline. This area shall include permanent appurtenances.

	H	=	Height, in feet, to the center of area (A) above the center of gravity or the flotation.

(Ord. 3011 Exh. 1 § 15, 2006)


15.16.160      Construction.

(1) General. All construction shall comply with the other chapters of this code. The deck and superstructure framing shall be adequate to resist all design loads and forces in accordance with the Oregon Structural Specialty Code, including, but not limited to, Chapter 16. The flotation, deck framing, and superstructure shall be designed by a licensed engineer and constructed to act as an integral unit which is not adversely affected by wave action or point reactions under the flotation.

All framing lumber less than 12 inches above the waterline shall be pressure treated with an approved preservative. All hardware shall be hot-dip galvanized or noncorrosive metal. All plywood shall be exterior type adhesive, all exposed plywood shall be exterior grade, and all plywood below the deck level shall be marine grade.

(2) Roof Coverings (Roofing). Roofing materials on floating structures shall be fire-resistant or noncombustible in accordance with the Oregon Structural Specialty Code, including, but not limited to, Chapter 15. An example of a typical approved roof section is in Exhibit B at the end of this section.

(3) Interior Finishing. Every floating structure shall have interior finishes in accordance with The Oregon Structural Specialty Code, including, but not limited to, Chapter 8. In addition, Group R occupancies shall not have an interior finish that is less than Class III.

(4) Exiting. In addition to the requirements of the Oregon Structural Specialty Code, including, but not limited to, Chapter 10, every floating structure shall have a 24-inch minimum width open deck on all sides except as required by boat wells. Decks shall be so constructed as to prevent the ponding of water.

(5) Utility Connections. All connections for sewage, potable water, electricity, and fuel-gas piping shall be made to the appropriate Oregon Specialty Code. 

Exhibit B-1


[IMAGE]


Exhibit B-2


[IMAGE]


(Ord. 3011 Exh. 1 § 16, 2006)


15.16.170      Additional provisions.

(1) Access. To provide for emergency exit, rescue and fire fighting, every mooring site shall be provided with continuous, unobstructed pedestrian access to a public way. Such access shall have a minimum clear net width of 48 inches for its entire length.

Every mooring site shall abut a waterway providing continuous, unobstructed vessel access to the lake or river proper.

(2) Water Depth. The minimum water depth for any boathouse or houseboat mooring site shall be sufficient for the houseboat to float free at mean low water.

(3) Mooring Devices. Every floating structure shall be moored with devices with capacity to hold the structure in place at all times. All such devices shall have an obvious means of emergency release.

(4) Piling. The moorage walkways, ramps, and floats shall be anchored by piling which is adequate to resist lateral forces produced by any combination of wind current, wave and/or impact. The minimum piling height shall be 30 feet above mean low water.

(5) Sanitation. Every mooring site which is intended for, or which is occupied by, a floating structure containing toilet, bathing, laundry, kitchen, or any other sanitary facilities shall be provided with approved connection for potable water and sewage disposal. (Ord. 3011 Exh. 1 § 17, 2006)


Chapter 15.20 CODE FOR THE ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS

Sections:

15.20.010    Currently adopted edition of the International Existing Building Code.


15.20.010 Currently adopted edition of the International Existing Building Code.

(1) Preface. The provisions of this code were developed to afford jurisdictions reasonable procedures for the classification and abatement of dangerous buildings. 

This code is designed to be compatible with the International Existing Building Code. While the housing code is applicable only to residential buildings, the International Existing Building Code is designed to apply to all types of buildings and structures. The notices, orders and appeals procedures specified have been found to be workable and are referenced by the Uniform Building Code.

If properly followed, the provisions of this code will provide the building official with the proper legal steps in abating dilapidated, defective buildings which endanger life, health, property and public safety within concepts of fair play and justice.

(2) Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings.

Chapter 1

TITLE AND SCOPE

SECTION 101 — TITLE

These regulations shall be known as the Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as “this code.”

SECTION 102 — PURPOSE AND SCOPE

102.1 Purpose. It is the purpose of this code to provide a just, equitable and practicable method, to be cumulative with and in addition to any other remedy provided by the Building Code, Housing Code or otherwise available by law, whereby buildings or structures which from any cause endanger the life, limb, health, morals, property, safety or welfare of the general public or their occupants may be required to be repaired, vacated or demolished.

The purpose of this code is not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited by the terms of this code.

102.2 Scope. The provisions of this code shall apply to all dangerous buildings, as herein defined, which are now in existence or which may hereafter become dangerous in this jurisdiction.

SECTION 103 — ALTERATIONS, ADDITIONS AND REPAIRS

All buildings or structures which are required to be repaired under the provisions of this code shall be subject to the provisions of the currently adopted edition of the International Existing Building Code.

Chapter 2

ENFORCEMENT

SECTION 201 — GENERAL

201.1 Administration. The building official is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this code.

The building official shall have the power to render interpretations of this code and to adopt and enforce rules and supplemental regulations in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, rules and regulations shall be in conformity with the intent and purpose of this code.

201.2 Inspections. The health officer, the fire marshal and the building official are hereby authorized to make such inspections and take such actions as may be required to enforce the provisions of this code.

201.3 Right of Entry. When it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this code, or when the building official or the building official’s authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a building or upon a premises a condition which is contrary to or in violation of this code which makes the building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official may enter the building or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this code, provided that if such building or premises be occupied that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such building or premises be unoccupied, the building official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry.

“Authorized representative” shall include the officers named in Section 201.2 and their authorized inspection personnel.

SECTION 202 — ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS

All buildings or portions thereof which are determined after inspection by the building official to be dangerous as defined in this code are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal in accordance with the procedure specified in Section 401 of this code.

SECTION 203 — VIOLATIONS

It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this code.

SECTION 204 — INSPECTION OF WORK

All buildings or structures within the scope of this code and all construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official in accordance with and in the manner provided by this code and Sections 110 and 1701 of the currently adopted edition of the Oregon Structural Specialty Code and Section R109 of the currently adopted edition of the Oregon Residential Specialty Code.

SECTION 205 — BOARD OF APPEALS

205.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretations of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals consisting of members who are qualified by experience and training to pass upon matters pertaining to building construction and who are not employees of the jurisdiction. The building official shall be an ex officio member and shall act as secretary to said board but shall have no vote upon any matter before the board. The board of appeals shall be appointed by the governing body and shall hold office at its pleasure. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant, with a duplicate copy to the building official. Appeals to the board shall be processed in accordance with the provisions contained in Section 501 of this code. Copies of all rules or regulations adopted by the board shall be delivered to the building official, who shall make them freely accessible to the public.

205.2 Limitations of Authority. The board of appeals shall have no authority relative to interpretation of the administrative provisions of this code nor shall the board be empowered to waive requirements of this code.

Chapter 3

DEFINITIONS

SECTION 301 — GENERAL

For the purpose of this code, certain terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall be construed as specified in either this chapter or as specified in the Building Code or the Housing Code. Where terms are not defined, they shall have their ordinary accepted meanings within the context with which they are used. Webster’s Third New International Dictionary of the English Language, Unabridged, copyright 1986, shall be construed as providing ordinary accepted meanings. Words used in the singular include the plural and the plural the singular. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and the feminine the masculine.

BUILDING CODE is the currently adopted edition of the International Existing Building Code, as adopted by this jurisdiction.

DANGEROUS BUILDING is any building or structure deemed to be dangerous under the provisions of Section 302 of this code.

HOUSING CODE is the currently adopted edition of the International Existing Building Code, as adopted by this jurisdiction.

SECTION 302 — DANGEROUS BUILDING

For the purpose of this code any building or structure which has any or all of the conditions or defects hereinafter described shall be deemed to be a dangerous building, provided that such conditions or defects exist to the extent that the life, health, property or safety of the public or its occupants are endangered.

1. Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is not of sufficient width or size or is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic.

2. Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, stairway or other means of exit is so warped, worn, loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic.

3. Whenever the stress in any materials, member or portion thereof, due to all dead and live loads, is more than one and one half times the working stress or stresses allowed in the Building Code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location.

4. Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood or by any other cause, to such an extent that the structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was before such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of the Building Code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location.

5. Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof likely to fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and hereby injure persons or damage property.

6. Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one half of that specified in the Building Code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location without exceeding the work stresses permitted in the Building Code for such buildings.

7. Whenever any portion thereof has wracked, warped, buckled or settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of similar new construction.

8. Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof, because of (i) dilapidation, deterioration or decay; (ii) faulty construction; (iii) the removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building; (iv) the deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation; or (v) any other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse.

9. Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used.

10. Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one third of the base.

11. Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the foundation, shows 33 percent or more damage or deterioration of its supporting member or members, or 50 percent damage or deterioration of its nonsupporting members, enclosing or outside walls or coverings.

12. Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become (i) an attractive nuisance to children; (ii) a harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons; or as to (iii) enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing unlawful or immoral acts.

13. Whenever any building or structure has been constructed, exists or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to such building or structure provided by the building regulations of this jurisdiction, as specified in the Building Code or Housing Code, or of any law or ordinance of this state or jurisdiction relating to the condition, location or structure of buildings.

14. Whenever any building or structure which, whether or not erected in accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances, has in any nonsupporting part, member or portion less than 50 percent, or in any supporting part, member or portion less than 66 percent of the (i) strength, (ii) fire-resisting qualities or characteristics, or (iii) weather-resisting qualities or characteristics required by law in the case of a newly constructed building of like area, height and occupancy in the same location.

15. Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or sanitation facilities, or otherwise, is determined by the health officer to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease.

16. Whenever any building or structure, because of obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire resistant construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections or heating apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the fire marshal to be a fire hazard.

17. Whenever any building or structure is in such a condition as to constitute a public nuisance known to common law or in equity jurisprudence.

18. Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six months so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public.

Chapter 4

NOTICES AND ORDERS OF BUILDING OFFICIAL

SECTION 401 — GENERAL

401.1 Commencement of Proceedings. When the building official has inspected or caused to be inspected any building and has found and determined that such building is dangerous building, the building official shall commence proceedings to cause the repair, vacation or demolition of the building.

401.2 Notice and Order. The building official shall issue a notice and order directed to the record owner of the building. The notice and order shall contain:

1. The street address and a legal description sufficient for identification of the premises upon which the building is located.

2. A statement that the building official has found the building to be dangerous with a brief and concise description of the conditions found to render the building dangerous under the provisions of Section 302 of this code.

3. A statement of the action required to be taken as determined by the building official.

3.1 If the building official has determined that the building or structure must be repaired, the order shall require that all required permits be secured therefor and the work physically commenced within such time (not to exceed 60 days from the date of the order) and completed within such time as the building official shall determine is reasonable under all of the circumstances.

3.2 If the building official has determined that the building or structure must be vacated, the order shall require that the building or structure shall be vacated within a time certain from the date of the order as determined by the building official to be reasonable.

3.3 If the building official has determined that the building or structure must be demolished, the order shall require that the building be vacated within such time as the building official shall determine is reasonable (not to exceed 60 days from the date of the order); that all required permits be secured therefor within 60 days from the date of the order; and that the demolition be completed within such time as the building official shall determine is reasonable.

4. Statements advising that if any required repair or demolition work (without vacation also being required) is not commenced within the time specified, the building official (i) will order the building vacated and posted to prevent further occupancy until the work is completed, and (ii) may proceed to cause the work to be done and charge the costs thereof against the property or its owner.

5. Statements advising (i) that any person having any record title or legal interest in the building may appeal from the notice and order or any action of the building official to the board of appeals, provided the appeal is made in writing as provided in this code and filed with the building official within 30 days from the date of service of such notice and order; and (ii) that failure to appeal will constitute a waiver of all right to an administrative hearing and determination of the matter.

401.3 Service of Notice and Order. The notice and order, and any amended or supplemental notice and order, shall be served upon the record owner and posted on the property; and one copy thereof shall be served on each of the following if known to the building official or disclosed from official public records: the holder of any mortgage or deed of trust or other lien or encumbrance of record; the owner or holder of any lease of record; and the holder of any other estate or legal interest of record in or to the building or the land on which it is located. The failure of the building official to serve any person required herein to be served shall not invalidate any proceedings hereunder as to any other person duly served or relieve any such person from any duty or obligation imposed by the provisions of this section.

401.4 Method of Service. Service of the notice and order shall be made upon all persons entitled thereto either personally or by mailing a copy of such notice and order by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to each such person at their address as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll of the county or as known to the building official. If no address of any such person so appears or is known to the building official, then a copy of the notice and order shall be so mailed, addressed to such person, at the address of the building involved in the proceedings. The failure of any such person to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this section. Service by certified mail in the manner herein provided shall be effective on the date of mailing.

401.5 Proof of Service. Proof of service of the notice and order shall be certified to at the time of service by a written declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the persons effecting service, declaring the time, date and manner in which service was made. The declaration, together with any receipt card returned in acknowledgment of receipt by certified mail shall be affixed to the copy of the notice and order retained by the building official.

SECTION 402 — RECORDATION OF NOTICE AND ORDER

If compliance is not had with the order within the time specified therein, and no appeal has been properly and timely filed, the building official shall file in the office of the county recorder a certificate describing the property and certifying (i) that the building is a dangerous building and (ii) that the owner has been so notified. Whenever the corrections ordered shall thereafter have been completed or the building demolished so that it no longer exists as a dangerous building on the property described in the certificate, the building official shall file a new certificate with the county recorder certifying that the building has been demolished or all required corrections have been made so that the building is no longer dangerous, whichever is appropriate.

SECTION 403 — REPAIR, VACATION AND DEMOLITION

The following standards shall be followed by the building official (and by the board of appeals if an appeal is taken) in ordering the repair, vacation or demolition or any dangerous building or structure:

1. Any building declared a dangerous building under this code shall be made to comply with one of the following:

1.1 The building shall be repaired in accordance with the current building code or other current code applicable to the type of substandard conditions requiring repair; or

1.2 The building shall be demolished at the option of the building owner; or

1.3 If the building does not constitute an immediate danger to the life, limb, property or safety of the public it may be vacated, secured and maintained against entry.

2. If the building or structure is in such condition as to make it immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property or safety of the public or its occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated.

SECTION 404 — NOTICE TO VACATE

404.1 Posting. Every notice to vacate shall, in addition to being served as provided in Section 401.3, be posted at or upon each exit of the building and shall be in substantially the following form:

DO NOT ENTER

UNSAFE TO OCCUPY

It is a misdemeanor to occupy this building, or to remove or deface this notice.

Building Official

……of……

404.2 Compliance. Whenever such notice is posted, the building official shall include a notification thereof in the notice and order issued under Section 401.2, reciting the emergency and specifying the conditions which necessitate the posting. No person shall remain or enter any building which has been so posted, except that entry may be made to repair, demolish, or remove such building under permit. No person shall remove or deface any such notice after it is posted until the required repairs, demolition or removal have been completed and a certificate of occupancy issued pursuant to the provisions of the Building Code.

Chapter 5

APPEAL

501.1 Form of Appeal. Any person entitled to service under Section 401.3 may appeal from any notice and order or any action of the building official under this code by filing at the office of the building official a written appeal containing:

1. A heading in the words: “Before the board of appeals of the ……. of ……..”

2. A caption reading: “Appeal of …..,” giving the names of all appellants participating in the appeal.

3. A brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each of the appellants in the building or the land involved in the notice and order.

4. A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the specific order or action protested, together with any material facts claimed to support the contentions of the appellant.

5. A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the relief sought and the reasons why it is claimed the protested order or action should be reversed, modified or otherwise set aside.

6. The signatures of all parties named as appellants and their official mailing addresses.

7. The verification (by declaration under penalty of perjury) of at least one appellant as to the truth of the matters stated in the appeal.

The appeal shall be filed within 30 days from the date of the service of such order or action of the building official; provided, however, that if the building or structure is in such condition as to make it immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property or safety of the public or adjacent property and is ordered vacated and is posted in accordance with Section 404, such appeal shall be filed within 10 days from the date of the service of the notice and order of the building official.

501.2 Processing of Appeal. Upon receipt of any appeal filed pursuant to this section, the building official shall present it at the next regular or special meeting of the board of appeals.

501.3 Scheduling and Noticing Appeal for Hearing. As soon as practicable after receiving the written appeal, the board of appeals shall fix a date, time and place for the hearing of the appeal by the board. Such date shall not be less than 10 days nor more than 60 days from the date the appeal was filed with the building official. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing to each appellant by the secretary of the board either by causing a copy of such notice to be delivered to the appellant personally or by mailing a copy thereof, postage prepaid, addressed to the appellant at the address shown on the appeal.

SECTION 502 — EFFECT OF FAILURE TO APPEAL

Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with the provisions of Section 501 shall constitute a waiver of the right to an administrative hearing and adjudication of the notice and order or any portion thereof.

SECTION 503 — SCOPE OF HEARING ON APPEAL

Only those matters or issues specifically raised by the appellant shall be considered in the hearing of the appeal.

SECTION 504 — STAYING OF ORDER UNDER APPEAL

Except for vacation orders made pursuant to Section 404, enforcement of any notice and order of the building official issued under this code shall be stayed during the pendency of an appeal therefrom which is properly and timely filed.

Chapter 6

PROCEDURES FOR CONDUCT OF HEARING APPEALS

SECTION 601 — GENERAL

601.1 Hearing Examiners. The board may appoint one or more hearing examiners or designate one or more of its members to serve as hearing examiners to conduct the hearings. The examiner hearing the case shall exercise all powers relating to the conduct of hearings until it is submitted to the board for decision.

601.2 Record. A record of the entire proceedings shall be made by tape recording or by any other means of permanent recording determined to be appropriate by the board.

601.3 Reporting. The proceedings at the hearing shall also be reported by a phonographic reporter if requested by any party thereto. A transcript of the proceedings shall be made available to all parties upon request and upon payment of the fee prescribed therefor. Such fees may be established by the board, but shall in no event be greater than the cost involved.

601.4 Continuances. The board may grant continuances for good cause shown; however, when a hearing examiner has been assigned to such hearing, no continuances may be granted except by the examiner for good cause shown so long as the matter remains before the examiner.

601.5 Oaths – Certification. In any proceedings under this chapter, the board, any board member, or the hearing examiner has the power to administer oaths and affirmations and to certify to official acts.

601.6 Reasonable Dispatch. The board and its representatives shall proceed with reasonable dispatch to conclude any matter before it. Due regard shall be shown for the convenience and necessity of any parties or their representatives.

SECTION 602 — FORM OF NOTICE OF HEARING

The notice to appellant shall be substantially in the following form, but may include other information:

“You are hereby notified that a hearing will be held before (the board of appeals or name of hearing examiner) at……on the …… day of ……, 2……, at the hour ……, upon the notice and order served upon you. You may be present at the hearing. You may be, but need not be, represented by counsel. You may present any relevant evidence and will be given full opportunity to cross-examine all witnesses testifying against you. You may request the issuance of subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, documents or other things by filing an affidavit therefor with (board of appeals or name of hearing examiner).”

SECTION 603 — SUBPOENAS 

603.1 Filing of Affidavit. The board or examiner may obtain the issuance and service of a subpoena for the attendance of witnesses or the production of other evidence at a hearing upon the request of a member of the board or upon the written demand of any party. The issuance and service of such subpoena shall be obtained upon the filing of an affidavit therefor which states the name and address of the proposed witness; specifies the exact things sought to be produced and the materiality thereof in detail to the issues involved; and states that the witness has the desired things in possession or under control. A subpoena need not be issued when the affidavit is defective in any particular.

603.2 Cases Referred to Examiner. In cases where a hearing is referred to an examiner, all subpoenas shall be obtained through the examiner.

603.3 Penalties. Any person who refuses without lawful excuse to attend any hearing or to produce material evidence which the person possesses or controls as required by any subpoena served upon such person as provided for herein shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

SECTION 604 — CONDUCT OF HEARING

604.1 Rules. Hearings need not be conducted according to the technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses.

604.2 Oral Evidence. Oral evidence shall be taken only on oath or affirmation.

604.3 Hearsay Evidence. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any direct evidence, but shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in this state.

604.4 Admissibility of Evidence. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the type of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in this state.

604.5 Exclusion of Evidence. Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded.

604.6 Rights of Parties. Each party shall have these rights, among others:

1. To call and examine witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing;

2. To introduce documentary and physical evidence;

3. To cross-examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing;

4. To impeach any witness regardless of which party first called the witness to testify; 

5. To rebut the evidence; and

6. To be represented by anyone who is lawfully permitted to do so.

604.7 Official Notice.

604.7.1 What may be noticed. In reaching a decision, official notice may be taken, either before or after submission of the case for decision, of any fact which may be judicially noticed by the courts of this state or of official records of the board or departments and ordinances of the city or rules and regulations of the board.

604.7.2 Parties to be notified. Parties present at the hearing informed of the matters to be noticed, and these matters noted in the record, referred to therein, or appended thereto.

Chapter 7

ENFORCEMENT OF THE ORDER OF THE BUILDING OFFICIAL OR THE BOARD OF APPEALS

SECTION 701 — COMPLIANCE

701.1 General. After any order of the building official or the board of appeals made pursuant to this code shall have become final, no person to whom any such order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey any such order. Any such person who fails to comply with any such order is guilty of a misdemeanor.

701.2 Failure to Obey Order. If, after any order of the building official or board of appeals made pursuant to this code has become final, the person to whom such order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey such order, the building official may (i) cause such person to be prosecuted under Section 701.1 or (ii) institute any appropriate action to abate such building as a public nuisance.

701.3 Failure to Commence Work. Whenever the required repair or demolition is not commenced within 30 days after any final notice and order issued under this code becomes effective:

1. The building official shall cause the building described in such notice and order to be vacated by posting at each entrance thereto a notice reading:

DANGEROUS BUILDING

DO NOT OCCUPY

It is a misdemeanor to occupy this building, or to remove or deface this notice.

Building Official

……of……

2. No person shall occupy any building which has been posted as specified in this section. No person shall remove or deface any such notice so posted until the repairs, demolition or removal ordered by the building official have been completed and a certificate of occupancy issued pursuant to the provisions of the Building Code.

3. The building official may, in addition to any other remedy herein provided, cause the building to be repaired to the extent necessary to correct the conditions which render the building dangerous as set forth in the notice and order; or, if the notice and order required demolition, to cause the building to be sold and demolished or demolished and the materials, rubble and debris therefrom removed and the lot cleaned. Any such repair or demolition work shall be accomplished and the cost thereof paid and recovered in the manner hereinafter provided in this code. Any surplus realized from the sale of any such building, or from the demolition thereof, over and above the cost of demolition and of cleaning the lot, shall be paid over to the person or persons lawfully entitled thereto.

SECTION 702 — EXTENSION OF TIME TO PERFORM WORK

Upon receipt of an application from the person required to conform to the order and by agreement of such person to comply with the order if allowed additional time, the building official may grant an extension of time, not to exceed an additional 120 days, within which to complete said repair, rehabilitation or demolition, if the building official determines that such an extension of time will not create or perpetuate a situation imminently dangerous to life or property. The building official’s authority to extend time is limited to the physical repair, rehabilitation or demolition of the premises and will not in any way affect the time to appeal the notice and order.

SECTION 703 — INTERFERENCE WITH REPAIR OR DEMOLITION WORK PROHIBITED

No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of this jurisdiction or with any person who owns or holds any estate or interest in any building which has been ordered repaired, vacated or demolished under the provisions of this code; or with any person to whom such building has been lawfully sold pursuant to the provisions of this code, whenever such officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of this jurisdiction, person having an interest or estate in such building or structure, or purchaser is engaged in the work of repairing, vacating and repairing, or demolishing any such building, pursuant to the provisions of this code, or in performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work or authorized or directed pursuant to this code.

Chapter 8

PERFORMANCE OF WORK OF REPAIR OR DEMOLITION

SECTION 801 — GENERAL

801.1 Procedure. When any work of repair or demolition is to be done pursuant to Section 701.3, Item 3, of this code, the building official shall, issue an order therefor to the director of public works and the work shall be accomplished by personnel of this jurisdiction or by private contract under the direction of said director. Plans and specifications therefor may be prepared by said director, or the director may employ such architectural and engineering assistance on a contract basis as deemed reasonably necessary. If any part of the work is to be accomplished by private contract, standard public works contractual procedures shall be followed.

801.2 Costs. The cost of such work shall be paid from the repair and demolition fund, and may be made a special assessment against the property involved, or may be made a personal obligation of the property owner, whichever the legislative body of this jurisdiction shall determine is appropriate.

SECTION 802 — REPAIR AND DEMOLITION FUND

802.1 General. The legislative body of this jurisdiction shall establish a special revolving fund to be designated as the repair and demolition fund. Payments shall be made out of said fund upon the demand of the director of public works to defray the costs and expenses which may be incurred by this jurisdiction in doing or causing to be done the necessary work of repair or demolition of dangerous buildings.

802.2 Maintenance of Fund. The legislative body may at any time transfer to the repair and demolition fund, out of any money in the general fund of this jurisdiction, such sums as it may deem necessary in order to expedite the performance of the work of repair or demolition, and any sum so transferred shall be deemed a loan to the repair and demolition fund and shall be repaid out of the proceeds of the collections hereinafter provided for. All funds collected under the proceedings hereinafter provided for shall be paid to the treasurer of this jurisdiction who shall credit the same to the repair and demolition fund.

Chapter 9

RECOVERY OF COST OF REPAIR OR DEMOLITION

SECTION 901 — ACCOUNT OF EXPENSE, FILING OF REPORT

The director of public works shall keep an itemized account of the expense incurred by this jurisdiction in the repair or demolition of any building done pursuant to the provisions of Section 701.3, Item 3, of this code. Upon the completion of the work of repair or demolition, said director shall prepare and file with the clerk of this jurisdiction a report specifying the work done, the itemized and total cost of the work, a description of the real property upon which the building or structure is or was located, and the names and addresses of the persons entitled to notice pursuant to Section 401.3.

SECTION 902 — NOTICE OF HEARING

Upon receipt of said report, the clerk of this jurisdiction shall present it to the legislative body of this jurisdiction for consideration. The legislative body of this jurisdiction shall fix a time, date and place for hearing said report and any protests or objections thereto. The clerk of this jurisdiction shall cause notice of said hearing to be posted upon the property involved, published once in a newspaper of general circulation in this jurisdiction, and served by certified mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the owner of the property as the owner’s name and address appears on the last equalized assessment roll of the county, if such so appears, or as known to the clerk. Such notice shall be given at least 10 days prior to the date set for the hearing and shall specify the day, hour and place when the legislative body will hear and pass upon the director’s report, together with any objections or protests which may be filed as hereinafter provided by any person interested in or affected by the proposed charge.

SECTION 903 — PROTESTS AND OBJECTIONS

Any person interested in or affected by the proposed charge may file written protests or objections with the clerk of this jurisdiction at any time prior to the time set for the hearing on the report of the director. Each such protest or objection must contain a description of the property in which the signer thereof is interested and the grounds of such protest or objection. The clerk of this jurisdiction shall endorse on every such protest or objection the date of receipt. The clerk shall present such protests or objections to the legislative body of this jurisdiction at the time set for the hearing, and no other protests or objections shall be considered.

SECTION 904 — HEARING OF PROTESTS

Upon the day and hour fixed for the hearing, the legislative body of this jurisdiction shall hear and pass upon the report of the director together with any such objections or protests. The legislative body may make such revision, correction or modification in the report or the charge as it may deem just; and when the legislative body is satisfied with the correctness of the charge, the report (as submitted or as revised, corrected or modified) together with the charge, shall be confirmed or rejected. The decision of the legislative body of this jurisdiction on the report and the charge, and on all protests or objections, shall be final and conclusive.

SECTION 905 — PERSONAL OBLIGATION OR SPECIAL ASSESSMENT

905.1 General. The legislative body of this jurisdiction may thereupon order that said charge shall be made a personal obligation of the property owner or assess said charge against the property involved.

905.2 Personal Obligation. If the legislative body of this jurisdiction orders that the charge shall be a personal obligation of the property owner, it shall direct the attorney for this jurisdiction to collect the same on behalf of this jurisdiction by use of all appropriate legal remedies.

905.3 Special Assessment. If the legislative body of this jurisdiction orders that the charge shall be assessed against the property, it shall confirm the assessment, cause the same to be recorded on the assessment roll, and thereafter said assessment shall constitute a special assessment against and a lien upon the property.

SECTION 906 — CONTEST

The validity of any assessment made under the provisions of this chapter shall not be contested in any action or proceeding unless the same is commenced within 30 days after the assessment is placed upon the assessment roll as provided herein. Any appeal from a final judgment in such action or proceeding must be perfected within 30 days after the entry of such judgment.

SECTION 907 — AUTHORITY FOR INSTALLMENT PAYMENT OF ASSESSMENTS WITH INTEREST

The legislative body of this jurisdiction, in its discretion, may determine that assessments in amounts of $500.00 or more shall be payable in not to exceed five equal annual installments. The legislative body’s determination to allow payment of such assessments in installments, the number of installments, whether they shall bear interest, and the rate thereof shall be by a resolution adopted prior to the confirmation of the assessment.

SECTION 908 — LIEN OF ASSESSMENT

908.1 Priority. Immediately upon its being placed on the assessment roll, the assessment shall be deemed to be complete, the several amounts assessed shall be payable, and the assessments shall be liens against the lots or parcels of land assessed, respectively. The lien shall be subordinate to all existing special assessment liens previously imposed upon the same property and shall be paramount to all other liens except for state, county and property taxes with which it shall be upon a parity. The lien shall continue until the assessment and all interest due and payable thereon are paid.

908.2 Interest. All such assessments remaining unpaid after 30 days from the date of recording on the assessment roll shall become delinquent and shall bear interest at the rate of 7 percent per annum from and after said date.

SECTION 909 — REPORT TO ASSESSOR AND TAX COLLECTOR: ADDITION OF ASSESSMENT TO TAX BILL

After confirmation of the report, certified copies of the assessment shall be given to the assessor and the tax collector for this jurisdiction, who shall add the amount of the assessment to the next regular tax bill levied against the parcel for municipal purposes.

SECTION 910 — FILING COPY OF REPORT WITH COUNTY AUDITOR

If the county assessor and the county tax collector assess property and collect taxes for this jurisdiction, a certified copy of the assessment shall be filed with the county auditor on or before August 10th. The descriptions of the parcels reported shall be those used for the same parcels on the county assessor’s map books for the current year.

SECTION 911 — COLLECTION OF ASSESSMENT PENALTIES FOR FORECLOSURE

The amount of the assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary property taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary property taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of property taxes shall be applicable to such assessment.

If the legislative body of this jurisdiction has determined that the assessment shall be paid in installments, each installment and any interest thereon shall be collected in the same manner as ordinary property taxes in successive years. If any installment is delinquent, the amount thereof is subject to the same penalties and procedure for sale as provided for ordinary property taxes.

SECTION 912 — REPAYMENT OF REPAIR AND DEMOLITION FUND

All money recovered by payment of the charge or assessment or from the sale of the property at foreclosure sale shall be paid to the treasurer of this jurisdiction, who shall credit the same to the repair and demolition fund.

(Ord. 3218 § 8, 2017; Ord. 3011 Exh. 2, 2006)


Title 16 (Reserved)


Title 17 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CODE

Chapters:

17.04    Introductory Provisions

17.08    Amendments to the Code and Zone District Maps

17.12    Enforcement

17.16    General and Land Use Definitions

17.20    Procedures for Decision-Making – Legislative

17.24    Procedures for Decision-Making – Quasi-Judicial

17.28    Annexation

17.32    Zones and Uses

17.36    Historic Sites and Overlay District

17.40    Protective Measures for Significant Wetlands, Riparian Corridors, and Protection Zones

17.44    Sensitive Lands

17.46    Floodplains and Floodways

17.48    Solar Access Requirements

17.52    Environmental Performance Standards

17.56    Density Computations

17.60    Manufactured/Mobile Home Regulations

17.64    Additional Yard Setback Requirements and Exceptions

17.68    Building Height Limitations – Exceptions

17.72    Landscaping and Screening

17.76    Visual Clearance Areas

17.80    Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements

17.84    Access, Egress, and Circulation

17.88    Signs

17.92    Mixed Solid Waste and Recyclables Storage in New Multi-Unit Residential and Nonresidential Buildings

17.96    Site Development Review

17.100    Conditional Use

17.104    Nonconforming Situations

17.108    Variance

17.112    Established Area – Developing Area Classification

17.116    Temporary Uses

17.120    Home Occupations

17.124    Accessory Structures

17.128    Auxiliary Dwelling Units

17.132    Tree Removal

17.136    Land Division – Subdivision

17.140    Land Division – Land Partitioning – Lot Line Adjustment

17.144    Expedited Land Divisions

17.148    Planned Development

17.152    Street and Utility Improvement Standards

17.156    Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA)


Chapter 17.04 INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS

Sections:

17.04.010    Title.

17.04.020    Purposes.

17.04.030    Severability.

17.04.040    Compliance and scope.

17.04.050    Consistency with the plan and laws.

17.04.060    Use of a development.

17.04.070    Preexisting approvals.

17.04.080    Certificate of occupancy/compliance.

17.04.090    Official action.


17.04.010 Title.

The ordinance codified in this title and SHMC Title 18, Ordinance No. 2875, shall be known as the Community Development Code and may be so cited and pleaded, and shall be referred to herein as this code. (Ord. 2875 § 1.010.010, 2003)


17.04.020 Purposes.

As a means of promoting the general health, safety, and welfare of the public, this code is designed to set forth the standards and procedures governing the development and use of land in the city of St. Helens and to implement the St. Helens comprehensive plan. To these ends, it is the purpose of this code:

(1) To encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the city and to arrange the uses which are made of land so that they:

(a) Are orderly, convenient, and suitably related to each other;

(b) Are suitably related to the characteristics of the natural environment;

(c) Fulfill the needs of the people served; and

(d) Maximize the conservation of energy.

(2) To guide and manage growth and minimize its possible adverse impacts.

(3) To allot sufficient lands for urban development to meet future needs.

(4) To promote a coordinated development of unbuilt areas.

(5) To create and maintain residential living areas which are safe, convenient, and attractive and which make a positive contribution to the quality of life and personal satisfaction of residents.

(6) To establish commercial areas which provide maximum service to the public and are properly integrated into the physical pattern of the communities.

(7) To establish industrial areas which are suitable for their purpose, properly located, and adequate for future needs.

(8) To locate public and semipublic developments so that they encourage a pattern of land development that benefits the whole community.

(9) To develop buffer areas between incompatible uses of land and require appropriate screening around unsightly structures or activities.

(10) To protect open spaces for future generations.

(11) To protect life and property from natural disasters and hazards.

(12) To promote the adequate provision of public services and facilities.

(13) To promote and encourage a safe and convenient transportation system.

(14) To stimulate and diversify the economy.

(15) To promote housing that meets the basic needs of local residents.

(16) To preserve our natural and manmade resources.

(17) To promote a quality of life that reflects the wants of the citizenry.

(18) To conserve energy and use renewable energy resources. (Ord. 2875 § 1.010.020, 2003)


17.04.030 Severability.

The provisions of this code are severable. If any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this code is adjudged to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, that decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. (Ord. 2875 § 1.010.030, 2003)


17.04.040 Compliance and scope.

(1) Except as otherwise specifically provided by this code, no building or other structure shall be constructed, improved, altered, enlarged, or moved, nor shall any use or occupancy of premises within the city be commenced or changed, nor shall any condition of or upon real property be caused or maintained after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this code, except in conformity with conditions prescribed for each of the several zones and general regulations established hereunder (also see SHMC 17.12.010).

(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, establish, occupy, alter, enlarge, or use, or cause to be used, any building, structure, improvement, or use of premises located in any zone described in this code contrary to the provisions of this code. Where this code imposes greater restrictions than those imposed or required by other rules or regulations or code provisions, the provisions of this code shall control.

(3) No lot area, yard, other open space or off-street parking or loading area existing on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this code shall be reduced below the minimum required for it by this code. No fee conveyance of any portion of a lot, for other than a public use, shall leave a structure on the remainder of the lot with less than the minimum requirements of this code.

(4) No lot area, yard, or other open space or off-street parking or loading area which is required by this code for one use shall be a required lot area, yard, or other open space or off-street parking or loading area for another use, except as provided in Chapter 17.80 SHMC. (Ord. 2875 § 1.010.040, 2003)


17.04.050 Consistency with the plan and laws.

Each development and use application and other procedures initiated under this code shall be consistent with the adopted comprehensive plan that the city of St. Helens has implemented by this code and with applicable state and federal laws and regulations. All provisions of this code shall be construed in conformity with the adopted comprehensive plan. (Ord. 2875 § 1.010.050, 2003)


17.04.060 Use of a development.

A development shall be used only for a lawful use. A lawful use of a development is one that is not prohibited by law and for which the development is designed, arranged, and intended, or which is a continuing nonconforming use. (Ord. 2875 § 1.010.060, 2003)


17.04.070 Preexisting approvals.

(1) Planned developments, including the approved density, subdivisions, projects requiring site design review approval, or other development applications for which approvals were granted prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this code, may occur pursuant to such approvals. 

(2) All development proposals received by the director after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this code shall be subject to review for conformance with the standards under this code or as otherwise provided by state law. (Ord. 2875 § 1.010.070, 2003)


17.04.080 Certificate of occupancy/compliance.

(1) In order to ensure completion of the work in the manner and at the time approved, the structure or use shall not be used or occupied for the purposes set forth in the building permit application until the city has issued a certificate of occupancy/compliance following completion of the work and substantial conformance to the permit.

(2) Prior to the final completion of all work, a certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion of the structure conditioned upon further work being completed by a certain date. (Ord. 2875 § 1.010.080, 2003)


17.04.090 Official action.

(1) All officials, departments, and employees of the city vested with authority to issue permits or grant approvals shall adhere to and require conformance with this code, and shall issue no permit or grant approval for any development or use which violates or fails to comply with conditions or standards imposed to carry out this code.

(2) Any permit or approval issued or granted in conflict with the provisions of this code shall be void. (Ord. 2875 § 1.010.090, 2003)


Chapter 17.08 AMENDMENTS TO THE CODE AND ZONE DISTRICT MAPS

Sections:

17.08.010    Purpose.

17.08.020    Legislative amendments.

17.08.030    Quasi-judicial amendments and procedures.

17.08.040    Quasi-judicial amendments and standards.

17.08.050    Conditions of approval.

17.08.060    Transportation planning rule compliance.


17.08.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to set forth the standards and purpose governing legislative and quasi-judicial amendments to this code and the zoning district map. Amendments may be necessary from time to time to reflect changing community conditions, needs and desires, to correct mistakes or to address changes in the law. (Ord. 2875 § 1.020.010, 2003)


17.08.020 Legislative amendments.

Legislative amendments to this code and to the zoning map shall be in accordance with the procedures and standards as set forth in Chapter 17.20 SHMC. (Ord. 2875 § 1.020.020, 2003)


17.08.030 Quasi-judicial amendments and procedures.

Quasi-judicial amendments to this code and to the zoning map shall be in accordance with the procedures set forth in this code and the following:

(1) The planning commission shall make recommendations to the city council on zone change applications which do not involve comprehensive plan amendments as provided by Chapter 17.24 SHMC;

(2) The planning commission or historic landmark commission, as applicable, shall make a recommendation to the council on an application for a comprehensive plan amendment; and 

(3) The planning commission shall make a recommendation to the council on a zone change application which also involves a concurrent application for a comprehensive plan map amendment. (Ord. 3084 § 2, 2008; Ord. 2875 § 1.020.030, 2003)


17.08.040 Quasi-judicial amendments and standards.

(1) Quasi-Judicial Amendments and Standards for Making Decisions.

(a) A recommendation or a decision to approve, approve with conditions, or to deny an application for a quasi-judicial amendment shall be based on all of the following standards:

(i) The applicable comprehensive plan policies and map designation; and that the change will not adversely affect the health, safety, and welfare of the community;

(ii) The applicable Oregon Statewide Planning Goals adopted under ORS Chapter 197, until acknowledgment of the comprehensive plan and ordinances;

(iii) The standards applicable of any provision of this code or other applicable implementing ordinance; and

(iv) A proposed change to the St. Helens zoning district map that constitutes a spot zoning is prohibited. A proposed change to the St. Helens comprehensive plan map that facilitates a spot zoning is prohibited.

(b) Consideration may also be given to:

(i) Any applicable evidence of change in the neighborhood or community or a mistake or inconsistency in the comprehensive plan or zoning map as it relates to the property which is the subject of the development application. (Ord. 3215 § 4 (Att. D), 2017; Ord. 2875 § 1.020.040, 2003)


17.08.050 Conditions of approval.

(1) A quasi-judicial decision may be for denial, approval, or approval with conditions as provided by SHMC 17.24.250.

(2) A legislative decision may be approved, approved with modifications, or not approved. (Ord. 2875 § 1.020.050, 2003)


17.08.060 Transportation planning rule compliance.

(1) Review of Applications for Effect on Transportation Facilities. A proposed comprehensive plan amendment, zone change or land use regulation change, whether initiated by the city or by a private interest, shall be reviewed to determine whether it significantly affects a transportation facility, in accordance with OAR 660-012-0060 (the Transportation Planning Rule (“TPR”)). “Significant” means the proposal would:

(a) Change the functional classification of an existing or planned transportation facility (exclusive of correction of map errors in an adopted plan);

(b) Change standards implementing a functional classification system; or

(c) As measured at the end of the planning period identified in the adopted transportation system plan:

(i) Allow land uses or levels of development that would result in types or levels of travel or access that are inconsistent with the functional classification of an existing or planned transportation facility;

(ii) Reduce the performance of an existing or planned transportation facility below the minimum acceptable performance standard identified in the TSP; or

(iii) Worsen the performance of an existing or planned transportation facility that is otherwise projected to perform below the minimum acceptable performance standard identified in the TSP or comprehensive plan.

(2) Amendments That Affect Transportation Facilities. Comprehensive plan amendments, zone changes or land use regulations that significantly affect a transportation facility shall ensure that allowed land uses are consistent with the function, capacity, and level of service of the facility identified in the TSP. This shall be accomplished by one or a combination of the following:

(a) Adopting measures that demonstrate allowed land uses are consistent with the planned function, capacity, and performance standards of the transportation facility.

(b) Amending the TSP or comprehensive plan to provide transportation facilities, improvements or services adequate to support the proposed land uses consistent with the requirements of OAR 660-012-0060.

(c) Altering land use designations, densities, or design requirements to reduce demand for vehicle travel and meet travel needs through other modes of transportation.

(d) Amending the TSP to modify the planned function, capacity or performance standards of the transportation facility.

(3) Traffic Impact Analysis. A traffic impact analysis shall be submitted with a plan amendment or zone change application, as applicable, pursuant to Chapter 17.156 SHMC. (Ord. 3150 § 3 (Att. B), 2011)


Chapter 17.12 ENFORCEMENT

Sections:

17.12.010    Provisions of this code declared to be minimum requirements.

17.12.020    Violation of this code prohibited.

17.12.030    Penalty.

17.12.040    Complaints regarding violations.

17.12.050    Inspection and right of entry.

17.12.060    Abatement of violations.


17.12.010 Provisions of this code declared to be minimum requirements.

In the interpretation and application, the provisions of this code shall be held to be the minimum requirements, adopted for the protection of the public health, safety, and general welfare. Whenever the requirements of this code are at variance with other provisions of this code, or with the requirements of any other adopted city rules, regulations, or ordinances, the most restrictive, or that imposing the higher standard, shall govern. (Ord. 2875 § 1.030.010, 2003)


17.12.020 Violation of this code prohibited.

No person shall erect, construct, alter, maintain or use any building or structure or shall use, divide or transfer any land in violation of this code or any amendment thereto. No public right-of-way shall be used for any use without the consent or approval of the city council. (Ord. 2875 § 1.030.020, 2003)


17.12.030 Penalty.

A violation of this code or development contrary to any permit approval, or approval conditions arising out of this code, shall carry penalties as follows:

(1) Class I violation: any person intentionally or knowingly violating any provision of this code shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor which carries a maximum fine of $1,250 and/or 30 days in jail, or the maximum per state law, whichever is greater.

(2) Class II violation: any person violating any provision of this code shall be guilty of a Class A violation which carries a maximum fine of $720.00, or the maximum per state law, whichever is greater.

(3) A violation of any provision of this code shall be considered a separate offense for each day the violation continues.

(4) A finding of a violation of this code shall not relieve the responsible party of the duty to abate the violation. The penalties imposed by this section are in addition to and not in lieu of any remedies available to the city.

(5) The above are not intended to violate state and federal laws. (Ord. 3144 § 2 (Att. A), 2011; Ord. 2875 § 1.030.030, 2003)


17.12.040 Complaints regarding violations.

Whenever a violation of this code occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a signed, written complaint. Such complaints, stating fully the causes and bases thereof, shall be filed with the planning director or designee. The planning director shall record properly such complaints, investigate and take action thereon as provided by this code. (Ord. 2875 § 1.030.040, 2003)


17.12.050 Inspection and right of entry.

Whenever the planning director has reasonable cause to suspect a violation of any provision of this chapter exists; or when necessary to investigate an application for, or revocation of, any approval under any of the procedures described in this code, the planning director may enter on any site or into any structure for the purposes of investigation; provided, that no premises shall be entered without first attempting to obtain the consent of the owner or person in control of the premises, if other than the owner. If consent cannot be obtained, the planning director shall secure a search warrant from the city’s municipal court before further attempts to gain entry, and shall have recourse to every other remedy provided by law to secure entry. (Ord. 2875 § 1.030.050, 2003)


17.12.060 Abatement of violations.

(1) Any development or use which occurs contrary to the provisions of this code, or contrary to any permit or approval issued or granted under this code, is unlawful and may be abated by appropriate proceedings. 

(2) Violations of this Community Development Code may be prosecuted pursuant to general code enforcement procedures for ordinance violations as provided in the general ordinances of the city of St. Helens, Oregon (St. Helens Municipal Code). (Ord. 2875 § 1.030.060, 2003)


Chapter 17.16 GENERAL AND LAND USE DEFINITIONS

Sections:

17.16.010    General and land use definitions.


17.16.010 General and land use definitions.

Words used in this Development Code have their normal dictionary meaning unless they are listed below. Words listed below have the specific meaning stated, unless the context clearly indicates another meaning.

The definition of words with specific meaning in the Development Code are as follows:

“Abandonment” means the relinquishment of property, or a cessation of the use of the property, by the owner with the intention neither of transferring rights to the property to another owner nor of resuming the use of the property.

“Abut/abutting” means adjacent/adjoining or contiguous; to physically touch or border upon; or to share a common property line.

“Accept” means to receive as complete and in compliance with all submittal requirements.

“Access” means a way or means of approach to provide physical entrance to a property.

“Accessory building” means a detached subordinate building, the use of which is clearly incidental to that of the main building or to the main use of the land and which is located on the same tract with the building or use.

Accessory Dwelling Unit. See “auxiliary or accessory dwelling unit.”

“Accessory structure” means a structure of secondary importance or function on a site. In general, the primary use of the site is not carried on in an accessory structure. Accessory structures may be attached or detached from the primary structure.

“Accessory use” means a use or activity which is a subordinate part of a primary use and which is clearly incidental to a primary use on a site.

“Addition” means a modification to an existing building or structure which increases the site coverage.

“Administrative action” means a quasi-judicial action, including: (a) an action conducted pursuant to a portion of the St. Helens Community Development Code in which the legal rights, duties, or privileges of specific parties are determined, and any appeal or review therefrom; (b) a comprehensive plan map change for a small tract of land; or (c) any other proceedings as provided by ordinance, rule, or resolution adopted by the council. 

“Administrator” means the city administrator of St. Helens, Oregon, or a duly authorized representative.

Adult Entertainment. See SHMC 17.100.150.

“Adult foster home” means any private or public institution maintained and operated for the care, boarding, housing or training of five or fewer physically, mentally or socially handicapped or delinquent, elderly or dependent persons by any person who is not the parent or guardian of, and who is not related by blood, marriage or legal adoption to, such persons and excluding foster care of children; same use as “dwelling unit.” See “residential home.”

“Advance financing district” means a financing district established by the St. Helens city council to reimburse the developer by future and intervening property in accordance with St. Helens Ordinance 2642.

“Agricultural building” means a structure located on a farm and used in the operation of such farm for the storage, maintenance or repair of farm machinery and equipment or for the raising, harvesting and selling of crops or in the feeding, breeding management and sale of, or the produce of, livestock, poultry, fur-bearing animals or honeybees, or for dairying and sale of dairy products or any other agricultural or horticultural use, or animal husbandry or any combination thereof, including the preparation and storage of products raised on such farm for man’s use and animal use and disposal by marketing or otherwise.

“Agricultural sales” means sale of feed, grain, fertilizers, pesticides, and similar goods. Typical uses include nurseries, hay, feed, and grain stores.

“Agricultural services” means establishments or places of business engaged in the provision of agriculturally related services with incidental storage on lots other than where the service is rendered. Typical uses include tree and lawn service firms.

Agriculture. See “farm use,” “forest use.”

“Aisle” means the traveled way by which vehicles enter and depart parking spaces.

“Alteration” means a change in construction or a change of or in occupancy classification. When the term is applied to a change in construction, it is intended to apply to any change, addition, or modification in construction. When the term is used in connection with a change of occupancy, it is intended to apply to changes of or in occupancy from one trade or use to another or from one division of trade or use to another. Applied to land it means grading in excess of 10 cubic yards of land or removal of live, healthy trees in excess of six inches in diameter at four feet high.

“Amendment” means a change in the wording, context, or substance of this code or the comprehensive plan, or a change in the boundaries of a district upon the zoning district map or the boundaries of a designation on the comprehensive plan map.

“Amusement services” means establishments engaged in providing amusement or entertainment for a fee or admission charge and including such activities as dance halls; studios; bands, orchestras, and other musical entertainment; bowling alleys and billiard and pool establishments; commercial sports such as arenas, rings, racetracks, public golf courses and coin-operated games; amusement parks; amusement and bathing beaches; riding academies; carnival operations; expositions; game parlors and horse shows.

“Animal hospital” means a place where animals or pets are given medical or surgical treatment and the boarding of animals is limited to short-term care incidental to the hospital use. See “animal sales and services, veterinary.”

“Animal kennel” means any structure or premises in which animals are kept, boarded, bred or trained for commercial gain. See “animal sales and services.”

“Animal sales and services” means establishments or places of business primarily engaged in animal-related sales and services. The following are animal sales and services use types:

“Animal sales and services, grooming” means grooming of dogs, cats, and similar small animals. Typical uses include dog bathing and clipping salons or pet grooming shops.

“Animal sales and services, kennels” means kennel services for dogs, cats, and similar small animals. Typical uses for a business venture include boarding kennels or dog training centers.

“Animal sales and services, retail” means pet stores that include both live animals for sale and related retail items.

“Animal sales and services, veterinary (large animals)” means veterinary services for large animals. Typical uses include animal hospitals for large animals (horses, sheep) or veterinary hospitals for large animals. Small animals may be included as well.

“Animal sales and services, veterinary (small animals)” means veterinary services for small animals. Typical uses include pet clinics, dog and cat hospitals, or animal hospitals for small animals.

“Annexation” means the incorporation of a land area into St. Helens with a resulting change in the boundaries.

Apartment Unit. See “dwelling: multidwelling unit, apartment (multifamily).”



“Applicant” means a person submitting an application for development.

“Application” means materials submitted as required by this code.

“Approval authority” means the agency, board, group or other legally designated individual or authority, such as director, planning commission, or city council, which has been charged with review and approval of plans and applications.

Arcade. See “amusement services.”

“Archaeological site” means land or water areas which show evidence or artifacts of human, plant, or animal activity, usually dating from periods of which only vestiges remain.

Assisted Living. See “congregate housing.”

“Attached housing” means two or more primary buildings placed side by side, so that some structural parts are touching one another, located on a lot or portion thereof.

“Auto wrecker yard” means any property where two or more motor vehicles are not in running condition, or the parts thereof, are stored in the open and are not being restored to operation; or any land, building or structure used for the wrecking or storing of such motor vehicles or the parts thereof. See “junkyard.”

“Automobile service station” means any building, land area or other premises, or portions thereof, used or intended to be used for the retail dispensing or sales of vehicular fuels; and including as an accessory use the sale and installation of lubricants, tires, batteries and similar accessories (also “service station” or “gasoline station”).

Auxiliary or Accessory Dwelling Unit. See “dwelling, auxiliary or accessory” and Chapter 17.128 SHMC.

“Awning” means a roof-like cover that is temporary in nature and that projects from a wall of a building for the purpose of shielding a doorway or window from the elements.

“Balcony” means a projection from a house not touching the ground.

“Bar” means a structure or part of a structure used primarily for the sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages by the drink. (In developing zoning regulations to regulate bars, a distinction is often made between bars that have live entertainment and those that do not. Those with live entertainment require considerably more parking and additional setbacks because of noise. Many bars also possess licenses which permit them to sell bottled goods. This is usually accessory to the principal use of dispensing liquor by the drink.)

“Base flood” means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Also referred to as the “100-year flood.”

“Base flood elevation” means the highest elevation, expressed in feet above sea level, of the level of floodwaters occurring in the regulatory base flood.

“Basement” means a space having one-half or more of its floor-to-ceiling height below the average level of the adjoining ground with a floor-to-ceiling height of not less than six feet, six inches.

Bed and Breakfast. See “homestay.”

“Bike path” means a way designed for and improved with a hard surface, and signed for use by bicycle traffic.

“Boarding home or house” means a building or premises within which the owner or the owner’s agent resides full-time, where meals and lodging are offered for compensation for not more than three persons. See “lodging facilities.”

“Boat dock” means a structure built along the shore of a river, lake, canal, or navigable stream for use by boats for moorage and loading and unloading passengers and materials.

“Boathouse” means any structure supported wholly or partially by flotation, used wholly or partially to houseboat(s).

“Broadcasting facility” means a facility in which radio frequency signals are transmitted and/or received for establishments primarily engaged in the provision of broadcasting and other information relay services accomplished through the use of electronic and telephonic mechanisms. Typical uses include television studio, telecommunication service center, telegraph service office, or Internet service center.

“Buildable lot” means a lot which meets the area and dimensional requirements of the underlying zone and is not constricted by hazards or significant resources protection. (See OAR 660-04-000.)

“Building” means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended to shelter, house, or enclose any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods, or materials of any kind or nature. An element of time is also included in this definition.

“Building envelope” means that portion of a lot or development site exclusive of the areas required for front, side, and rear yards and other required open spaces and which is available for siting and constructing a building or buildings.

“Building height” means the vertical distance of a building measured from the average elevation of the finished grade within 20 feet of the structure to the highest point of the roof.

“Building line” means a line that coincides with the front side of the main building, exclusive of eaves. Porches, but not steps, and any other attached appurtenances (things attached to the house) shall be included as part of the main building.

“Building maintenance services” means the provision of maintenance and custodial services. Typical uses include janitorial, landscape maintenance, or window cleaning services.

“Building official” means an individual designated by the appointing authority to enforce the provisions of the building code.

“Building supplies” means those products sold in retail and wholesale for use in construction industry or repair/remodel of homes.

“Business equipment sales and services” means establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the sale, rental or repair of equipment and supplies used by office, professional, and service establishments to the firms themselves rather than to individuals, but excludes automotive, construction, and farm equipment. Typical uses include office equipment and supply firms, small business machine repair shops, or hotel equipment and supply firms.

“Business support services” means establishments primarily engaged in the provision of service of a clerical, employment, protective, or minor processing nature to firms rather than individuals and where the storage of goods other than samples is prohibited. Typical uses include secretarial services, telephone answering services, or blueprint services.

“Campground” means a plot of ground upon which two or more campsites are located, established or maintained for occupancy by camping units of the general public as temporary living quarters for recreation, education or vacation purposes. 

Car Wash. See “motor vehicle cleaning.”

“Carport” means a roofed structure providing space for the parking or storage of motor vehicles and enclosed on not more than three sides.

“Carry-out restaurant” means an establishment which by design of physical facilities or by service or packaging procedures permits or encourages the purchase of prepared ready-to-eat foods intended primarily to be consumed off the premises, and where the consumption of food in motor vehicles on the premises is not permitted or not encouraged. 

“Cemetery” means land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including columbaria, crematories, mausoleums and mortuaries.

“Certificate of compliance” means a certificate issued by the city for use of land, not including buildings.

“Certificate of occupancy” means a required permit allowing occupancy of a building or structure after it has been determined that the building meets all the requirements of applicable ordinances.

“Child care facility” means a commercial establishment enrolling children under the age of 13 years and where tuition, fees, or other forms of compensation for the care of the children is charged, and which is licensed or approved to operate as a child care center (also “day care,” “children’s center,” “day nursery”).

“Church (religious institution)” means a building constructed or utilized primarily for worship, and buildings where persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which is controlled by a religious body organized to sustain worship (also “religious assembly”).

“Clear vision area” means an area which consists of a triangular area, two sides of which are lot lines measured from the corner intersection of the access point lot lines, for a distance specified in this code.

“Clinic” means an establishment where patients are admitted for examination and treatment by one or more physicians, dentists, psychologists or social workers and where patients are not usually lodged overnight.

“Club facility” means a building or structure in which a group of people organizes for a common purpose to pursue common goals, interests or activities and usually characterized by certain membership qualifications, payment of fees and dues, and holds regular meetings (e.g., lodges, social clubs, veterans organizations, etc.).

“Commission” shall mean the city of St. Helens planning commission.

“Community building” means a building operated by the public or a nonprofit group, neighborhood, or association for public assembly and similar uses. Examples of a community building are a senior center or arts center.

“Community recreation facility” means a facility for a local neighborhood (e.g., swimming pool) not associated with a park.

“Compatibility” means efficient and orderly integration of housing types in an harmonious combination. 

“Complex” means a building or group of buildings developed on one lot of record or adjacent lots of record under one ownership.

“Conditional use” means a use permitted in a particular zoning district only upon showing that such use in a specified location will comply with all the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such use as specified in a zoning ordinance and authorized by the planning board.

“Condominium” means a building, or group of buildings, in which units are owned individually, and the structure, common area, and facilities are owned by all the owners on a proportional, undivided basis. (By definition, a condominium has common areas and facilities and there is an association of owners organized for the purpose of maintaining, administering, and operating the common areas and facilities. It is a legal form of ownership of real estate and not a specific building style. The purchaser has title to his or her interior space in the building and an undivided interest in parts of the interior, the exterior, and other common elements. The property is identified in a master deed and recorded on a plat with the local jurisdiction. The common elements usually include the land underneath and surrounding the building, certain improvements on the land, and such items as plumbing, wiring, and major utility systems, the interior areas between walls, the public interior spaces, exterior walls, streets and recreational facilities.) See “dwelling: multidwelling unit, apartment (multifamily).”

“Condominium unit” means a part of land which has had all buildings, improvements, structures, easements, rights, and appurtenances submitted to the provisions of ORS 100.005 to 100.627 and 100.990 consisting of a building or one or more rooms of a building intended for any type of independent ownership, the boundaries of which are described pursuant to ORS 100.105(1)(d), and with a direct exit to a public street, highway, or common area leading to a public street or highway.

Congregate Care Facility. See “congregate housing” and “continuing care retirement community.”

“Congregate housing” means a structure containing two or more dwelling units or living units providing shelter and services for the elderly which may include meals, housekeeping, and personal care assistance. Congregate housing provides a residential environment for the elderly who may be functionally impaired or socially isolated, but otherwise in good health. The residents can maintain a semi-independent lifestyle and do not require more intensive care as provided in an intensive care facility such as a nursing home (also “boarding home for sheltered care” or “group residential”).

“Conservation easement” means an easement normally precluding future or additional development of the land.

“Construction sales and services” means establishments or places of business primarily engaged in construction activities and incidental storage on lots other than construction sites as well as the retail or wholesale sale, from the premises, of materials used in the construction of buildings or other structures.

Container. As opposed to “building,” it is a structure intended to contain, enclose or hold item(s) but generally not permanently placed.

“Contiguous” means next to, abutting, or touching and having a boundary, or portion thereof, which is coterminous. (Notwithstanding this definition, for purposes of annexation, this term shall have the meaning set forth in ORS Chapter 222 and case law interpreting same.)

“Continuing care retirement community (CCRC)” means multiple types of senior living within single or multiple buildings or structures within a campus-like environment managed by a provider that agrees to furnish continuing care to a resident under a residency agreement or other type of service agreement. As established in the provisions of ORS 101.020. The continuing care retirement community includes independent, congregate care, assisted living, residential care, Alzheimer’s/dementia and skilled nursing care.

“Council” means the city council of St. Helens, Oregon.

“Court” means any open space, unobstructed from ground to sky, other than a yard, that is on the same lot with and bounded on two or more sides by the walls of a building.

“Cul-de-sac” means the turnaround at the end of a dead-end street (includes hammerhead and dead-end road ends).

“De novo” means that the proceeding will be held anew, without deference to any prior record or rulings.

“Deck” means a nonenclosed platform (excluding above-grade entry walkways) constructed on the ground (as per the applicable building code as administered by the building official) and attached to the main building.

“Dedication” means the act of permanently devoting (i.e., offer acceptance) a portion of private land to a public purpose such as road right-of-way or a public park.

“Density” means the number of countable units (e.g., families, individuals, dwelling units, or housing structures) per unit of land area.

“Detached housing, building” means the opposite of “attached housing.”

“Developing area” means an area which is included in the city’s buildable land inventory under the provisions of OAR 660-04-000.

“Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, land clearing, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations, but not including maintenance such as grass mowing or planting, vegetation control, removal of noxious plants or nonnative vegetation, tree thinning for fire control or diseases, and removal of dangerous trees or materials.

“Development site” means a lot or combination of lots upon which development is proposed or exists.

“Director” means the planning director of St. Helens, Oregon, or authorized agent.

“Disability” means a physical or mental impairment, including blindness, hearing impairment, mobility impairment, HIV infection, mental retardation, alcoholism, drug addiction, chronic fatigue, learning disability, head injury, and mental illness, that substantially limits one or more of a person’s major life activities, such as seeing, walking, hearing, breathing, performing manual tasks, caring for one’s self, learning, speaking or working.

“Division of land” means the process of dividing a tract, lot, or parcel into two or more lots or parcels by subdividing or partitioning.

“Drainageway” means undeveloped land inundated during a 25-year storm with a peak flow of at least five cubic feet per second and conveyed, at least in part, by identifiable channels that either drain to the Columbia River directly or after flowing through other drainageways, channels, creeks, or floodplain.

“Drive-through restaurant” means an eating and drinking establishment organized so that motorists may order and pick up orders without the necessity of leaving the vehicle.

“Drive-up” means any establishment which by design, physical facilities, service, or by packaging procedures encourages or permits customers to receive services or obtain goods while remaining in their motor vehicles. Drive-up uses shall not include automobile service stations.

“Driveway” means a private roadway providing access for vehicles to a parking space, garage, dwelling, or other structure on a property.

“Drop box, trailer, or structure of similar function” means a drop-box, truck trailer or structure of similar function intended for the collection of such things as newspaper, household goods, clothes, cardboard, and other items. 

Duplex. See “dwelling: duplex or two units (two-family).”

“Dwelling, attached: single unit” means two to five dwelling units in a single row with common walls and separate lots (also “row house”).

“Dwelling, auxiliary or accessory” means an interior dwelling unit or attached or detached residential dwelling unit structure that is used in connection with, or that is accessory to, a detached single-family dwelling unit (principal dwelling) and is located on the same lot or parcel as the principal dwelling. Auxiliary dwelling units are subject to Chapter 17.128 SHMC.

“Dwelling, detached: single unit (one-family)” means one dwelling unit, freestanding and structurally separated from other dwelling units or buildings, located on a lot. 

“Dwelling: duplex or two units (two-family)” means two dwelling units placed so that some structural parts are in common and are located on a single lot or development site. No more than two units may be joined by common wall.

“Dwelling: multidwelling unit, apartment (multifamily)” means a structure containing at least three dwelling units in any vertical or horizontal arrangement located on a single lot (e.g., town-house, triplex, apartments and condominiums).

“Dwelling unit” means one or more rooms designed for occupancy by one or more persons for living purposes providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation.

“Easement” means a grant of one or more of the property rights by the property owner to and/or for use by the public, a corporation, or another person or entity.

“Eating and drinking establishment” means establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the sale of prepared food and beverages for on-premises consumption. See “restaurant.”

“Effective date of decision” means the date the final decision is made. In the case of land use decisions or limited land use decisions see SHMC 17.24.300. For legislative decisions see SHMC 17.20.150 and 17.20.155. Ministerial decisions are final at the time they are made.

“Egress” means an exit.

Elderly. See “seniors.”

“Elderly or convalescent care facility” means a living facility, licensed by the state of Oregon, that provides specialized care (such as meals, housekeeping and personal care assistance), supervision, treatment or training, or a combination of these services, for the elderly or for persons requiring daily nursing or medical care or supervision. This definition includes, but is not limited to, congregate housing, continuing care retirement community, extended care facility, long-term care facility, and nursing or convalescent homes, but does not include residential facility.

Entertainment, Adult. See SHMC 17.100.150.

“Equipment (heavy) sales and rental” means sale, retail or wholesale, and/or rental from the premises of heavy construction equipment and trucks together with incidental maintenance.

“Equipment (light) sales and rental” means sale, retail or wholesale, and/or rental from the premises of autos, noncommercial trucks, motorcycles, motor homes, and trailers with less than a 10,000-pound gross cargo weight together with incidental maintenance.

“Equipment (small) sales, rental and repair” means sale, retail or wholesale, and/or rental from the premises of trailers, lawn equipment, house maintenance and repair equipment, etc.

“Erect” means the act of placing or affixing a component of a structure upon the ground or upon another such component.

“Established area” means an area where land is not classified as buildable under OAR 660-07-000, etc.; see Chapter 17.112 SHMC.

“Excavation” means the removal, placement, or replacement of earth or manmade materials as necessary to facilitate development of buildings and/or infrastructure, not including natural mineral resources development.

When a property or a portion of it is predominately composed of rock, removal of more rock than the minimum necessary to facilitate development shall be considered “mining and/or quarrying.”

“Extended care facility” means a long-term care facility or a distinct part of a facility licensed or approved as a nursing home, infirmary unit of a home for the aged or a governmental medical institution. See “long-term care facility” and “nursing or convalescent home.”

“Family” means one or more individuals occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single household unit.

Family Day Care Facility. See “home child care.”

“Farm use” means the current employment of the land for the primary purpose of obtaining a profit in money by raising, harvesting, and selling crops, or by the feeding, breeding, management, and sale of, or the produce of, livestock, poultry, fur-bearing animals or honeybees, or for dairying and the sale of dairy products, or any other agricultural or horticultural use or animal husbandry, or any combination thereof and includes the preparation and storage of products raised on such land for human use and disposal by marketing or otherwise.

“Fence” means an artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination of materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land.

“Fill” means placement of 11 or more cubic yards of any soil, sand, gravel, clay, mud, debris, and refuse, or any other material, organic or inorganic.

“Final action” means a determination reduced to writing, signed, and filed by the appropriate approval authority (also “final order,” “findings of fact” and “conclusions of law”).

“Findings” means a written statement of the facts determined to be relevant by the approval authority as the basis for making its decision. The approval authority applies the relevant facts to the approval criteria or standards in order to reach its decision.

“Flag lot” means a lot located behind a frontage lot, plus a strip out to the street for an access drive. A flag lot results from the subdivision or partitioning of a lot or parcel which is not less than twice as large as the minimum allowed in the underlying zone, but without sufficient frontage to allow two dwellings to front along a street. There are two distinct parts to a flag lot: the flag which comprises the actual building site located at the rear portion of the original lot, and the pole which provides access from a street to the flag. See figure below.


[IMAGE]


“Fleet storage” includes vehicles parked more than 24 hours at any one time and in an exclusive area for employee or business vehicles on property and in an area designated for parking by this code.

“Flood fringe area” means the area of the floodplain lying outside of the floodway.

“Floodplain” means land adjacent to a watercourse that is covered with water during periods of flooding; normally defined as an area of land inundated by a flood having a one percent chance of occurring in any year.

“Floodway” means the normal stream or drainage channel and that adjoining area of the natural floodplain needed to convey the waters, and including the no-rise floodway area defined by the most current U.S. Corps of Engineers Flood Insurance Study. Floodways must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation. 

“Floor area” means the gross horizontal area, under roof, of all floors of a building, measured from the exterior walls, excluding vents, shafts, courts, and space devoted to off-street parking. The floor area of a building, or portion thereof, not provided with surrounding exterior walls shall be the usable area under the horizontal projection of the roof or floor above.

“Floor area ratio” means the gross floor area of all buildings on a lot divided by the net buildable (or development) lot area. See SHMC 17.56.020(1).

“Forest use” means the production of trees and the processing of forest products within a forest boundary.

“Freight terminal” means an area and/or building where cargo is transferred and where trucks load and unload cargo on a regular basis.

Front Lot Line. See “lot line – front.”

Front Yard. See “yard – front.”

“Frontage” means the property line fronting on one side of a street between intersecting or intercepting streets or between a street and a right-of-way, waterway, and/or dead-end street, measured along the street line. An intercepting street shall determine only the boundary of the frontage on the side of the street which it intercepts.

“Funeral home” means a building used for the preparation of the deceased for burial or cremation and the display of the deceased and ceremonies connected therewith before burial or cremation.

“Garage, private” means a covered structure designed to provide shelter for vehicles, and which is accessory to a use in these structure types: houses, attached houses, duplexes, mobile homes, or houseboats. Carports are considered garages. Covered floor area adjacent to the space designed to provide shelter for vehicles, if not entirely separated from the garage area by floor-to-ceiling walls, is considered part of the garage. A garage may be attached to or detached from another structure. Floor area is that area supported or under cover only (also “structured parking”).

“Garage, public” means a publicly or privately owned structure having one or more stories, used for the parking of motor vehicles, and open for use by the general public, either free or for remuneration.

“Garage, repair” means any building, premises and land in which or upon which a business, service or industry involving the maintenance, servicing, repair or painting of vehicles is conducted or rendered.

“Grade” means the degree of rise or descent of a sloping surface.

“Grade – natural” means the elevation of the ground surface in its natural state before manmade alterations.

“Grading” means any stripping, gutting, filling, stockpiling of earth or land, including the land in its cut or filled condition.

Handicap. See “disability.”

“Hazardous (household) waste depot” means a depot intended to receive, classify, then transfer elsewhere hazardous wastes that are typically found in a household such as paint, motor oil, household cleaners and solvents, etc.

“Hazardous materials” are those materials as defined in OAR 340-142-0005(9).

“Hazardous waste storage or processing site” means ultimate storage or processing of hazardous materials.

“Home child care” means any care provider who provides care to children under the age of 13 years in the home of the provider to fewer than 13 children, including children of the provider, regardless of full-time or part-time status (also “family day care”).

“Home, convalescent” means a home, place or institution which operates and maintains facilities providing convalescent or chronic care, or both, for a period exceeding 24 hours for two or more ill or infirm patients not related to the nursing home administrator or owner by blood or marriage. Convalescent and chronic care may include, but need not be limited to, the procedures commonly employed in nursing and caring for the sick. See “nursing or convalescent home.”



“Home occupation” means any activity carried out for gain by a resident, conducted as an incidental use in the resident’s dwelling unit.

“Homeowners association” means an incorporated, nonprofit organization operating under recorded land agreements through which each lot owner of a planned development or other described land area is automatically subject to a charge for a proportionate share of the expenses for the organization’s activities, such as maintaining a common property.

“Homestay” means overnight accommodation in a private home with one or two rooms providing a morning meal to paying guests. Homestays are only allowed in the primary residence. 

“Hospital” means an institution providing primary health services and medical or surgical care to persons, primarily inpatients, suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity and other abnormal physical or mental conditions, and including, as an integral part of the institution, related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient facilities or training facilities.

“Hotel” means a building or group of buildings used for transient residential purposes containing rental units which are designed to be used, or which are used, rented or hired out for sleeping purposes. The facility could provide additional services such as restaurants, meeting rooms, and recreation facilities (also “inn,” “motel”).

Houseboat. See floating structures ordinance, part of St. Helens building code (Chapter 15.16 SHMC). (“Floating home”: house on floats, like a boat.)

“Household” means as defined by the I.R.S. or the Census Bureau.

“Impervious surface” means any hard surface or manmade material which reduces and prevents absorption of storm water into previously undeveloped land.

“Implementing ordinance” means an ordinance adopted to carry out the comprehensive plan.

“Improvement” means any manmade, immovable item which becomes part of, placed upon, or is affixed to real estate.

“Incomplete application” means an application that does not address each element required by the form and the Development Code and/or is not accompanied by the fee.

“Industrial park” means a tract of land that has been planned, developed and operated as an integrated facility for several individual uses, with special attention to circulation, parking, utility needs, aesthetics, and compatibility.

“Infill” means development of vacant land which is substantially surrounded by other developed properties.

“Intermediate care facility” means a facility which provides, on a regular basis, health-related care and services to individuals who do not require the degree of care and treatment which a hospital or skilled nursing facility is designated to provide, but who, because of their mental or physical condition, require care and services (above the level of room and board) which can be made available to them only through institutional facilities such as these. See “long-term care facility” and “nursing or convalescent home.”

“Irregular lot” means a lot in which the front and rear lot lines are not parallel.

“Junk” means any scrap, waste, reclaimable materials or debris, whether or not stored or used in conjunction with dismantling, processing, salvage, storage, baling, disposal, or other use or disposition.

“Junkyard” means the use of the area of any tract of land for the dismantling or “wrecking” of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery or for the storage or keeping of the parts or equipment resulting from such dismantling or “wrecking” or for the storage or keeping of junk including scrap metals or other scrap material.

“Laboratory” means a facility equipped to conduct scientific experiments or tests or to manufacture chemicals, medicines, or the like.

“Land use decision” means a final decision or determination made by the approval authority that concerns the adoption, amendment, or application of: (a) the statewide planning goals, (b) a comprehensive plan provision, (c) a land use regulation, or (d) a new land use regulation. See ORS 197.015 for more definition.

“Laundry services” means establishments primarily engaged in the provision of laundering, dry cleaning, or dyeing services other than those classified as “personal services.” Typical uses include commercial laundry agencies, diaper services, or linen supply services, but excluding laundromats and dry cleaners where listed.

“Legislative” means any proposed action which would result in a change in city policy including: (a) a change to the comprehensive plan text; (b) a change to the comprehensive plan map which involves a number of parcels of land; (c) a change to the text of an implementing ordinance; (d) a change to the zoning map which involves a number of parcels of land; and/or (e) a change to any land use plan or map which represents a change in city land use policy.

“Limited land use decision” means a final decision or determination made by a local government pertaining to a site within an urban growth boundary and concerns: (a) approval or denial of subdivision or partition; and/or (b) approval or denial of an application based upon discretionary standards designed to regulate the physical characteristics of a use permitted outright.

“Living unit” means, in assisted living facilities, residential facilities, and congregate care facilities, a room, apartment, cottage, or other area set aside for the use of a resident or residents.

“Loading space” means an off-street space or berth on the same lot, or parcel, with a building or use, or contiguous to a group of buildings or uses, for the temporary parking of a vehicle which is loading or unloading persons, merchandise, or materials, and which space or berth abuts upon a street, alley, or other appropriate means of access and egress.

“Local improvement district” means a geographic area created by the local government to which some improvement is proposed and those benefitting are responsible for it.

“Lodging facilities” means a building or premises within which the owner or the owner’s agent resides full-time, where meals and lodging are offered for compensation for three or more persons but not more than nine persons. See “boarding home or house.”

“Long-term care facility” means an institution or a distinct part of an institution which is licensed or approved to provide health care under medical supervision for 24 or more consecutive hours to two or more patients who are not related to the governing authority or its members by marriage, blood or adoption. See “extended care facility,” “intermediate care facility” and “nursing or convalescent home.”

“Lot” means a single unit of land that is created by a subdivision of land.

“Lot, corner” means a lot or parcel of land abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection, or upon two parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than 135 degrees.


[IMAGE]


“Lot depth” means the horizontal distance from the midpoint of the front lot line to the midpoint of the rear lot line, except for flag lots.

Lot, Flag. See “flag lot.”

“Lot line” means the property line bounding a lot.

“Lot line – front” means, in the case of an interior lot, a line separating the lot from the street, and in the case of a corner lot, a line separating the narrowest frontage of the lot from the street (except for flag lot).

“Lot line – rear” means the side that parallels the front of the lot/parcel, or in the case of an irregular lot/parcel, the rear shall be determined by drawing a line 10 feet in length parallel to the front property line between two side lines.

“Lot line – side” means the sides of the lot/parcel not labeled as the front or rear. 

“Lot, through” means a lot that has frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets.

“Lot width” means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles to the lot depths at a point midway between the front and rear lot lines.

“Manufactured dwelling” means a residential trailer, mobile home, or manufactured home, but not including any building or structure subject to the structural specialty code adopted pursuant to ORS 455.100 through 455.450 or any unit identified as a recreational vehicle by the manufacturer.

“Manufactured dwelling (mobile home) park” means any place where four or more manufactured dwellings (mobile homes) are located within 500 feet of one another on a lot, tract, or parcel of land under the same ownership, the primary purpose of which is to rent space or keep space for rent to any person for a charge or fee paid or to be paid for the rental or use of facilities or to offer space free in connection with securing the trade or patronage of such person.

“Manufactured home” means a structure constructed for transport on the public highways that has sleeping, cooking, and plumbing facilities, that is intended for human occupancy, that is being used for permanent residential purposes and that was constructed in accordance with federal manufactured housing construction and safety standards regulations in effect at the time of construction.

“Manufacturing” means an establishment engaged in the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into new products including the assembling of component parts, the manufacturing of products, and the blending of materials such as lubricating oils, plastics, resins or liquors. The term “manufacturing” covers all mechanical or chemical transformations, whether the new product is finished or semifinished as raw material in some other process. Manufacturing production usually is carried on for the wholesale market rather than for direct sales. (Processing on farms is not classified as manufacturing if the raw material is grown on the farm. The manufacturing is accessory to the major use of farming.)

“Marijuana” means all parts of a plant species of the genus Cannabis, whether growing or not; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant or its resin. It does not include: the mature stalks of the plant; fiber produced from the stalks; oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant; any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil or cake; or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination.

“Marijuana extract” means a product obtained by separating resins from marijuana.

“Marijuana items” means marijuana, marijuana products, and marijuana extracts.

“Marijuana products” means products that contain marijuana or marijuana extracts and are intended for human consumption.

“Marijuana retailer” means a facility that sells marijuana items to a consumer in this state as licensed by the Oregon Liquor Control Commission.

“Marina” means a facility providing moorage for boats and related repair and supply services.

“Medical marijuana dispensary” means a facility that is registered with the Oregon Health Authority and that sells, distributes, transmits, gives, dispenses or otherwise provides marijuana items to a person with a registry identification card.

Mini Mall. See “shopping center” and “shopping plaza.”

“Mini storage” means a structure containing separate storage spaces of varying sizes leased or rented on an individual basis. 

“Mining and/or quarrying” means the extraction of minerals including: solids, such as sand, gravel, rock, coal and ores; liquids, such as crude petroleum; and gases, such as natural gases. The term also includes quarrying; well operation; milling, such as crushing, screening, washing and flotation; and other preparation customarily done at the mine site or as part of a mining activity.

Also see “excavation.”

“Ministerial decision” means a decision that is not a land use decision or a limited land use decision.

“Mobile home” means a structure constructed for transport on the public highways that has sleeping, cooking, and plumbing facilities, that is intended for human occupancy, that is being used for permanent residential purposes, and that was constructed between January 1, 1962, and June 15, 1976, and met the construction requirements of Oregon mobile home law in effect at the time of construction.

“Modular home” means a dwelling unit fabricated in an off-site manufacturing facility for installation or assembly at the building site, able to meet the applicable building code as administered by the building official.

“Moratorium” means the legally authorized delay of new construction or development, usually based on the lack of adequate capacity for public facilities such as roads, sewer and water systems.

Motel. (Also “tourist home” or “transient lodging.”) See “hotel” or “resort.”

Motion Picture Theater. See “theaters.”

“Motor vehicle cleaning” means any commercial or industrial building or premises or portions thereof used for washing motor vehicles. Automotive cleaning means washing and polishing of automobiles. Typical uses include auto laundries or car washes and detailing establishments (also “detailing”).

Motor Vehicle Repair. See “garage, repair.”

“Heavy equipment” means repair of trucks, etc., as well as the sale, installation, or servicing of truck or automotive equipment and parts together with body repairs, painting, and steam cleaning. Typical uses include truck transmission shops, body shops, or motor freight maintenance groups.

“Light equipment” means repair of automobiles and the sale, installation, and servicing of automobile equipment and parts but excluding body repairs and painting. Typical uses include muffler shops, auto or motorcycle repair garages, or auto glass shops.

“Motor vehicle sales” means the use of any building, land area or other premises for the display and sale of new or used automobiles, panel trucks or vans, trailers, or recreation vehicles and including any warranty repair work and other repair service.

Multifamily Dwelling. See “dwelling: multidwelling unit, apartment (multifamily).”

“Net buildable area of a lot” means the area of the lot excluding those features or areas which this Development Code excludes from the calculations.

“Nonconforming lot” means a lot, the area, dimensions or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment of this code, but which fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district. 

“Nonconforming structure” means a structure or building the size, dimensions, or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment to this code, but which fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district.

“Nonconforming use” means a use not currently allowed in the underlying zoning district but which was legal prior to adoption of the ordinance codified in this code.

“Nurseries” means the propagation of trees, shrubs, vines or flowering plants for transplanting, sale, or for grafting or budding; planting of seeds or cuttings; grafting and budding one variety on another; spraying and using of plants to control insects and diseases; and buying and selling the above plant stock at wholesale or retail.

“Nursing or convalescent home” means a home, place or institution or part thereof in which convalescent and/or chronic care is rendered to two or more patients in exchange for compensation. Convalescent and/or chronic care includes, but is not limited to, the procedures commonly employed in nursing and caring for the sick; persons who are acutely ill or are surgical or maternity cases are excluded; qualified personnel and a consulting physician are available at all times; and isolation facilities are provided. See “home, convalescent.”

Occupancy Permit. See “certificate of occupancy.”

“Office” means a room or group of rooms used for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, service, industry, or government.

“Open space” means any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated, or reserved for public or private use or enjoyment, or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open space.

“Opponent” means one testifying against a proposal.

“ORS” means Oregon Revised Statutes.

“Outdoor storage” means the keeping, in an unroofed area, of any goods, junk, inoperable vehicles, material, or other merchandise, or vehicles in the same place for more than 24 hours.

“Owner” means the owner of record of real property as shown on the tax rolls of the county, or a person who is purchasing a piece of property under contract.

“Parcel” means a unit of land that is created by a partitioning of land.

“Park” means a tract of land designated and generally used for active and passive recreation.

“Parking area” means any public or private land area designed and used for parking motor vehicles including parking lots, garages, private driveways, and legally designated areas of public streets.

“Parking area, private” means a parking area for the private use of the owners or occupants of the lot on which the parking area is located.

“Parking area, public” means a parking area available to the public, with or without compensation, or used to accommodate clients, customers, or employees.

“Parking lot” means an off-street, ground level area, usually surfaced and improved, for the temporary storage of motor vehicles. 

“Parking space” means a space for the parking of a motor vehicle within a public or private parking area.

“Parkway” means that portion of street right-of-way lying between the curb line of the improved roadway and the adjacent private property line.

“Partition land” means division of an area or tract of land into two or three parcels or creation of street/road within a calendar year when such area or tract of land exists as a unit or contiguous units of land under single ownership at the beginning of such year. Partitioning land does not include: (a) divisions of land resulting from lien foreclosures, foreclosures of recorded contracts for the sale of real property, and creation of cemetery lots; (b) any adjustment of a lot line by the relocation of a common boundary where an additional parcel is not created and where the existing parcel, reduced in size by the adjustment, is not reduced below the minimum lot size established by an applicable zoning ordinance; or (c) the sale of a lot in a recorded subdivision, even though the lot may have been acquired prior to the sale with other contiguous lots or property by a single owner.

“Pathway” means a public or private right-of-way for pedestrian or nonmotorized traffic.

“Pawn shop” means a facility operating as a licensed pawnbroker in accordance with ORS 726.010 through 726.990.

Permanent. For purposes of this code, “permanent” means anything not specifically limited in duration as a condition.

“Permit” means written governmental permission issued by an authorized official, empowering the holder thereof to do some act not forbidden by law, but not allowed without such authorization.

Person. The term “person” shall mean and include any natural person, copartnership, association or corporation, whether he, she, or it is acting for himself, herself, or itself, or as servant, employee, agent, or representative of another. The singular number shall include the plural and the plural the singular.

“Personal services facilities” means an establishment primarily engaged in the provision of informational, instructional, personal improvement, and similar services of a nonprofessional nature but excludes services classified under spectator sports and entertainment facilities, participant sports, and recreation or transient lodging. Typical uses include photography studios, driving schools, and trade schools, or reducing salons.

“Planned development” means a physical development which is planned and designed to integrate residential uses with accessory and associated uses to achieve particular design objectives and to make provisions for common areas, open spaces, utilities, and public and private streets.

“Plat” means the final map, diagram, drawing, replat or other writing containing all the descriptions, locations, specifications, dedications, provisions, and information concerning a subdivision or partition of which the subdivider submits for approval and intends in final form to record.

“Plug/residential strip” means a small section of land used to restrict uncontrolled access to a public right-of-way.

“Primary or principal use” means an activity or combination of activities of chief importance on the site. One of the main purposes for which the land or structures are intended, designed, or ordinarily used. A site may have more than one primary use in accordance with specific provisions of this code.

“Principal building” means a structure or combination of structures of chief importance or function on a site. In general, the primary use of the site is carried out in a primary structure. The difference between a primary and accessory structure is generally determined by comparing the size, placement, similarity of design, use of common building materials, and the orientation of the structures on a site.

“Professional services” means establishments primarily used for the provision of professional, executive, management, or administrative offices, legal offices, architectural or engineering firms, or real estate firms.

“Property line” means the artificial boundary which marks the confines of and forms the imaginary line of division between two contiguous separately owned and/or legally recorded parcels of land.

“Proponent” means a person testifying in favor of a proposal.

“Public facility, major” means any public service improvement or structure developed by or for a public agency that is not defined as a minor public facility.

“Public facility, minor” means the following public service improvements or structures developed by or for a public agency: 

(a) Minor utility structures, except substations, but including poles, lines, pipes or other such facilities.

(b) Sewer, storm drainage, or water system structures except treatment plants, reservoirs, or trunk lines, but including reconstruction of existing facilities, pump stations, manholes, valves, hydrants or other portions of the collection, treatment and distribution systems located within public property or specified easement.

(c) Street improvements within existing development including sidewalks, curbs, gutters, catch basins, paving, signs and traffic control devices and street lights.

(d) Transit improvements, such as shelters or pedestrian and bicycle safety improvements, located within public right-of-way or on public property.

“Public safety facilities” means providing protection pursuant to fire, life, and safety code sections together with the incidental storage and maintenance of necessary vehicles. Typical uses include fire stations, police stations, and ambulance services.

“Public service” means any service provided by a public agency including but not limited to power, water, streets, sewers, parks, recreation facilities, schools, police and fire protection. This term includes utilities provided by regulated utility companies such as telephone, gas and electric power.

“Quasi-judicial” means an action or decision which involves the application of adopted policy to a specific development application or amendment.

Radio/TV Towers, Studio. See “broadcasting facility.”

Rear Lot Line. See “lot line – rear.”

“Reasonable accommodations” means approval of modifications or exceptions to applicable rules, policies, practices or services, when such accommodations may be necessary to afford persons with disabilities an equal opportunity to use or enjoy a dwelling as required by the Federal Fair Housing Act.

“Recreation facility” means establishments or places primarily engaged in the provision of sports or recreation by and for participants. Any spectators would be incidental and on a nonrecurring basis.

“Recreational storage site” means storage of recreational vehicles and boats. Typical uses include the collective storage of personal recreational vehicles or boats.

“Recreational vehicle” means towed or self-propelled vehicles such as motor homes, pickup campers, and travel trailers, intended for human occupancy for vacation and recreational purposes.

“Recycle collection center” means a place where recyclable materials are deposited by the residents and sorted for transport to processing plants. Yard debris depots shall also fall into this classification. (Yard debris is organic material: leaves, grass clippings, weeds, etc.)

Religious Assembly. See “church (religious institution).”

“Remodel” means an internal or external modification to an existing building or structure which does not increase the site coverage.

Repairs. See “garage, repair.”

“Research services” means establishments primarily engaged in research of an industrial or scientific nature which is generally provided as a service or which is conducted by and for a private firm, but excludes medical testing and analysis. Typical uses include electronics research laboratories, environmental research and development firms, or pharmaceutical research labs.

“Residence” means a structure designed for occupancy as living quarters for one or more persons.

“Residential care” means services such as supervision; protection; assistance while bathing, dressing, grooming or eating; management of money; transportation; recreation; and the providing of room and board, as defined in ORS 443.400(4).

“Residential facility” means a residential care, residential training or residential treatment facility, as defined in and licensed by the Department of Human Services under ORS 443.400 through 443.455 or ORS 418.205 through 418.327, that provides residential care alone or in conjunction with treatment or training or a combination thereof for six to 16 individuals who need not be related. Staff persons required to meet licensing requirements shall not be counted in the number of facility residents, and need not be related to each other or to any resident of the residential facility.

“Residential home” means a residential treatment or training home or an adult foster home as defined in and licensed or certified by or under the authority of the Department of Human Resources under ORS 443.400 through 443.455 or ORS 443.705 through 443.825 that provides residential care, alone or in conjunction with treatment or training, or a combination thereof, for five or fewer individuals who need not be related. Staff persons required to meet licensing requirements are not to be counted in the number of residential home residents, and need not be related to each other or to any resident of the residential facility.

“Resort” means a facility for transient guests where the primary attraction is generally recreational features or activities.

Rest Home. See “nursing or convalescent home.”

“Restaurant” means an establishment where food and drink is prepared, serviced and consumed primarily within the principal building (also “eating and drinking establishment,” “fast-food restaurant,” “retail food establishment”). See “carry-out restaurant,” “drive-through restaurant.”

“Retail establishments” means establishments engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods; and establishments providing services or entertainment, as opposed to products, to the general public, if not elsewhere classified.

“Right-of-way” means:

(a) A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, forced dedication, prescription or condemnation and intended to be occupied or occupied by a road, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission lines, oil or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary storm sewer and other similar uses;

(b) Generally, the right of one to pass over the property of another.

Roadway. See “street.”

Rooming House. See “lodging facilities.”

Row House. See “dwelling, attached: single unit.”

“School” means any building or part thereof which is designed, constructed or used for education or instruction in any branch of knowledge, excluding vocational, trade, business schools and colleges.

“Seniors” shall be interchangeable with “elderly.” “Seniors” or “elderly” shall be anyone 62 years of age or older.

Service Station. See “automobile service station.”

“Setback” means the minimum allowable horizontal distance from a given point or line of reference, which shall be the property line unless otherwise stated to the nearest foundation wall of a building or structure.

“Shopping center” means a group (at least eight business units) of commercial establishments planned, constructed and managed as a total entity with customer and employee parking provided on site, provision for goods delivery separated from customer access, aesthetic considerations and protection from the elements (also “mini mall”).

“Shopping plaza” means a group (two to seven business units) of commercial establishments planned, constructed and managed as a total entity with customer and employee parking provided on site, provision for goods delivery separated from customer access, aesthetic considerations and protection from the elements (also “mini mall”).

“Short-term rental” means the use of a dwelling unit or rooms within a dwelling unit by a person or groups of persons entitled to occupy for rent for a period of less than 31 consecutive days. Short-term rental does not include: (a) bed and breakfast, homestay, boarding house; (b) lodging facilities or rooming house; or (c) hotels and motels.

Side Lot Line. See “lot line – side.”

“Sidewalk” means a pedestrian walkway with permanent surfacing built to city standards.

Single Unit, Attached. See “dwelling, attached: single unit.”

Single Unit, Detached. See “dwelling, detached: single unit (one-family).”

“Skirting” means a covering that totally obscures the undercarriage of a manufactured dwelling, extending from the top of the undercarriage to the ground.

“Solid waste disposal site” means a site of ultimate disposition of solid waste that cannot be salvaged or recycled.

“Spot zoning” means rezoning of a lot or parcel of land to benefit an owner for a use incompatible with surrounding uses and not for the purpose or effect of furthering the comprehensive plan.

“Steep slope” means land where the slope exceeds 20 percent.

“Story” means that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it and including those basements used for the principal use.

“Street” means a public or private way that is created to provide ingress or egress for vehicles to one or more lots, parcels, areas, or tracts of land, and including the terms “road,” “highway,” “lane,” “avenue,” “alley,” “place,” “court,” “way,” “circle,” “drive,” or other designations.

“Strip development” means commercial or retail development, usually one store deep, that fronts on a major street.

“Structure” means something constructed or built and having a fixed base on, or fixed connection to, the ground or another structure, and platforms, walks, and driveways more than 30 inches above grade and not over any basement or story below. Tents used for carports and/or other storage in excess of 15 consecutive days or 30 accumulative days in a calendar year shall be considered structures for purposes of this code.

“Studio” means a building or portion of a building used as a place of work by an artist, photographer, or artisan, or used for radio or television broadcasting.

“Subdivide (subdivision)” means to divide an area or tract of land into four or more lots within a calendar year when such area or tract of land exists as a unit or contiguous units of land, owned by a person, at the beginning of such year.

“Temporary parklet” means the use of a vehicle space (e.g., on-street parking space) or curb extension for public use, social interaction, and passive or active recreation. Temporary parklets in an on-street parking space are typically comprised of a platform, barriers to traffic, and seating, yet creativity in incorporating landscaping, art, and other elements is encouraged, given safety requirements are met. The duration of temporary parklets and the design vary accordingly. See SHMC 18.12.190.

“Temporary structures” means structures not allowed on a permanent basis.

“Temporary use” means a use which, by its nature, will last less than a year. Examples of temporary uses are uses associated with the sale of goods for a specific holiday, activity or celebration, uses associated with construction, and seasonal uses. 

A use established for a fixed period of time with the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of the time period.

“Tent” means a portable shelter or temporary structure of fabric or skins supported by poles and usually secured by stakes to the ground and that defines volume.

“Theater” means a building or part of a building devoted to showing motion pictures, or for dramatic, musical or live performances.

Tourist Home. See “hotel.”

Transient Lodging. See “hotel.”

“Travel trailer” means a portable vehicular structure not built to the UBC, Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Code, or the Mobile Home Design and Construction Standard, designed for travel, recreational camping or vacation purposes, either having its own motor power or mounted onto or drawn by another vehicle, fully licensed and ready for highway use, and including but not limited to travel and camping trailers, truck campers, and motor homes.

“Travel trailer park” means a park where four or more travel trailers are located within 50 feet of one another on a lot, tract, or parcel under the same ownership, the primary purpose of which is to rent space or keep space for rent to any person for a charge or for the rental or use of facilities.

“Tree” means any living, standing woody plant having a trunk two inches or more in diameter, four feet above the ground level. See SHMC 17.132.020.

“Unincorporated” means those areas situated outside of an incorporated city’s legal boundary.

“Unlisted use” means a use which is not listed as either a use permitted outright or as a conditional use in a particular zone.

“Urban area” means, generally, the area inside a municipality’s limits.

“Urban growth area” means area between city limits and urban growth boundary.

“Urban growth boundary” means an adopted line at or outside the current city limits defining an area that would accommodate future city growth for a specific period of time.

Utility, Major. See “public facility, major.”

Utility, Minor. See “public facility, minor.”

“Variance” means permission to depart from the specific requirements of this code.

“Warehouse” means a building used primarily for the commercial storage of goods and/or materials.

“Warehousing” means terminal facilities for storing freight on a temporary basis, with or without maintenance facilities.

“Wetlands” means as determined by the Oregon Division of State Lands. See ORS 196.800(16): those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions.

“Yard” means an open space on a lot which is unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise provided in this code. When determining setback, yard does not include an access easement or street right-of-way.

“Yard – front” means a yard, the front of which is the front lot line measuring at right angles toward the building the required distance or to the front exterior wall of the building.

“Yard – rear” means a yard between side lot lines and measured horizontally at right angles to the rear lot line from the rear lot line to the nearest point of the building.

“Yard – side” means a yard not defined as front or rear.

“Zone” means a specifically delineated area or district in the city of St. Helens within which regulations and requirements govern, among other things, the use, placement, spacing and size of land and buildings. (Ord. 3232 § 2 (Att. A), 2018; Ord. 3215 § 4 (Att. D), 2017; Ord. 3203 § 2 (Att. A), 2016; Ord. 3190 § 2 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 3186 § 21, 2015; Ord. 3181 § 4 (Att. C), 2015; Ord. 3164 § 3 (Att. B), 2012; Ord. 3144 § 2 (Att. A), 2011; Ord. 3032 §§ 1(1), 1(2), 2007; Ord. 2875 § 1.040, 2003)


Chapter 17.20 PROCEDURES FOR DECISION-MAKING – LEGISLATIVE

Sections:

17.20.010    Purpose.

17.20.020    The application process.

17.20.030    Time periods – Submissions/hearings.

17.20.040    Additional information required, waiver of requirements, and report required.

17.20.050    Duties of the director.

17.20.060    Recommendation and alternative recommendation by the director.

17.20.070    Consolidation of proceedings.

17.20.080    Public hearing – Notice requirements.

17.20.090    Mechanics of giving notice and failure to give notice.

17.20.100    Hearings procedure.

17.20.110    Continuation of the public hearing.

17.20.120    The standards of the decision.

17.20.130    Approval process and authority.

17.20.140    Vote required for a legislative change.

17.20.150    The final decision.

17.20.155    Notice of final decision.

17.20.160    The record of the public hearing.

17.20.170    Reapplication.


17.20.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures applicable to the Community Development Code for consideration of legislative changes to the provisions of the comprehensive plan, implementing ordinances, and maps. (Ord. 2875 § 1.060.010, 2003)


17.20.020 The application process.

(1) A request for a legislative change may be initiated by:

(a) Order of the council;

(b) Resolution of a majority of the commission;

(c) The director;

(d) Any person or the person’s agent authorized in writing to make the application.

(2) Application acceptance:

(a) Form must be complete;

(b) City council must approve the concept;

(c) Fee must be paid unless previously waived by the city council. (Ord. 2875 § 1.060.020, 2003)


17.20.030 Time periods – Submissions/hearings.

(1) The director may receive proposed legislative changes four times a year, and the completed application shall be submitted not more than 75 days and not less than 45 days before the first commission meetings in March, June, September, and December.

(2) The commission shall normally hear the matter at the first meeting in March, June, September, or December, depending upon which date the item has been scheduled.

(3) The council shall normally receive the commission’s recommendations within 30 days after the commission’s decision and schedule a public hearing of the commission’s recommendation. If the planning commission fails to act within 60 days after the scheduled public hearing date, the application shall be forwarded to the city council without a recommendation.

(4) The application shall be made on forms provided by the director.

(5) The application shall be complete and shall:

(a) Contain the information requested on the form;

(b) Address the appropriate criteria in sufficient detail for review and action;

(c) Be accompanied by the required fee except as allowed under SHMC 17.24.345; and

(d) Be accompanied by a narrative addressing the standards in SHMC 17.20.120.

(6) An application shall be deemed incomplete unless it addresses each element required by the form and each element required by this code and is accompanied by the required fee. 

(7) The director shall not accept an incomplete application.

(8) The director shall have the authority to waive a requirement of this code in the manner provided by SHMC 17.20.040(2). (Ord. 2875 § 1.060.030, 2003)


17.20.040 Additional information required, waiver of requirements, and report required.

(1) The director may require information in addition to that required by a specific code provision provided:

(a) The information is needed to properly evaluate the proposed development proposal; and

(b) The need can be justified on the basis of a special or unforeseen circumstance.

(2) The director may waive a special requirement for information or a requirement to address a certain approval standard subject to the provisions of subsection (3) of this section provided:

(a) The director finds that specific information is not necessary to properly evaluate the application; or

(b) The director finds that a specific approval standard is not applicable to the application.

(3) Where a requirement is waived, the director shall:

(a) Prepare a memorandum to the record and to the applicant citing the grant of authority, the specific requirements waived, and the reasons;

(b) Advise the applicant in writing that the waiver may be challenged at the hearing on the matter and may be denied by the approval authority; and

(c) Cite in the staff report for the application the specific requirements waived, the reasons for the waiver, and the specific grant of authority. (Ord. 2875 § 1.060.040, 2003)


17.20.050 Duties of the director.

(1) The director shall:

(a) Give notice of the commission hearing as provided by SHMC 17.20.080(3) and (4) and 17.20.090;

(b) Prepare a staff report which includes:

(i) The facts found relevant to the proposal and found by the director to the true;

(ii) The statewide planning goals and guidelines adopted by ORS Chapter 197 found to be applicable and the reasons why any other goal(s) and guideline(s) are not applicable to the proposal;

(iii) Any federal or state statutes or rules the director found applicable;

(iv) Those portions of the comprehensive plan found to be applicable, and if any portion(s) of the plan appears to be reasonably related to the proposal and is not applied, the director shall explain the reasons why such portion(s) of the plan is not applicable;

(v) Those portions of the implementing ordinances relevant to the proposal, and if the provisions are not considered, the director shall explain the reasons why such portion(s) of the ordinances were not considered; and

(vi) An analysis relating the facts found to be true by the director to the applicable criteria and a statement of the alternatives, a recommendation for approval, approval with modification or denial, and, at the option of the director, an alternative recommendation;

(c) Make the staff report and all case-file materials available seven days prior to the scheduled date of the public hearing under SHMC 17.20.080 in writing; and

(d) Cause the public hearing to be held pursuant to SHMC 17.20.080.

(2) The director shall administer the hearings process.

(3) The director shall transmit the record to the council for a hearing as set forth in SHMC 17.20.030(3), and:

(a) Give notice of the council hearing as provided by SHMC 17.20.080;

(b) Prepare a report which shall include, at a minimum, the following:

(i) A copy of the staff report submitted to the commission;

(ii) A copy of the commission recommendation; and

(iii) A copy of the minutes of the commission public hearing;

(c) Make a report to the council; and

(d) Administer the hearings process.

(4) The director shall maintain a register of all applications which have been filed for a decision. The register shall at all times identify at what stage the application is in the process.

(5) The director shall maintain and preserve the file for each application. The file shall include, as applicable, a list of persons required to be given notice and a copy of the notice pursuant to SHMC 17.20.080 and the accompanying affidavits, the application and all supporting information, the staff report, the final adopted document, all correspondence, the minutes of any meetings at which the application was considered and any other exhibits, information or documentation which was considered with respect to the application. (Ord. 2875 § 1.060.050, 2003)


17.20.060 Recommendation and alternative recommendation by the director.

(1) The director may make a recommendation to the commission on the application; however, in addition, the director may recommend an alternative(s).

(2) As a result of the public hearing on the proposed change, the commission may on its own motion recommend to the council an alternative recommendation; however, in addition, the commission must take action on the specific application before it. (Ord. 2875 § 1.060.060, 2003)


17.20.070 Consolidation of proceedings.

In the event there is an application for a legislative change to the plan text or map, and an application for a legislative change to an implementing ordinance text or map, both of which involve either the same geographic area or the same subject matter, the hearings may be consolidated; however:

(1) The decision on the proposed plan change shall precede the decision on the proposed change to the implementation ordinance;

(2) Separate actions shall be taken on each application; and

(3) The change to the implementing ordinance shall implement the change to the plan. (Ord. 2875 § 1.060.070, 2003)


17.20.080 Public hearing – Notice requirements.

(1) The commission shall hold at least one public hearing on each applicable application request.

(2) The council shall hold at least one public hearing on each applicable application request.

(3) Notice of the public hearings on the proposed change and alternatives, if any, shall be given by the director in the following manner:

(a) At least 10 days prior to the scheduled hearing date, notice shall be sent to:

(i) The applicant;

(ii) Any affected governmental agency. Notice shall be sent to ODOT when land subject to the proposed action is located adjacent to a state roadway or the proposed action may have an impact on a state roadway;

(iii) Any person who requests notice in writing and pays a fee established by council resolution; and

(b) At least 14 days prior to the scheduled public hearing date, notice shall be given in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.

(4) The director shall:

(a) For each mailing of notice, cause an affidavit of mailing to be filed and made a part of the record as provided by SHMC 17.20.160; and

(b) For each published notice, cause an affidavit of publication to be filed and made part of the record as provided by SHMC 17.20.160.

(5) The director shall mail notice in accordance with ORS Chapter 197 when applicable. (Ord. 3150 § 3 (Att. B), 2011; Ord. 2875 § 1.060.080, 2003)


17.20.090 Mechanics of giving notice and failure to give notice.

(1) Where either the commission or council or both intend to hold more than one public hearing on the same application, notice of several public hearings before both approval authorities may be given in one notice in the same manner provided under SHMC 17.20.080(3).

(2) The notice given to persons entitled to mailed or published notice pursuant to SHMC 17.20.080(3) shall include the following information:

(a) The number and title of the file containing the application and the address and phone number of the director’s office where additional information can be obtained;

(b) A description of the location of the proposal reasonably calculated to give notice as to the location of the affected geographic area;

(c) A description of the substance of the proposal in sufficient detail for people to determine that a change is contemplated and the place where all relevant materials and information may be obtained or reviewed; and

(d) The time(s), place(s), and date(s) of any public hearing(s); a statement that public oral or written testimony is invited; and a statement that the hearing will be held under this code and rules of procedure adopted by the council and available at City Hall or the rules of procedure set forth in SHMC 17.20.100.

(3) The failure of a person entitled to notice under SHMC 17.20.080(3)(a) to receive notice shall not invalidate the action provided a good faith attempt was made to notify all persons entitled to notice.

(4) Personal notice is deemed given where the notice is deposited with the United States Postal Service.

(5) Published notice is deemed given on the date it is published. 

(6) In computing the length of time that notice is given, the first date notice is given shall be excluded and the day of the hearing or the date on which the appeal period or review period expires shall be included unless the last day falls on any legal holiday or on Saturday, in which case, the last day shall be the next business day. (Ord. 2875 § 1.060.090, 2003)


17.20.100 Hearings procedure.

(1) Unless otherwise provided in the rules of procedure adopted by the city council:

(a) The presiding officer of the commission and of the council shall have the authority to:

(i) Regulate the course, sequence, and decorum of the hearing;

(ii) Dispose of procedural requirements or similar matters; and 

(iii) Impose reasonable time limits for oral presentations;

(b) No person shall address the commission or the council without:

(i) Receiving recognition from the presiding officer; and

(ii) Stating their full name and mailing address; and

(c) Disruptive conduct such as audience demonstrations in the form of applause, cheering, or display of signs shall be cause for expulsion of a person or persons from the hearing, termination or continuation of the hearing, or other appropriate action determined by the presiding officer.

(2) Unless otherwise provided in the rules of procedures adopted by the council, the presiding officer of the commission and of the council shall conduct the hearing as follows:

(a) The hearing shall be opened by a statement from the presiding officer setting forth the nature of the matter before the body, a general summary of the procedures set forth in this section, a summary of the standards set forth in SHMC 17.20.120, and whether the decision will be made as a recommendation to the city council or whether it will be a final decision of the council;

(b) A presentation of the director’s report and other applicable staff reports shall be given;

(c) The public shall be invited to testify;

(d) The public hearing may be continued to allow additional testimony or it may be closed; and

(e) The body’s deliberation may include questions to the staff, comments from the staff, or inquiries directed to any person present. (Ord. 2875 § 1.060.100, 2003)


17.20.110 Continuation of the public hearing.

The commission or the council may continue any hearing and no additional notice shall be required if the matter is continued to a place, date, and time certain. (Ord. 2875 § 1.060.110, 2003)


17.20.120 The standards of the decision.

(1) The recommendation by the commission and the decision by the council shall be based on consideration of the following factors:

(a) The statewide planning goals and guidelines adopted under ORS Chapter 197, including compliance with the Transportation Planning Rule, as described in SHMC 17.08.060;

(b) Any federal or state statutes or guidelines found applicable;

(c) The applicable comprehensive plan policies, procedures, appendices and maps;

(d) The applicable provisions of the implementing ordinances; and

(e) A proposed change to the St. Helens zoning district map that constitutes a spot zoning is prohibited. A proposed change to the St. Helens comprehensive plan map that facilitates a spot zoning is prohibited.

(2) Consideration may also be given to:

(a) Proof of a change in the neighborhood or community or a mistake or inconsistency in the comprehensive plan or implementing ordinance which is the subject of the application. (Ord. 3215 § 4 (Att. D), 2017; Ord. 3150 § 3 (Att. B), 2011; Ord. 2875 § 1.060.120, 2003)


17.20.130 Approval process and authority.

(1) The commission shall:

(a) After notice and a public hearing, formulate a recommendation to the council to approve, to approve with modifications, or to deny the proposed change, or to adopt an alternative; and 

(b) Within 30 days of determining a recommendation, cause the written recommendation to be signed by the presiding officer of the commission and to be filed with the director.

(2) Any member of the commission who voted in opposition to the recommendation by the commission on a proposed change may file a written statement of opposition with the director prior to any council public hearing on the proposed change. The director shall transmit a copy to each member of the council and place a copy in the record.

(3) If the commission fails to recommend approval, approval with modification, or denial of the proposed legislative change within 60 days of the first public hearing on the proposed change, the director shall:

(a) Report the failure together with the proposed change to the council; and

(b) Cause notice to be given, the matter to be placed on the council’s agenda, a public hearing to be held and a decision to be made by the council. No further action shall be taken by the commission.

(4) The council shall:

(a) Have the responsibility to approve, approve with modifications, or deny an application for the legislative change or to remand to the commission for rehearing and reconsideration on all or part of an application transmitted to it under this code;

(b) Consider the recommendation of the commission; however, it is not bound by the commission’s recommendation; and

(c) Act by ordinance, if application approved with or without modifications. (Ord. 2875 § 1.060.130, 2003)


17.20.140 Vote required for a legislative change.

An affirmative vote by a majority of the voting members present of the commission shall be required for a recommendation for the approval or approval with modifications. (Ord. 2875 § 1.060.140, 2003)


17.20.150 The final decision.

The approved legislative change shall take effect after adoption as specified in the enacting ordinance. (Ord. 2875 § 1.060.150, 2003)


17.20.155 Notice of final decision.

Per ORS 197.615:

197.615 Local government notice of adopted amendment or new regulation; content; notice by director. (1) A local government that amends an acknowledged comprehensive plan or land use regulation or adopts a new land use regulation shall mail or otherwise submit to the Director of the Department of Land Conservation and Development a copy of the adopted text of the comprehensive plan provision or land use regulation together with the findings adopted by the local government. The text and findings must be mailed or otherwise submitted not later than five working days after the final decision by the governing body. If the proposed amendment or new regulation that the director received under ORS 197.610 has been substantially amended, the local government shall specify the changes that have been made in the notice provided to the director. If the text and findings are mailed, they shall include a signed statement by the person mailing them indicating the date of deposit in the mail. 

(2)(a) On the same day that the text and findings are mailed or delivered, the local government also shall mail or otherwise submit notice to persons who: 

(A) Participated in the proceedings leading to the adoption of the amendment to the comprehensive plan or land use regulation or the new land use regulation; and 

(B) Requested of the local government in writing that they be given such notice. 

(b) The notice required by this subsection shall: 

(A) Describe briefly the action taken by the local government; 

(B) State the date of the decision; 

(C) If delivered by mail, include a certificate of mailing containing a statement signed by the person mailing it indicating the date the notice was deposited in the mail; 

(D) List the place where and the time when the amendment to the acknowledged comprehensive plan or land use regulation or the new land use regulation, and findings, may be reviewed; and 

(E) Explain the requirements for appealing the action of the local government under ORS 197.830 to 197.845. 

(3) Not later than five working days after receipt of an amendment to an acknowledged comprehensive plan or land use regulation or a new land use regulation submitted under subsection (1) of this section, the director shall notify by mail or other submission any persons who have requested notification. The notice shall: 

(a) Explain the requirements for appealing the action of the local government under ORS 197.830 to 197.845; and 

(b) List the locations where the comprehensive plan or land use regulation amendment or new land use regulation may be reviewed. [1981 c.748 s.5; 1983 c.827 s.9; 1999 c.255 s.1]

(Ord. 2875 § 1.060.155, 2003)


17.20.160 The record of the public hearing.

(1) A verbatim record of the proceeding shall be made by stenographic or mechanical means. It shall not be necessary to transcribe testimony. The minutes and other evidence presented as a part of the hearing shall be part of the record.

(2) All exhibits received and displayed shall be marked so as to provide identification and shall be part of the record. Nothing shall be accepted for the record if it cannot be stored in files nine by 14.75 inches or less.

(3) The official record shall include:

(a) All materials considered by the hearings body;

(b) All materials submitted by the director to the hearings body with respect to the application;

(c) The verbatim record made by the stenographic or mechanical means, the minutes of the hearing, and other documents considered;

(d) The final ordinance;

(e) All correspondence; and

(f) A copy of the notice which was given as provided by SHMC 17.20.080 and 17.20.090, accompanying affidavits, and list of persons who were sent mailed notice. (Ord. 2875 § 1.060.160, 2003)


17.20.170 Reapplication.

If an application has been made and denied in accordance with the provisions set forth in this chapter or by action by the Land Use Board of Appeals, the Land Conservation and Development Commission, or the courts, no new application for the same or substantially similar change shall be accepted within one year from the date of the final action denying the application; except the council may reinitiate an application upon a finding that there has been a substantial change in the facts surrounding the application or a change in policy which would support the reapplication. (Ord. 2875 § 1.060.170, 2003)


Chapter 17.24 PROCEDURES FOR DECISION-MAKING – QUASI-JUDICIAL

Sections:

17.24.010    Scope and purpose.

17.24.020    The application process.

17.24.030    Time period for certain quasi-judicial decisions (ORS 227.178).

17.24.040    Preapplication conference.

17.24.050    Application submittal requirements – Refusal of an application.

17.24.055    Applicant’s evidence.

17.24.060    Duties of the director.

17.24.070    Alternative recommendation by director.

17.24.080    Additional information required, waiver of requirements, and report required.

17.24.090    Approval authority responsibilities.

17.24.110    A decision by the director – No hearing required.

17.24.120    Notice of decision by the director.

17.24.130    Notice of planning commission, historic landmark commission and city council proceedings.

17.24.140    Contents of the notice for public hearings.

17.24.150    Failure to receive notice – Computations.

17.24.155    Hearing procedure – Preliminary matters, ex parte communications, bias, conflict of interest.

17.24.160    Hearings procedure.

17.24.165    Continuation of the hearing and request to leave the record open.

17.24.170    Final written argument.

17.24.180    Continuation of the hearing.

17.24.200    Evidence.

17.24.210    Judicial notice.

17.24.220    Participation in the decision – Voting.

17.24.230    Record of proceeding for public hearings.

17.24.250    The decision process of the approval authority.

17.24.260    The form of the final decision.

17.24.270    Notice of final decision.

17.24.275    Amended decision process.

17.24.280    Denial of the application – Resubmittal.

17.24.290    Standing to appeal.

17.24.300    Computation of appeal period from a director’s decision and effective date of the decision.

17.24.310    Determination of appropriate reviewing body.

17.24.320    Type of appeal.

17.24.330    Transcripts.

17.24.340    Notice of appeal (application).

17.24.345    Fee waiver for appeals.

17.24.350    Persons entitled to notice on appeal – Type of notice.

17.24.360    Contents of notice on appeal.

17.24.370    Action on appeal – Time limit and authority to change the decision.

17.24.380    Final action of the approval authority – Effective date.

17.24.390    Revocation of approvals.

17.24.400    Table A.


17.24.010 Scope and purpose.

(1) Purpose. This code uses a combination of nondiscretionary and discretionary reviews to evaluate land use proposals for compliance with the use and development requirements of the code. The combination is necessary to provide a comprehensive set of implementation tools. The nondiscretionary reviews provide the certainty needed in most situations by providing straight-forward, clear, and objective standards. Discretionary reviews provide needed flexibility by allowing more subjective standards and objectives, and providing for the modification of regulations in response to specific site conditions. This chapter addresses discretionary reviews.

(2) Explanation of Discretionary Reviews. A discretionary review is one that involves judgment or discretion in determining compliance with the approval requirements. The review is discretionary because not all of the approval requirements are objective. That is, they are not easily definable or measurable. The amount of discretion and the potential impact of the request varies among different reviews. Some have less discretion or impact, such as the reduction of a garage setback for a house on a hillside. Others may involve more discretion or potential impacts, such as the design review of a new downtown building or the siting of a firm which uses hazardous materials. Discretionary reviews must provide opportunities for public involvement.

(3) Scope. This chapter concerns procedures for the consideration of quasi-judicial land use applications. The Oregon Supreme Court formulated a three-pronged test to aid in determining whether action is quasi-judicial: (a) whether the process is bound to result in a decision; (b) whether the decision is bound to apply preexisting criteria to concrete facts; and (c) whether the action is directed at a closely circumscribed factual situation or a relatively small number of persons. Strawberry Hill 4-Wheelers v. Benton County Board of Commissions, 287 Or. 591, 601 P.2d 769 (1979). Common quasi-judicial applications include but are not limited to the following: site-specific comprehensive plan map amendment, site-specific rezoning subdivision, partition, variance, site design review.

(4) The Function of Approval Criteria.

(a) The approval criteria that are listed with a specific review reflect the findings that must be made to approve a request. The criteria set the bounds for the issues that must be addressed by the applicant and which may be raised by the city or affected parties. A proposal that complies with all of the criteria will be approved. A proposal that can comply with the criteria with mitigation measures or limitations will be approved with conditions. A proposal that cannot comply with the criteria outright or cannot comply with mitigation measures will be denied.

(b) The approval criteria have been derived from and are based on the comprehensive plan. Reviews against the goals and policies of the comprehensive plan are not required unless specifically stated. Fulfillment of all requirements and approval criteria means the proposal is in conformance with the comprehensive plan.

(c) When approval criteria refer to the request meeting a specific threshold, such as adequacy of services or no significant detrimental environmental impacts, the review body will consider any proposed improvements, mitigation measures, or limitations proposed as part of the request when reviewing whether the request meets the threshold. All proposed improvements, mitigation measures, and limitations must be submitted for consideration prior to a final decision by a review body.

(5) The Burden of Proof. The burden of proof is on the applicant to show that the approval criteria are met. The burden is not on the city or other parties to show that the criteria have not been met.

(6) Conditions of Approval. The city may attach conditions to the approval of all discretionary reviews. However, conditions may be applied only to ensure that the proposal will conform to the applicable approval criteria for the review or to ensure the enforcement of other city regulations. (Ord. 2875 § 1.070.010, 2003)


17.24.020 The application process.

(1) Applications for approval required under this chapter may be initiated by:

(a) Order of the council;

(b) Resolution of a majority of the commission;

(c) Application of a recorded owner of property or contract purchasers.

(2) Any persons authorized by this code to submit an application for approval may be represented by an agent authorized in writing to make the application. (Ord. 2875 § 1.070.020, 2003)


17.24.030 Time period for certain quasi-judicial decisions (ORS 227.178).

The city shall take final action on an application for a permit, limited land use decision, or a zone change, including the resolution of all appeals, within 120 days after the application is deemed complete, except:

(1) The 120-day period may be extended for a reasonable period of time at the request of the applicant;

(2) The 120-day period applies only to a decision wholly within the authority and control of the city;

(3) The 120-day period does not apply if the parties have agreed to mediation as described in ORS 197.319(2)(b);

(4) The 120-day period does not apply to an amendment to an acknowledged comprehensive plan or land use regulation or adoption of a new land use regulation forwarded to the Department of Land Conservation and Development pursuant to ORS 197.610(1); and

(5) Failure to comply with the time limitations of this section makes available the enforcement and refund remedies identified in the Oregon Revised Statutes. (Ord. 2875 § 1.070.030, 2003)


17.24.040 Preapplication conference.

(1) Unless excepted herein, all applicants for quasi-judicial land use applications shall be required to meet with the director for a preapplication conference. Another preapplication conference is required if an application is submitted more than six months after the initial preapplication conference. Unless excepted, a preapplication conference is a jurisdictional prerequisite to filing an application. 

(2) Preapplication Conference Issues. At the preapplication conference, the director, the applicant, and the representatives from other city departments and county and state agencies, as applicable, shall discuss issues that relate to the proposed development and application. Those issues shall include but not be limited to the following, as applicable to the proposed development:

(a) The burden on the applicant to demonstrate consistency with the comprehensive plan and the requirements of the Land Development Code; 

(b) Identification of the application requirements and appropriate development review procedures for the proposed development, and a tentative schedule of review for any proposed consolidation of review for more than one application;

(c) The consistency of the request with the land use and zoning designations on the property;

(d) The relationship between the proposed development and surrounding land uses;

(e) Physical characteristics of the site proposed for development including but not limited to environmentally sensitive areas, wetlands, uplands, wildlife protection issues and existing roads, utilities, easements, and facilities; 

(f) The characteristics of the proposed site development including proposed on-site streets, utilities or other public and private facilities, including common open areas, recreation areas and maintenance mechanisms designed to guarantee the care and upkeep of the common elements; 

(g) Status of public facilities that would serve the proposed development, including specifically water, sewer, solid waste, drainage, roads, parks and mass transit. When the proposed action is located adjacent to a state roadway or the proposed action may have an impact on a state roadway, ODOT shall be invited to participate in the preapplication conference and review of the application.

(3) The applicant has the burden to demonstrate strict compliance with each and every applicable approval criterion by providing competent substantial evidence of compliance for the record. The burden is on the applicant to ascertain for themselves what is required for approval from the text of the local code, plan and state statutes. The information and opinions provided in a preapplication conference are for the general assistance of the applicant, and shall not be binding on the city, the applicant or any of the participants. Failure of the director to cite or identify any of the information required by this chapter shall not constitute a waiver of the standards, criteria, or other requirements of the application. 

(4) The following applications are exempt from the preapplication requirement of this section:

(a) Tree removal permit.

(b) Accessory structure permit.

(c) Nonconforming determination.

(d) Sign permits.

Nothing herein prohibits a voluntary preapplication conference. (Ord. 3232 § 2 (Att. A), 2018; Ord. 3150 § 3 (Att. B), 2011; Ord. 3144 § 2 (Att. A), 2011; Ord. 2875 § 1.070.040, 2003)


17.24.050 Application submittal requirements – Refusal of an application.

(1) The application shall be made on forms approved by the director.

(2) The application shall:

(a) Include the information requested on the application form;

(b) Address appropriate criteria in sufficient detail for review and action;

(c) Be accompanied by the required fee except as set out in SHMC 17.24.345; and

(d) The records of the Columbia County department of assessment and taxation shall be the official records for determining ownership.

(3) The director shall not accept:

(a) An incomplete application, except as otherwise provided by subsection (7) of this section; or

(b) Applications not accompanied by the required fee.

(4) An application shall be deemed incomplete unless it addresses each element required to be considered under applicable provisions of this code and the application form.

(5) If an application for a permit or zone change is incomplete, the director shall:

(a) Notify the applicant within 30 days of receipt of the application of exactly what information is missing; and

(b) Allow the applicant to submit the missing information.

(6) The application for a permit or a zone change shall be deemed complete when the missing information is provided and at that time the 120-day time period shall begin to run for the purposes of satisfying state law.

(7) If the applicant refuses to submit the missing information required for a permit or a zone change application, the application shall be deemed complete on the thirty-first day after the director first received the application. This in no way negates the applicant’s burden of proof, but it is for the purpose of allowing an application to be submitted for a decision. (Ord. 2875 § 1.070.050, 2003)


17.24.055 Applicant’s evidence.

(1) All documents or evidence relied upon by the applicant, but submitted after the application has been determined to be complete, shall be submitted to the planning staff at least seven days prior to the time notice is mailed as provided in SHMC 17.24.120.

(2) When documents or evidence submitted pursuant to subsection (1) of this section significantly alter an application previously deemed complete, the director may recalculate the date the application is deemed complete. The recalculated completion date may then be used to determine:

(a) The 120-day time period for decision-making as set forth in SHMC 17.24.030; and

(b) A new decision or hearing date.

(3) If additional evidence or documents are provided in support of the application after the time set forth in subsection (2)(b) of this section that is after the time set forth in subsection (1) of this section, any party is entitled to request a continuance of the hearing. Such continuance does not count as part of the 120-day provision in ORS 227.178. (Ord. 2875 § 1.070.055, 2003)


17.24.060 Duties of the director.

The director shall:

(1) Prepare application forms made pursuant to the standards contained in the applicable state law, comprehensive plan, and implementing ordinance provisions;

(2) Accept all development applications which comply with the provisions of SHMC 17.24.050;

(3) Within 60 days after an application is deemed complete pursuant to this chapter, except as provided by SHMC 17.24.050:

(a) Develop a list of affected property owner names and addresses;

(b) Give notice as provided by SHMC 17.24.120 and 17.24.130, except as provided by SHMC 17.24.110;

(c) Prepare a staff report or notice of decision which shall include:

(i) The facts deemed relevant to the proposal and found by the director to be true;

(ii) Those portions of the St. Helens comprehensive plan and/or implementing ordinances which the director deems to be applicable to the proposal. If any portion of the plan or ordinances appears to be reasonably related to the proposal and is deemed not applicable by the director, the director shall explain why such portion or portions are not applicable;

(iii) An analysis relating the facts deemed true by the director to the applicable criteria and a consideration of alternatives open to the approval authority, resulting in a recommendation of denial, approval, or approval with conditions under SHMC 17.24.250; and

(iv) A statement regarding a waiver of information or additional information required by the director as provided by SHMC 17.24.080;

(d) In the case of an application subject to a director’s decision, make the staff report and all case-file materials available at the time the notice of the decision is given; and

(e) In the case of an application subject to a hearing, make the staff report available seven days prior to a scheduled hearing date and the case-file materials available when notice is mailed, as provided by SHMC 17.24.130(1)(a).

(4) Act on the development application pursuant to SHMC 17.24.090(1) and 17.24.110 or cause a hearing to be held pursuant to SHMC 17.24.090(2) through (4), and 17.24.160 through 17.24.230, unless the applicant has requested or consented to a delay;

(5) Administer the hearings process pursuant to SHMC 17.24.155 through 17.24.230;

(6) Maintain a register of all applications which have been filed for a decision. The register shall identify at what stage the application is in the process;

(7) File notice of the final decision in the records of the planning department and mail a copy of the notice of the final decision to the applicant and all parties and to those persons requesting copies of such notices who pay the necessary fees therefor as provided by SHMC 17.24.120 or 17.24.130;

(8) Maintain and preserve the file for each application. The file shall include, as applicable, a list of persons required to be given notice and a copy of the notice given pursuant to SHMC 17.24.120 or 17.24.130 and the accompanying affidavits, the application and all supporting information, the staff report, the final decision, including the findings, conclusions, and conditions, if any, all correspondence, the minutes of any meeting at which the application was considered and any other exhibit, information, or documentation which was considered by the hearing body with respect to the application; and

(9) Administer the appeals and review process pursuant to SHMC 17.24.290 through 17.24.370. (Ord. 2875 § 1.070.060, 2003)


17.24.070 Alternative recommendation by director.

(1) The director may make a recommendation to the initial hearings body on the application; however, in addition, the director may recommend an alternative or alternatives.

(2) Such alternatives shall be considered only if:

(a) Notice of such alternative(s) has been given as part of the hearing notice in addition to the matters contained in SHMC 17.24.140; and

(b) The staff report prepared as provided by SHMC 17.24.060(3)(c) supports such an alternative(s). (Ord. 2875 § 1.070.070, 2003)


17.24.080 Additional information required, waiver of requirements, and report required.

(1) The director may require information in addition to that required by a specific provision of this code, provided:

(a) The information is needed to properly evaluate the proposed development proposal; and

(b) The need can be justified on the basis of a special or unforeseen circumstance.

(2) The director may waive the submission of information for a specific requirement subject to the provisions of subsection (3) of this section, provided:

(a) The director finds that specific information is not necessary to properly evaluate the application; or 

(b) The director finds that a specific approval standard is not applicable to the application.

(3) Where a requirement is found by the director to be inapplicable the director shall:

(a) Indicate for the record and to the applicant the specific requirements waived;

(b) Advise the applicant in writing that the waiver may be challenged on appeal or at the hearing on the matter and may be denied by the approval authority; and

(c) Cite in the staff report on the application the specific requirements waived, the reasons for the waiver, and the specific grant of authority. (Ord. 2875 § 1.070.080, 2003)


17.24.090 Approval authority responsibilities.

(1) In addition to ministerial and administrative decisions, the director shall have the authority to approve, deny, or approve with conditions the following applications and/or activities: 

(a) Accessory structures pursuant to Chapter 17.124 SHMC.

(b) Expedited land division per ORS 197.360.

(c) Final development plan and final subdivision plat, pursuant to Chapters 17.136 and 17.148 SHMC.

(d) Home occupation pursuant to Chapter 17.120 SHMC.

(e) Lot line adjustments pursuant to Chapter 17.140 SHMC.

(f) Partitions pursuant to Chapter 17.140 SHMC.

(g) Sign permits.

(h) Site development pursuant to Chapter 17.96 SHMC.

(i) Solar access for new construction on lots not covered by subsection (3)(a) of this section pursuant to Chapter 17.48 SHMC.

(j) Temporary use pursuant to Chapter 17.116 SHMC.

(k) Unlisted uses (approve or deny), pursuant to Chapter 17.32 SHMC.

(l) Variance pursuant to Chapter 17.108 SHMC.

(m) Minor modification to conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.100 SHMC.

(n) Access variances pursuant to Chapter 17.84 SHMC.

(o) Sensitive lands pursuant to Chapter 17.44 SHMC.

(p) Nonconforming status pursuant to Chapter 17.104 SHMC.

(q) Revocation proceedings pursuant to SHMC 17.24.390.

(r) Review of uses in Willamette Greenway overlay zone per SHMC 17.32.160.

(s) Any other matter not specifically assigned to others.

(2) The director may refer any application for review to the planning commission.

(3) The planning commission shall conduct a public hearing in the manner prescribed by this chapter and shall have the authority to approve, deny, or approve with conditions the following applications and enforcement proceedings:

(a) Solar access requirements for new subdivisions pursuant to Chapter 17.48 SHMC.

(b) Conditional use pursuant to Chapter 17.100 SHMC.

(c) Sensitive land permit.

(d) Subdivisions pursuant to Chapter 17.136 SHMC when not part of a planned development.

(e) Sign code exceptions and sign code variances pursuant to Chapter 17.88 SHMC.

(f) An appeal of decisions made by the director, under subsection (1) of this section.

(g) Referral from the director of any decision.

(h) Subdivisions pursuant to Chapter 17.148 SHMC when requested as part of planned development and/or in conjunction with a variance to the subdivisions standard or a variance to any requirement of this code.

(i) A quasi-judicial comprehensive plan map or text amendment except:

(i) The commission’s function shall be limited to a recommendation to the council; and

(ii) The commission may transmit their recommendation in any form and a final order need not be formally adopted.

(j) Recommendations to the city council on quasi-judicial zoning map amendments without comprehensive plan changes, pursuant to SHMC 17.08.030.

(k) A recommendation to the city council on quasi-judicial rezoning concurrent with a quasi-judicial comprehensive plan amendment.

(l) A recommendation to the city council on annexation applications.

(m) A recommendation to the city council on comprehensive plan and zoning designations made to lands annexed to the city.

(n) A recommendation to the city council on development agreement.

(o) A recommendation to the city council on a preliminary planned development zone change proposal under Chapter 17.148 SHMC.

(p) A preliminary plan/plat for planned development proposal under Chapter 17.148 SHMC.

(q) Revocation proceedings pursuant to SHMC 17.24.390.

(4) The planning commission may refer any matter directly to the city council with or without cause with a two-thirds affirmative vote from appointed members.

(5) The historic landmark commission shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny any application filed under the provisions of this chapter. The historic landmark commission shall apply the standards herein set forth in this chapter.

(a) The historic landmark commission shall be composed of three members pursuant to SHMC 17.36.020; and

(b) Decisions of the historic landmark commission shall be made in a public meeting; notice shall be published at least 10 days prior to the meeting. 

(6) The city council shall conduct a public hearing in a manner prescribed by this chapter and shall have the authority to approve, deny, or approve with conditions the following development applications:

(a) The formal imposition of comprehensive plan map and zoning designations made to lands annexed to the city.

(b) Matters referred to the council by the commission for review.

(c) Review of initial decisions of other city land use approving authorities, whether on the council’s own motion or otherwise (including appeal or referral) of the following:

(i) Appeal or referral of any final decision made by an approving authority that is not specifically assigned to the director or the city council under this code.

(d) Supplemental application pursuant to ORS 227.184:

(1) A person whose application for a permit is denied by the governing body of a city or its designee under ORS 227.178 may submit to the city a supplemental application for any or all other uses allowed under the city’s comprehensive plan and land use regulations in the zone that was the subject of the denied application.

(2) The governing body of a city or its designee shall take final action on a supplemental application submitted under this section, including resolution of all appeals, within 240 days after the application is deemed complete. Except that 240 days shall substitute for 120 days, all other applicable provisions of ORS 227.178 shall apply to a supplemental application submitted under this section. 

(3) A supplemental application submitted under this section shall include a request for any rezoning or zoning variance that may be required to issue a permit under the city’s comprehensive plan and land use regulations.

(4) The governing body of a city or its designee shall adopt specific findings describing the reasons for approving or denying: 

(a) A use for which approval is sought under this section; and

(b) A rezoning or variance requested in the application. [1999 c.648 s.4]

(e) Appeals of revocations of land use permits issued by the planning commission as original approving authority.

(f) Appeal of matters decided by the planning commission pursuant to referral from the director.

(g) Preliminary plan/plat for planned development proposal under Chapter 17.148 SHMC.

(h) Director decisions not normally reviewed by or appealed to the planning commission. 

(i) Quasi-judicial zoning map amendment without comprehensive plan change pursuant to SHMC 17.08.030 (ordinance required).

(j) Quasi-judicial rezoning concurrent with quasi-judicial comprehensive plan amendment (ordinance required).

(k) Quasi-judicial comprehensive plan map or text amendments (ordinance required).

(l) Subdivisions pursuant to Chapter 17.148 SHMC when requested as part of planned development and/or in conjunction with a variance to the subdivisions standard.

(m) Development agreement (ordinance required).

(n) Annexations. (Ord. 3084 § 2, 2008; Ord. 2875 § 1.070.090, 2003)


17.24.110 A decision by the director – No hearing required.

(1) Pursuant to SHMC 17.24.090(1), the director is authorized to make certain decisions, and no hearing shall be held unless an appeal is filed as provided herein, or unless:

(a) An appeal is filed pursuant to SHMC 17.24.310; or

(b) The director has an interest in the outcome of the decision, due to some past or present involvement (interpret as in conflict of interest laws) with the applicant, other interested persons or in the property or surrounding property. In such cases, the application shall be treated as if it were filed under SHMC 17.24.090(3); or

(c) The director believes that there may be the appearance of conflict of interest or it may be in the public interest to require a more public process and deems it best to refer it.

(2) The decision shall be in the form set forth in SHMC 17.24.120.

(3) The decision shall be based on the approval criteria set forth in SHMC 17.24.250.

(4) Notice of the decision by the director shall be given as provided by SHMC 17.24.120 and notice shall be governed by the provisions of SHMC 17.24.140, Contents of the notice for public hearings, and 17.24.150, Failure to receive notice – Computations.

(5) The record shall include:

(a) A copy of the application and all supporting information, plans, exhibits, graphics, etc.;

(b) All correspondence relating to the application;

(c) All information considered by the director in making the decision;

(d) Any staff report or decision of the director prepared under SHMC 17.24.060;

(e) A list of the conditions, if any are attached to the approval of the application; and

(f) A copy of the notice advising of the director’s decision which was given pursuant to SHMC 17.24.090, and accompanying affidavits, and a list of all persons who were given mailed notice.

(6) Standing to appeal shall be as provided by SHMC 17.24.290.

(7) The appeal period shall be computed as provided by SHMC 17.24.300.

(8) The method for taking the appeal shall be as provided by SHMC 17.24.310 and the notice of appeal submitted by the appellant shall be as provided by SHMC 17.24.340.

(9) The appeal hearing shall be de novo as provided by SHMC 17.24.320.

(10) Notice of the final decision on appeal shall be as provided by SHMC 17.24.270, Notice of final decision, and 17.24.260, The form of the final decision.

(11) No decision by the director may be modified from that set out in the notice except upon being given new notice.

(12) The action on the appeal shall be as provided by SHMC 17.24.370, Action on appeal – Time limit and authority to change the decision.

(13) Resubmittal shall be as provided by SHMC 17.24.280, Denial of the application – Resubmittal. (Ord. 2875 § 1.070.110, 2003)


17.24.120 Notice of decision by the director.

(1) Notice of the director’s decision on an application pursuant to SHMC 17.24.090 shall be given by the director in the following manner:

(a) Within 10 working days of signing the proposed decision, notice shall be sent by mail to:

(i) The applicant and all owners or contract purchasers of record of the property which is the subject of the application for the following types of director decisions:

(A) Minor modifications to site design reviews;

(B) Nonconforming status;

(C) Sign permits;

(ii) All surrounding property owners of record of property within the applicable notice area of the property for the following types of director decisions:

(A) Lot line adjustments, major site design reviews, minor modifications to conditional use permits, sensitive lands, temporary uses, accessory structures: 100 feet;

(B) Land partitions: 200 feet;

(C) Expedited land divisions: 300 feet;

(iii) For home occupations see SHMC 17.120.060;

(iv) Any governmental agency which is entitled to notice under an intergovernmental agreement entered into with the city which includes provision for such notice. For subject sites located adjacent to a state roadway or where proposals may have an impact on a state facility, notice of the decision shall be sent to ODOT; and

(v) Any person who requests, in writing, and pays the required fee established by the council.

(2) The director shall cause an affidavit of mailing and/or publication of notice where newspaper publication was required to be filed and made a part of the administrative record. (Newspaper publication is required for all decisions in excess of 100 feet notice radius for property owners.)

(3) Notice of the decision by the director shall contain:

(a) The nature of the application in sufficient detail to apprise persons entitled to notice of the applicant’s proposal and of the decision; 

(b) The address and legal description of the subject property;

(c) A statement of where the adopted findings of fact, decision, and statement of conditions can be obtained;

(d) The date the director’s decision will become final;

(e) A statement that a person entitled to notice or adversely affected or aggrieved by the decision may appeal the decision:

(i) The statement shall explain briefly how an appeal can be taken, the deadlines, and where information can be obtained; and

(ii) The statement shall explain that if an appeal is not filed, the decision shall be final;

(f) A map showing the location of the property.

(4) If not listed in subsection (1) of this section, no notice of a director’s decision is required (e.g., final plat partitions, final plat subdivisions, building permits). (Ord. 3232 § 2 (Att. A), 2018; Ord. 3203 § 2 (Att. A), 2016; Ord. 3189 § 2 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 3150 § 3 (Att. B), 2011; Ord. 3144 § 2 (Att. A), 2011; Ord. 2875 § 1.070.120, 2003)


17.24.130 Notice of planning commission, historic landmark commission and city council proceedings.

(1) Notice of an impending action pursuant to SHMC 17.24.090 shall be given by the director in the following manner:

(a) At least 20 days prior to the scheduled hearing date, or if two or more hearings are scheduled, 10 days prior to the first hearing and 20 days prior to the second hearing, notice shall be sent by mail to:

(i) The applicant and all owners or contract purchasers of record of the property which is the subject of the application;

(ii) All property owners of record within the following distances of the property for the following types of applications:

(A) Subdivisions: 300 feet;

(B) Sign code exceptions/variances: 100 feet;

(C) Conditional use permits: 300 feet;

(D) Planned developments: 300 feet;

(E) Comprehensive plan amendments: 300 feet;

(F) Zone changes: 300 feet;

(G) Zone ordinance amendments: 300 feet;

(H) Historic sites and districts reviews: 300 feet;

(I) Referrals or appeals of director decisions or planning commission decisions shall follow the same notice guidelines as stated in SHMC 17.24.120 and this section;

(iii) Any affected governmental agency which has entered into an intergovernmental agreement with the city which includes provision for such notice or public agency that provides service within the city. When the application site is located adjacent to a state roadway or was determined by a traffic impact analysis to have an effect on a state roadway, notice of the decisions shall be sent to ODOT;

(iv) Any person who requests, in writing, and pays a fee established by the council; and

(v) The appellant and all parties to an appeal.

(b) Notice of a hearing on a proposed zone change for a mobile home park shall be given to tenants to that mobile home park at least 20 days but no more than 40 days prior to the hearing; and

(c) The director shall cause an affidavit of mailing of notice to be filed and made a part of the administrative record.

(2) At least 10 days prior to the hearing, notice shall be given for publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. An affidavit of publication shall be made part of the administrative record.

(3) Where applicable, other notices required by law shall be accomplished. (Ord. 3150 § 3 (Att. B), 2011; Ord. 3144 § 2 (Att. A), 2011; Ord. 3084 § 2, 2008; Ord. 2875 § 1.070.130, 2003)


17.24.140 Contents of the notice for public hearings.

(1) Notice given to persons entitled to mailed or published notice pursuant to SHMC 17.24.130 shall include the following information, in accordance with ORS 197.763(3):

(a) The number and title of the file containing the application and the address and phone number of the director’s office where additional information can be obtained;

(b) A description of the subject property, reasonably calculated to give notice as to its actual location which shall include, but not be limited to, the address (if any), geographical description or the tax map designations of the county assessor’s office;

(c) Except for notice published in the newspaper, a map showing the location of the property;

(d) The nature of the application in sufficient detail to apprise persons entitled to notice of the application’s proposal; and

(e) The time, place, and date of the public hearing, a statement that both public oral and written testimony is invited, and a statement that the hearing will be held under this chapter and any rules of procedure adopted by the council and available at City Hall.

(2) When the proceeding is an initial evidentiary hearing before the planning commission or the city council, the following information shall be included in the mailed notice, in addition to the information required in subsection (1) of this section:

(a) A list of applicable criteria from ordinance and plan;

(b) A statement that failure to raise an issue, including constitutional or other issues relating to the proposed conditions of approval, in this hearing, in person, or by letter, or failure to raise an issue accompanied by statements or evidence sufficient to afford the approving authority an opportunity to respond to the issue precludes appeal to LUBA, the Land Use Board of Appeals, on that issue, and precludes an action for damages in circuit court;

(c) A statement that all documents in the file are available for inspection at no cost, or copies at a reasonable cost; and

(d) A statement that a copy of the staff report will be available for inspection at no cost, or copies at reasonable cost, at least seven days prior to the hearing.

(3) Other notices shall follow the procedures as per applicable governing rules. (Ord. 2875 § 1.070.140, 2003)


17.24.150 Failure to receive notice – Computations.

(1) The failure of property owner to receive notice shall not invalidate the action provided a good faith attempt was made to notify all persons entitled to notice.

(2) Personal notice is deemed given when the notice is deposited with the United States Postal Service, and published notice is deemed given on the date it is published.

(3) The records of the Columbia County assessor’s office shall be the official records used for giving notice required by the ordinances codified in this code, and a person’s name and address which is not on file at the time the notice mailing list is initially prepared is not a person entitled to notice under SHMC 17.24.120 and 17.24.130.

(4) In computing the length of time that notice is given, the first date notice is given shall be excluded and the day of the hearing or the date on which the appeal period or review period expires shall be included unless the last day falls on any legal holiday or on Saturday, in which case, the last day shall be the next business day. (Ord. 2875 § 1.070.150, 2003)


17.24.155 Hearing procedure – Preliminary matters, ex parte communications, bias, conflict of interest.

(1) Members of the approval authority shall not:

(a) Communicate, directly or indirectly, with any party or representative of a party, in connection with any issue involved; nor

(b) Take notice of any communication, report, or other materials outside the record prepared by the proponents or opponents in connection with the particular case.

(2) No decision or action of the approval authority shall be invalid due to an ex parte contact with a member of the decision-making body, if the member of the decision-making body receiving the contact:

(a) Places on the record the substance of any written or oral ex parte communications concerning the decision or action; and

(b) Makes a public announcement of the content of the communication and of the parties’ right to rebut the substance of the communication made at the first hearing following the communication where action will be considered or taken on the subject to which the communication related.

(3) Members of the commission shall be governed by the provisions of ORS 227.035, St. Helens Ordinance No. 2197 and amendments, and the provisions of this code.

(4) This section shall not apply to director decisions made under SHMC 17.24.090.

(5) A communication between the city staff and the decision-makers shall not be considered an ex parte contact. 

(6) In addition to the provisions of ORS 227.035 which apply to commission members or ORS Chapter 244 which applies to all members of an approval authority, each member of the approval authority shall be impartial. Any member having any substantial past or present involvement with the applicant, or other interested persons, the property or surrounding property, or having a financial interest in the outcome of the proceeding, or having any prehearing contacts, shall state for the record the nature of their involvement or contacts, and shall either:

(a) State that they are not prejudiced by the involvement or contacts and will participate and vote on the matter; or

(b) State that they are prejudiced by the involvement or contact and will withdraw from participation in the matter. (Ord. 2875 § 1.070.155, 2003)


17.24.160 Hearings procedure.

(1) Unless otherwise provided by the rules of procedure adopted by the council, the approval authority shall have the authority to conduct a public hearing, and:

(a) Determine who qualifies as a party;

(b) Regulate the course, sequence, and decorum of the hearing;

(c) Dispose of procedural requirements or similar matters;

(d) Rule on offers of proof and relevancy of evidence and testimony;

(e) Impose reasonable limitations on the number of witnesses heard and set reasonable time limits for oral presentation and rebuttal testimony;

(f) Take such other action appropriate for conduct commensurate with the nature of the hearing; and

(g) Approve or deny applications or approve with conditions pursuant to SHMC 17.24.250.

(2) Unless otherwise provided in the rules of procedure adopted by the council, the approval authority shall conduct the hearing as follows:

(a) Announce the nature and purpose of the hearing and summarize the rules of conducting the hearing, address preliminary matters such as ex parte communications, conflict of interest and bias, and make a statement that:

(i) Lists the applicable substantive criteria;

(ii) States that testimony, arguments, and evidence must be directed toward the criteria described in subsection (2)(a)(i) of this section, or to the other criteria in the comprehensive plan, or the Development Code which the person believes applies to the decision;

(iii) States that failure to raise an issue accompanied by statements or evidence sufficient to afford the decision-maker and the parties an opportunity to respond to the issue precludes appeal to the Land Use Board of Appeals on that issue;

(b) Recognize parties;

(c) Request the director to present the staff report, to explain any graphic or pictorial displays which are a part of the report, to summarize the findings, recommendations and conditions, if any, and to provide such other information as may be requested by the approval authority;

(d) Allow the applicant or a representative of the applicant to be heard;

(e) Allow parties or witnesses in favor of the applicant’s proposal to be heard;

(f) Allow parties or witnesses in opposition to the applicant’s proposal to be heard; 

(g) Upon failure of any party to appear, the approval authority shall take into consideration written material submitted by such party;

(h) Allow the applicant to offer rebuttal evidence and testimony limited to rebuttal of points raised. New testimony will not be heard;

(i) If the proceeding is an initial evidentiary hearing before a decision-making body, announce that, upon the request of a participant, the body must either grant a continuance for no less than seven days or leave the record open for no less than seven days. Ask if any participant requests a continuance or requests that the record be left open;

(j) If no request for a continuance, conclude the hearing by announcing officially the public hearing is closed;

(k) If no request to leave the record open, close the record;

(l) Ask if the applicant waives the opportunity to submit final written argument after the close of the record; and

(m) If no request to submit final argument by the applicant, make a decision pursuant to SHMC 17.24.250 or take the matter under advisement pursuant to SHMC 17.24.180.

(3) Unless otherwise provided by the rules of procedures adopted by the council, the following rules shall apply to the general conduct of the hearing:

(a) The approval authority may ask questions at any time before the close of the hearing, and the answers shall be limited to the substance of the question; questions may also be asked of staff at any time after the close of the hearing and the record; however, such questions shall be limited to the evidence in the record and the applicable law;

(b) Parties or the director must receive approval from the approving authority to submit questions directly to other parties or witnesses or the director;

(c) A reasonable amount of time shall be given to persons to respond to questions;

(d) No person shall testify without first receiving recognition from the approval authority and stating their full name and address;

(e) The approval authority may require that testimony be under oath or affirmation;

(f) Audience demonstrations such as applause, cheering, and display of signs, or other conduct disruptive of the hearing shall not be permitted. Any such conduct may be cause for immediate suspension of the hearing;

(g) No person shall be disorderly, abusive, or disruptive of the orderly conduct of the hearing; and

(h) After the close of the hearing and the record, the approval authority may obtain legal advice from its lawyer concerning legal issues raised during the proceedings, instructions on the applicable law, and the application of the law to the evidence in the record. There is no right to rebut legal advice from the approval authority’s lawyer provided after the close of the record. (Ord. 2875 § 1.070.160, 2003)


17.24.165 Continuation of the hearing and request to leave the record open.

(1) If the proceeding is an initial evidentiary hearing, prior to the close of the hearing, the chair shall announce that, upon the request of a participant, the hearing authority must either grant a continuance for no less than seven days or leave the record open for no less than seven days as set forth in ORS 197.763:

(a) A continued hearing is conducted in the same manner as the original hearing; and

(b) When the record is left open, any person may submit relevant written testimony, argument or evidence and any person may raise new issues which relate to the new testimony, argument or evidence, as specified in ORS 197.763. 

(2) In addition to a continuance or request to leave the record open pursuant to subsection (1) of this section, the hearing authority may continue a public hearing or leave the record open at its discretion. Said continuance or opening may be to gather additional evidence, to consider the application fully, or to give notice to additional persons.

(3) Unless otherwise provided by the approval authority, no additional notice need be given of the continued hearing if the matter is continued to a date, time, and place certain. Notwithstanding the above, renotification in accordance with the notice and advertising requirements of this chapter shall be required if:

(a) The requested continuance would delay or continue the hearing over 60 calendar days from the date of the original hearing date. The requestor shall pay the cost of the renotification if the requestor had previously been granted a continuance; or

(b) The continuation results in a change in the application to such a degree that the notice of the proposed action does not reasonably describe the application. 

(4) If a quorum of the hearing authority does not appear for a scheduled public hearing, the public hearing shall automatically be continued to the date and time of the next regularly scheduled meeting.

(5) Unless requested or agreed to by the applicant, the time period of the continuance or period of time the record is held open is included in the time limit for final decision as set forth in SHMC 17.24.030. (Ord. 2875 § 1.070.165, 2003)


17.24.170 Final written argument.

After the close of the record, the chair shall ask the applicant if the applicant desires to waive submission of final written argument as provided by ORS 197.763. If final argument is waived, the approval authority may proceed to deliberate and make a decision. If the applicant desires to submit final written argument, a date and time certain no less than seven calendar days from the date of request shall be set for the submission of written argument and deliberations on the matter shall be continued to the next regularly scheduled meeting after the submission of written argument. The time period for this delay in obtaining a final decision shall not be included in the time limits for final decision as set forth in SHMC 17.24.030. (Ord. 2875 § 1.070.170, 2003)


17.24.180 Continuation of the hearing.

(1) An approval authority may continue the hearing from time to time to gather additional evidence, to consider the application fully, or to give notice to additional persons.

(2) Unless otherwise provided by the approval authority, no additional notice need be given of the continued hearing if the matter is continued to a date, time, and place certain. (Ord. 2875 § 1.070.180, 2003)


17.24.200 Evidence.

(1) All evidence offered and not objected to may be received unless excluded by the approval authority on its own motion.

(2) Evidence received at any hearing shall be of a quality that reasonable persons rely upon in the conducting of their everyday affairs.

(3) No person shall present irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious testimony or evidence.

(4) Formal rules of evidence, as used in courts of law, shall not apply. (Ord. 2875 § 1.070.200, 2003)


17.24.210 Judicial notice.

(1) The approval authority may take notice of the following:

(a) All facts which are judicially noticeable. Such noticed facts shall be stated and made part of the record, pursuant to ORS 183.450:

(1) Irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded but erroneous rulings on evidence shall not preclude agency action on the record unless shown to have substantially prejudiced the rights of a party. All other evidence of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in conduct of their serious affairs shall be admissible. Agencies and hearing officers shall give effect to the rules of privilege recognized by law. Objections to evidentiary offers may be made and shall be noted in the record. Any part of the evidence may be received in written form.

(2) All evidence shall be offered and made a part of the record in the case, and except for matters stipulated to and except as provided in subsection (4) of this section no other factual information or evidence shall be considered in the determination of the case. Documentary evidence may be received in the form of copies or excerpts, or by incorporation by reference. The burden of presenting evidence to support a fact or position in a contested case rests on the proponent of the fact or position. 

(3) Every party shall have the right of cross-examination of witnesses who testify and shall have the right to submit rebuttal evidence. Persons appearing in a limited party status shall participate in the manner and to the extent prescribed by rule of the agency. 

(4) The hearing officer and agency (Note: For purposes of this Code – The Approving Authority) may take notice of judicially cognizable facts, and may take official notice of general, technical or scientific facts within the specialized knowledge of the hearing officer or agency. Parties shall be notified at any time during the proceeding but in any event prior to the final decision of material officially noticed and they shall be afforded an opportunity to contest the facts so noticed. The hearing officer and agency may utilize the hearing officer’s or agency’s experience, technical competence and specialized knowledge in the evaluation of the evidence presented. 

(5) No sanction shall be imposed or order be issued except upon consideration of the whole record or such portions thereof as may be cited by any party, and as supported by, and in accordance with, reliable, probative and substantial evidence. [1957 c.717 s.9; 1971 c.734 s.15; 1975 c.759 s.12; 1977 c.798 s.3; 1979 c.593 s.21; 1987 c.833 s.1; 1995 c.272 s.5; 1997 c.391 s.1; 1997 c.801 s.76; 1999 c.448 s.5; 1999 c.849 s.34]

(b) The statewide planning goals adopted pursuant to ORS Chapter 197; and 

(c) The comprehensive plan and other officially adopted plans, implementing ordinances, and rules and regulations of the city of St. Helens.

(2) Matters judicially noticed need not be established by evidence and may be considered by the approval authority in the determination of the application. (Ord. 2875 § 1.070.210, 2003)


17.24.220 Participation in the decision – Voting.

(1) In addition to the provisions of ORS 227.035 which apply to commission members or ORS Chapter 244 which applies to all members of an approval authority, each member of the approval authority shall be impartial. Any member having any substantial past or present involvement with the applicant, or other interested persons, the property or surrounding property, or having a financial interest in the outcome of the proceeding, or having any prehearing contacts, shall state for the record the nature of their involvement or contacts, and shall either:

(a) State that they are not prejudiced by the involvement or contacts and will participate and vote on the matter; or

(b) State that they are prejudiced by the involvement or contact and will withdraw from participation in the matter.

(2) An affirmative vote by a majority of the qualified voting members of the approval authority who are present is required to approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application or to amend, modify, or reverse a decision on appeal or review.

(3) Notwithstanding subsections (1) and (2) of this section, no member of an approval authority having a financial interest in the outcome of an application shall take part in proceedings on that application; provided, however, with respect to the council only, a member may vote upon a finding of necessity which shall be placed on the record by the presiding officer.

(4) Only those qualified members who have reviewed the entire record shall vote.

(5) In the event of a tie, the decision which is the subject of appeal or review shall stand. (Ord. 2875 § 1.070.220, 2003)


17.24.230 Record of proceeding for public hearings.

(1) A verbatim record of the proceeding shall be made by stenographic or mechanical means, and:

(a) It shall not be necessary to transcribe testimony except as provided for in SHMC 17.24.330; and

(b) The minutes or transcript of testimony, or other evidence of the proceedings, shall be part of the record.

(2) All exhibits received shall be marked so as to provide identification upon review.

(3) The official record shall include:

(a) All materials, pleadings, memoranda, stipulations, and motions submitted by any party to the proceeding and recorded or considered by the approval authority as evidence;

(b) All materials submitted by the director to the approval authority with respect to the application including, in the case of an appeal taken pursuant to SHMC 17.24.290, the record of the director’s decision as provided by SHMC 17.24.110;

(c) The transcript of the hearing, if requested by the council or a party, or the minutes of the hearing, or other evidence of the proceedings before the approval authority;

(d) The written findings, conclusions, decision and, if any, conditions of approval of the approval authority;

(e) Argument by the parties or their legal representatives permitted pursuant to SHMC 17.24.320 at the time of review before the council;

(f) All correspondence relating to the application; and

(g) A copy of the notice which was given as provided by SHMC 17.24.130, accompanying affidavits and list of persons who were sent mailed notice. (Ord. 2875 § 1.070.230, 2003)


17.24.250 The decision process of the approval authority.

(1) The decision shall be based on:

(a) Proof by the applicant that the application fully complies with:

(i) Applicable portions of the city of St. Helens comprehensive plan; and

(ii) The relevant approval standards found in the applicable chapter(s) of this code or other applicable implementing ordinances; and

(iii) The Oregon Transportation Planning Rule as applicable, pursuant to SHMC 17.08.060.

(b) The standards and criteria that were applicable at the time the application was determined to be complete; at such time as the city’s plan and applicable ordinances are acknowledged.

(2) Consideration may also be given to:

(a) Proof of a change in the neighborhood community or a mistake in the comprehensive plan or zoning map as it relates to the property which is the subject of the development application; and

(b) Factual oral testimony or written statements from the parties, other persons and other governmental agencies relevant to the existing conditions, other applicable standards and criteria, possible negative or positive attributes of the proposal or factors in subsection (1) or (2) of this section.

(3) In all cases, the decision shall include a statement in a form addressing the requirements of SHMC 17.24.060 which refers to the director’s staff report.

(4) The approval authority may:

(a) Adopt findings and conclusions contained in the staff report;

(b) Adopt findings and conclusions of a lower approval authority;

(c) Adopt its own findings and conclusions;

(d) Adopt findings and conclusions submitted by any party provided all parties have had an opportunity to review the findings and comment on the same; or

(e) Adopt findings and conclusions from another source, whether with or without modification, having made a tentative decision, and having directed staff to prepare findings for review and to provide an opportunity for all parties to comment on the same.

(5) The decision may be for denial, approval, or approval with conditions. Any additional conditions shall be pursuant to subsections (5)(a) through (f) of this section.

(a) Conditions may be imposed where such conditions are necessary to:

(i) Carry out the applicable provisions of the St. Helens comprehensive plan; and

(ii) Carry out the applicable implementing ordinances;

(b) Conditions of approval shall be fulfilled within the time limit set forth in the decision or, if no time limit is set forth, within one year. Failure to fulfill any condition of approval within the time limitations provided may be grounds for revocation of approval;

(c) Changes, alterations, or amendments to the substance of the conditions of approval shall be processed as a new action;

(d) Prior to the commencement of development (i.e., the issuance of any permits or the taking of any action under the approved development application), the owner and any contract purchasers of the property which is the subject of the approved application, if made a condition of approval, may be required to sign and deliver to the director their acknowledgment and consent to such conditions; 

(e) The conditional approval may require the owner of the property to sign within a time certain or, if no time is designated, within a reasonable time, a contract with the city for enforcement of the conditions and:

(i) The council shall have the authority to execute such contracts on behalf of the city;

(ii) If a contract is required by a conditional approval, no building permit shall be issued for the use covered by the application until the executed contract is recorded in a real property record of the applicable county and filed in the county records; and

(iii) Such contracts shall be enforceable against the signing parties, their heirs, successors, and assigns by the city by appropriate action in law or suit in equity for the benefit of public health, safety, and welfare;

(f) A bond in a form acceptable to the director or, upon appeal or review by the appropriate approval authority, a cash deposit from the property owners or contract purchasers, in such an amount as will ensure compliance with the conditions imposed pursuant to this section, may be required. Such bond or deposit shall be posted prior to the issuance of a building permit for the use covered by the application. (Ord. 3150 § 3 (Att. B), 2011; Ord. 2875 § 1.070.250, 2003)


17.24.260 The form of the final decision.

(1) The final decision shall be a decision which is in writing and which has been:

(a) Signed by the director in the case of a final decision by the director, and filed as a final decision within 10 calendar days unless extended pursuant to SHMC 17.24.300; or

(b) Formally adopted and signed by the chairperson of the planning commission, or the duly authorized commissioner designated by planning commission vote, and filed with the director within 10 calendar days of the formal adoption of the decision; or

(c) Formally adopted by the council, and signed by the mayor, or the duly authorized councilor designated by city council vote, and filed with the director within 10 calendar days of the formal adoption of the decision; or

(d) Formally adopted by the historic landmark commission and signed by the chair and filed with the director within 10 calendar days of the formal adoption of the decision.

(2) The final decision shall be filed in the records of the director within 10 calendar days after the decision is signed. (Ord. 3084 § 2, 2008; Ord. 2875 § 1.070.260, 2003)


17.24.270 Notice of final decision.

(1) Notice of a final decision shall contain:

(a) A statement that all required notices under SHMC 17.24.130 have been met;

(b) A statement of where the adopted findings of fact, decision, and statement of conditions can be obtained;

(c) The date the final decision was filed; and

(d) A statement of whether a party to the proceeding may seek review of the decision, as appropriate.

(2) Notice of the final decision shall be mailed to the applicant and to all the parties to the decision, and shall be made available to the members of the council. (Ord. 2875 § 1.070.270, 2003)


17.24.275 Amended decision process.

(1) The approving authority may issue an amended decision after the notice of final decision has been issued and within 10 working days of receipt of a proper request for an amended decision.

(2) A request for an amended decision shall be in writing, accompanied with the appropriate fee, and filed with the director within the appeal period, after the notice of final decision has been filed.

(3) A request for an amended decision may be filed within the appeal period by:

(a) The city council (via minutes of meeting and majority voting);

(b) The planning commission (via minutes of meeting and majority voting);

(c) The director or representative (via letter to file);

(d) Any party entitled to notice of the original decision (via application and required fee); or

(e) Any party who submitted comments in writing on the original decision (via application and required fee).

(4) The amended decision process shall be limited to one time for each original application.

(5) The approving authority shall make the determination as to issuance of an amended decision based on findings that one or more of the following conditions exist (except when agreed in writing by applicant):

(a) An error or omission was made on the original notice of final decision;

(b) The original decision was based on incorrect information; and

(c) New information becomes available during the appeal period which was not available when the decision was made which alters the facts or conditions in the original decision.

(6) An amended decision shall be processed in accordance with SHMC 17.24.120 and 17.24.130. (Ord. 2875 § 1.070.275, 2003)


17.24.280 Denial of the application – Resubmittal.

(1) An application which has been denied or an application which was denied and which on appeal or review has not been reversed by a higher authority, including the Land Use Board of Appeals, the Land Conservation and Development Commission or the courts, may not be resubmitted for the same or a substantially similar proposal or for the same or substantially similar action for a period of at least 12 months from the date the final city action is made denying the application unless there is a substantial change in the facts or a change in city policy which would change the outcome, except as per subsection (2) of this section.

(2) An applicant may resubmit a denied application pursuant to ORS 227.184:

(1) A person whose application for a permit is denied by the governing body of a city or its designee under ORS 227.178 may submit to the city a supplemental application for any or all other uses allowed under the city’s comprehensive plan and land use regulations in the zone that was the subject of the denied application.

(2) The governing body of a city or its designee shall take final action on a supplemental application submitted under this section, including resolution of all appeals, within 240 days after the application is deemed complete. Except that 240 days shall substitute for 120 days, all other applicable provisions of ORS 227.178 shall apply to a supplemental application submitted under this section. 

(3) A supplemental application submitted under this section shall include a request for any rezoning or zoning variance that may be required to issue a permit under the city’s comprehensive plan and land use regulations.

(4) The governing body of a city or its designee shall adopt specific findings describing the reasons for approving or denying: 

(a) A use for which approval is sought under this section; and 

(b) A rezoning or variance requested in the application. [1999 c.648 s.4]

(Ord. 2875 § 1.070.280, 2003)


17.24.290 Standing to appeal.

(1) In the case of a decision by the director, any person entitled to notice of the decision under SHMC 17.24.120 or any person who is adversely affected or aggrieved by the decision may file a notice of appeal as provided by SHMC 17.24.310.

(2) In the case of a decision by the planning commission, except for a decision on an appeal of the director’s decision, any person shall be considered a party to a matter, thus having standing to appeal, provided:

(a) The person appeared before the planning commission orally or in writing and:

(i) The person was entitled as of right to notice and hearing prior to the decision being appealed; or 

(ii) The person is aggrieved or has interests adversely affected by the decision.

(3) In the case of a decision by the historic landmark commission, except for a decision on an appeal of the director’s decision, any person shall be considered a party to a matter, thus having standing to appeal, provided:

(a) The person appeared before the historic landmark commission orally or in writing and:

(i) The person was entitled as of right to notice and hearing prior to the decision being appealed; or 

(ii) The person is aggrieved or has interests adversely affected by the decision. (Ord. 3084 § 2, 2008; Ord. 2875 § 1.070.290, 2003)


17.24.300 Computation of appeal period from a director’s decision and effective date of the decision.

(1) In computing the length of the appeal period of any approval authority and the effective date for a director’s decision, the day the notice is mailed shall be excluded, and the last day for filing the appeal and the effective date shall be included unless the last day falls on a legal holiday for the city or on a Saturday, in which the last day shall be the next business day. The director may extend the appeal period and the effective date to the day following a planning commission or city council meeting when the computed appeal period would not otherwise provide an opportunity for the planning commission or city council to be notified regarding the decision. The appeal period thus computed shall not be less than seven nor greater than 20 days. Unless an extension is granted, decisions of the director shall normally be 10 calendar days; decisions of the planning commission and historic landmark commission shall normally be 14 calendar days (unless required to be longer by law).

(2) The director may grant an extension of the appeal period and effective date on a director’s decision for a reasonable time only if requested by the applicant and in the condition where no appeal has been filed to that date, except as described in subsection (1) of this section. (Ord. 3084 § 2, 2008; Ord. 2875 § 1.070.300, 2003)


17.24.310 Determination of appropriate reviewing body.

(1) All land use and limited land use decisions made by the director may be appealed pursuant to SHMC 17.24.090, as provided in Table A, located at SHMC 17.24.400.

(2) Final decisions, excluding appeals and reviews of the director’s decision, made by the planning commission under SHMC 17.24.090(2) or (3) may be appealed to the council, as provided in Table A, located at SHMC 17.24.400, by:

(a) The filing of a notice of appeal (application) as provided by SHMC 17.24.340 by any party to the decision by 5:00 p.m. on the final date of the appeal period, as stated in the notice of final decision; or

(b) The council, on its own motion, seeking review by majority voice vote prior to the final date of the appeal period.

(3) Final decision made by the historic landmark commission may be reviewed by the city council. 

(4) Failure to file an appeal shall be deemed a failure to exhaust administrative remedies. It is the purpose of this section to provide parties every remedy possible. The filing of an appeal is a condition precedent to litigation. (Ord. 3084 § 2, 2008; Ord. 2875 § 1.070.310, 2003)


17.24.320 Type of appeal.

(1) The appeal of a decision made by the director under SHMC 17.24.090(1) and 17.24.110 shall be de novo and conducted as if brought under SHMC 17.24.090(2) or (3).

(2) The appeal of an original decision made by the planning commission to the city council shall be de novo and conducted as if brought under SHMC 17.24.090(4), pursuant to SHMC 17.24.155 through 17.24.270. (Ord. 2875 § 1.070.320, 2003)


17.24.330 Transcripts.

(1) The appellant or any party who is the first to request a transcript shall be responsible to satisfy all costs incurred for preparation of the transcript at a rate of actual costs. Payment shall be made in full at least five days prior to the hearing.

(2) Any party other than the appellant or the first party to request a transcript shall be charged copy costs as per St. Helens Resolution 1332 and amendments thereafter. (Ord. 2875 § 1.070.330, 2003)


17.24.340 Notice of appeal (application).

(1) The notice of appeal shall contain:

(a) A reference to the application sought to be appealed;

(b) A statement as to how the petitioner qualifies as a party;

(c) The specific grounds for the appeal. Grounds shall include specific reference to the Development Code sections or comprehensive plan provisions which form the basis for the appeal; and

(d) The date of the filing of the final decision on the action or, in the case of a decision by the director, the date the decision was filed and the date notice of the final or proposed decision was given.

(2) The appeal shall be accompanied by the required fee.

(3) The appeal shall be filed in accordance with the appeal deadline specified in the notice of decision.

(4) All the requirements of this section are jurisdictional requirements for filing a valid petition for appeal. (Ord. 2875 § 1.070.340, 2003)


17.24.345 Fee waiver for appeals.

(1) The fee for a petition (application) for appeal may be waived or reduced and/or refunded in whole or in part to the applicant by the council upon written request if:

(a) The proposed project will benefit the general public; or

(b) The applicant is a public agency or nonprofit, community-oriented service organization; or

(c) Payment of the application fee would pose a financial hardship to the applicant.

(2) Only the “local” portion of a fee may be waived or reduced when a portion of a fee must be remitted to another agency as required by law. 

(3) If the reason for the appeal is found to be due to a mistake by the original approving authority and the appellant is the final prevailing party after all appeals are completed, then the fee shall be refunded in full. (Ord. 2875 § 1.070.345, 2003)


17.24.350 Persons entitled to notice on appeal – Type of notice.

Upon appeal, notice shall be given to parties entitled to notice under SHMC 17.24.130 and 17.24.290. (Ord. 2875 § 1.070.350, 2003)


17.24.360 Contents of notice on appeal.

Notice shall include those matters provided by SHMC 17.24.140. (Ord. 2875 § 1.070.360, 2003)


17.24.370 Action on appeal – Time limit and authority to change the decision.

(1) The approval authority shall affirm, reverse, or modify the decision which is the subject of the appeal; however, the decision shall be made in accordance with the provisions of SHMC 17.24.250; or

(2) Upon the written consent of all parties to extend the 120-day limit, the approval authority may remand the matter if it is satisfied that testimony or other evidence could not have been presented or was not available at the time of the hearing. In deciding to remand the matter, the approval authority shall consider and make findings and conclusions regarding:

(a) The prejudice to parties;

(b) The convenience or availability of evidence at the time of the initial hearing;

(c) The surprise to opposing parties;

(d) The date notice was given to other parties as to an attempt to admit; or 

(e) The competency, relevancy, and materiality of the proposed testimony or other evidence. (Ord. 2875 § 1.070.370, 2003)


17.24.380 Final action of the approval authority – Effective date.

(1) Final action by the approval authority on appeal shall be effective on the day of the decision or the day that the final order is signed, whichever is later.

(2) Within five working days of the filing of the final action of the appeal authority, the director shall give notice of the final action to all parties to the proceeding, informing them of the date of filing, the decision rendered, and where a copy may be found. (Ord. 2875 § 1.070.380, 2003)


17.24.390 Revocation of approvals.

(1) An approval authority may, after a hearing conducted pursuant to this chapter, modify or revoke any approval granted pursuant to this chapter for any of the following reasons:

(a) A material misrepresentation or mistake of fact made by the applicant in the application or in testimony and evidence submitted, whether such misrepresentation be intentional or unintentional; or

(b) A failure to comply with the terms and/or conditions of approval; or

(c) A failure to use the premises in accordance with the terms of the approval; or

(d) A material misrepresentation or mistake or fact or policy by the city in the written or oral report regarding the matter whether such misrepresentation be intentional or unintentional.

Note: Misrepresentation or mistake referred to in subsections (1)(a) and (d) of this section must be material to the criteria for the decision.

(2) In the case of a decision made by the director, the hearing on whether to modify or revoke an approval shall be held by the applicable appeal authority.

(3) Revocations of approval made by the planning commission may be appealed to the city council as provided by SHMC 17.24.290 and other applicable portions of this chapter.

(4) Revocations of approval made by the historic landmark commission may be appealed to the city council as provided by SHMC 17.24.290 and other applicable portions of this chapter. (Ord. 3084 § 2, 2008; Ord. 2875 § 1.070.390, 2003)


17.24.400 Table A. 

TABLE A 

LAND USE DECISION PROCESS  

(Note: for all land use decisions there can only be one approval authority and one appeal authority in the city) 

	DIRECTOR

Decision without hearing	PLANNING COMMISSION

Public hearing	CITY COUNCIL

Public hearing

	ACCESSORY STRUCTURES pursuant to Chapter 17.124 SHMC	Appeal or referral*	 

	LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS pursuant to Chapter 17.140 SHMC	Appeal or referral*	 

	PARTITIONS pursuant to Chapter 17.140 SHMC	Appeal or referral*	 

	 	SUBDIVISIONS pursuant to Chapter 17.136 SHMC when not part of a planned development	Appeal or referral

	 	Recommendation on SUBDIVISIONS pursuant to Chapter 17.148 SHMC when requested as part of PLANNED DEVELOPMENT and/or in conjunction with a VARIANCE to the subdivisions standard	SUBDIVISIONS pursuant to Chapter 17.148 SHMC when requested as part of PLANNED DEVELOPMENT and/or in conjunction with a VARIANCE to the subdivisions standard

	REVIEW OF USES in Willamette Greenway zone	Appeal or referral*	Ordinance required

	EXPEDITED LAND DIVISION (partition, subdivision, or PUD meeting definition and requirements of ORS 197.360)	Appointed referee	Oregon Court of Appeals

	SITE DEVELOPMENT pursuant to Chapter 17.96 SHMC	Referral	Appeal

	 	VARIANCE pursuant to Chapter 17.108 SHMC	Appeal or referral

	HOME OCCUPATION pursuant to Chapter 17.120 SHMC	Appeal or referral*	 

	SOLAR ACCESS for new construction on lots not covered by SHMC 17.24.090(3)(a) pursuant to Chapter 17.48 SHMC	Appeal or referral*	 

	 	SOLAR ACCESS requirements for new subdivisions pursuant to Chapter 17.48 SHMC	Appeal or referral

	SIGN PERMITS	Appeal or referral*	 

	 	SIGN CODE ADJUSTMENTS/ VARIANCES pursuant to Chapter 17.88 SHMC	Appeal or referral

	TEMPORARY USE pursuant to Chapter 17.116 SHMC	Appeal or referral*	 

	UNLISTED USES	Appeal or referral*	 

	SENSITIVE LAND PERMIT (by director)	Appeal or referral*	 

	 	SENSITIVE LAND PERMIT (by commission)	Appeal or referral

	 	CONDITIONAL USE pursuant to Chapter 17.100 SHMC	Appeal or referral

	 	Appeal of revocation of director decision	Appeal of revocation of planning commission or historic sites and overlay district committee decisions

	 	Recommendation on a preliminary PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ZONE CHANGE proposal under Chapter 17.148 SHMC	A preliminary PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ZONE CHANGE proposal under Chapter 17.148 SHMC; ordinance required

	 	Preliminary plan/plat for PLANNED DEVELOPMENT proposal under Chapter 17.148 SHMC	Appeal or referral

	Final land division plan/plat	Appeal	 

	 	Recommendation on quasi-judicial ZONING MAP AMENDMENT without comprehensive plan change pursuant to SHMC 17.08.030	Quasi-judicial ZONING MAP AMENDMENT without comprehensive plan change pursuant to SHMC 17.08.030; ordinance required

	 	Recommendation on quasi-judicial REZONING concurrent with a quasi-judicial comprehensive plan amendment	Quasi-judicial REZONING concurrent with quasi-judicial comprehensive plan amendment; ordinance required

	 	Recommendation on quasi-judicial COMPREHENSIVE PLAN MAP OR TEXT AMENDMENT	Quasi-judicial COMPREHENSIVE PLAN MAP OR TEXT AMENDMENTS; ordinance required

	 	Recommendation on ANNEXATION request	ANNEXATIONS as referred by the planning commission; ordinance required

		Recommendation on COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND ZONING DESIGNATIONS made to lands ANNEXED to the city	The formal imposition of COMPREHENSIVE PLAN MAP AND ZONING DESIGNATIONS made to lands ANNEXED to the city

	 	Recommendation on DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT	DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT; ordinance required

	 	ANY OTHER LAND USE MATTER not specifically assigned to the director or the city council under this code	Appeal or referral

	MINOR MODIFICATIONS TO CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT	Appeal or referral*	 

	 	ACCESS VARIANCE	Appeal or referral

	NONCONFORMING STATUS	Appeal or referral*	 

	 	 	Supplemental application per ORS 227.184

	 	HISTORIC LANDMARK COMMISSION

Public hearing	CITY COUNCIL

Public hearing

	 	Recommendation on historic sites pursuant to Chapter 17.36 SHMC	Final decisions

	 	Approval for alterations and demolitions to historic sites pursuant to Chapter 17.36 SHMC	Appeals only

*    Referrals can be appealed to the city council. 

(Ord. 3189 § 2 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 3084 § 2, 2008; Ord. 2875 § 1.070, Table A, 2003)


Chapter 17.28 ANNEXATION

Sections:

17.28.010    Purpose.

17.28.020    Administration and approval process.

17.28.030    Approval standards.

17.28.040    Application submission requirements.


17.28.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to:

(1) Implement the policies of the comprehensive plan;

(2) Provide for city review of all annexation requests for a determination of the availability of facilities and services as related to the proposal;

(3) Provide for dissemination of public information and for sufficient time for public review;

(4) Provide for city and county coordination of annexation requests; and

(5) Provide for an expedited process by establishing procedures whereby the annexation and rezoning may be considered concurrently. (Ord. 2875 § 1.075.010, 2003)


17.28.020 Administration and approval process.

(1) The applicant for an annexation proposal shall be as provided by Chapter 17.24 SHMC and shall concurrently apply for an established area/developing area designation as provided by Chapter 17.112 SHMC and for a zone map change following procedures outlined in Chapter 17.24 SHMC and a comprehensive plan map amendment pursuant to Chapter 17.24 SHMC.

(2) A preapplication conference with city staff is required. (See Chapter 17.24 SHMC.)

(3) Due to possible changes in state statutes, or regional or local policy, information given by staff to the applicant during the preapplication conference is valid for no more than six months:

(a) Another preapplication conference is required if any site development application is submitted six months after the preapplication conference; and

(b) Failure of the director to provide any of the information required by this section shall not constitute a waiver of the standards, criteria or requirements of the application.

(4) Within 60 days after the closing of the application submittal period, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.24 SHMC and shall make a recommendation to the city council for approval, approval with modifications, or denial of the annexation based on the standards in this chapter. At the same hearing, the planning commission shall recommend assignment of the developing or established area classification as provided by Chapter 17.112 SHMC, and the zoning and comprehensive plan map designations as provided in Chapter 17.24 SHMC.

(5) Any new zoning designation approved by the city through this process shall not become effective until the effective date of the city council’s final action on the proposed annexation.

(6) City notices, regarding the annexation, and given pursuant to SHMC 17.24.130, shall contain a declaration of the city’s intent to consider placing the property proposed for annexation or any part thereof in a city plan and zoning classification including whether it will be annexed as an established area as provided by SHMC 17.112.020(1) or developing area as provided by SHMC 17.112.020(2). 

(7) Annexations will comply with the City Charter, as amended. (Ord. 2875 § 1.075.020, 2003)


17.28.030 Approval standards.

(1) The decision to approve, approve with modification, or deny an application to annex property to the city shall be based on the following criteria:

(a) Adequate public facilities are available to the area and have sufficient capacity to provide service for the proposed annexation area; and

(b) Comply with comprehensive plan amendment standards and zoning ordinance amendment standards and not be in conflict with applicable comprehensive plan policies and implementing ordinances; and

(c) Complies with state laws; and

(d) Abutting roads must meet city standards or property owner will be required to sign and record an irrevocable consent to local improvement district; and

(e) Property exceeding 10 acres in gross size must show a need on the part of the city for such land if it is designated residential (e.g., less than five years’ supply of like designated lands in current city limits).

(2) The plan designation and the zoning designation placed on the property shall be the city’s zoning district which most closely implements the city’s comprehensive plan map designation.

(3) The determination of whether the property is an established area or a developing area will be based on the standards contained in Chapter 17.112 SHMC. (Ord. 2875 § 1.075.030, 2003)


17.28.040 Application submission requirements.

(1) All applications shall be made on forms provided by the director and shall be accompanied by:

(a) Copies of the annexation area, conceptual development plan(s) and necessary data or narrative (number to be determined at the preapplication conference), which explains how the annexation conforms to the standards:

(i) Sheet size for an annexation area, conceptual development plan and required drawings shall preferably not exceed 18 inches by 24 inches; and

(ii) The scale of the required drawings shall be an engineering scale;

(b) The required fee.

(2) The required information may be combined and does not have to be placed on separate maps.

(3) The annexation area plan, data and narrative shall include the following:

(a) A map to a scale shown in subsection (1)(a)(ii) of this section of the area to be annexed which includes the surrounding area;

(b) A map of the area shown on the Columbia County assessor map;

(c) A complete legal description of the annexation area;

(d) A statement of the availability, capacity, and status of existing water, sewer, drainage, and transportation facilities;

(e) A statement of the increased demand for such facilities to be generated by any proposed development within the annexation area; and

(f) A conceptual development plan which includes:

(i) The type of intensities (density) of the proposed land use;

(ii) Transportation corridors;

(iii) Significant natural features; and

(iv) Adjoining land uses. (Ord. 2875 § 1.075.040, 2003)


Chapter 17.32 ZONES AND USES

Sections:

17.32.010    Classification of zones.

17.32.020    Zoning district map.

17.32.030    Determination of zoning boundaries.

17.32.040    Unlisted use – Authorization of similar use.

17.32.050    Suburban residential zone – R-10.

17.32.060    Moderate residential zone – R-7.

17.32.070    General residential zone – R-5.

17.32.080    Apartment residential zone – AR.

17.32.090    Mobile home residential zone – MHR.

17.32.095    Mixed use zone – MU.

17.32.100    Highway commercial – HC.

17.32.110    General commercial – GC.

17.32.120    Repealed.

17.32.130    Light industrial – LI.

17.32.140    Heavy industrial – HI.

17.32.150    Public lands – PL.

17.32.160    Willamette Greenway – WG.

17.32.170    Riverfront district – RD.

17.32.171    Riverfront district – RD, marina.

17.32.172    Riverfront district – RD, plaza.

17.32.173    Riverfront district – RD, mill.

17.32.179    RD guidelines adopted.

17.32.180    Houlton business district – HBD.


17.32.010 Classification of zones.

All areas within the corporate limits of the city of St. Helens are divided into zoning districts. The use of each tract and ownership of land within the corporate limits is limited to those uses permitted by the zoning classification applicable to each such tract as designated in the following table. The zoning districts within the city of St. Helens are hereby classified and designated as follows:

	Suburban Residential	R-10

	Moderate Residential	R-7

	General Residential	R-5

	Apartment Residential	AR

	Mobile Home Residential	MHR

	Mixed Use	MU

	Highway Commercial	HC

	General Commercial	GC

	Light Industrial	LI

	Heavy Industrial	HI

	Willamette Greenway	WG

	Public Lands	PL

	Riverfront District	RD

	Houlton Business District	HBD

(Ord. 3215 § 4 (Att. D), 2017; Ord. 3180 § 1 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 3110 § 5 (Att. B), 2009; Ord. 2875 § 1.080.010, 2003)


17.32.020 Zoning district map.

(1) The boundaries of each of the foregoing districts listed in the table in SHMC 17.32.010 and the zoning classification and use of each tract in each of said zoning districts is prescribed to coincide with the identifying zone classifications shown on the map entitled “St. Helens Zoning District Map,” dated with the effective date of the ordinance codified in this code and signed by the mayor and city recorder and referred to as the zoning district map and the map by this reference is made a part of the code. A certified print of the adopted zoning district map or map amendments shall be maintained in the office of the planning division as long as the code remains in effect.

(2) Each lot, tract, and parcel of land or portion thereof within the zone boundaries as designated and marked on the zoning map is classified, zoned, and limited to the uses as hereinafter specified and defined for the applicable zone classification.

(3) Amendments to the city zoning district map may be made in accordance with the provisions of this code.

(a) Copies of all map amendments shall be dated with the effective date of the document adopting the map amendment and shall be maintained without change, together with the adopting documents, on file in the planning department; and

(b) The director shall maintain in the office and available for public inspection an up-to-date copy of the city zoning district map to be revised so that it accurately portrays changes of zone boundaries. (Ord. 2875 § 1.080.020, 2003)


17.32.030 Determination of zoning boundaries.

Where, due to the scale, lack of scale, lack of detail, or illegibility of the city zoning district map or due to any other reason, there is uncertainty, contradiction, or conflict as to the intended location of district boundary lines, the boundary lines shall be determined by the director in accordance with the following standards:

(1) Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways, railroad tracks, or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines;

(2) Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines;

(3) Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be construed as following city limits;

(4) Boundaries indicated as approximately following river, stream, and/or drainage channels shall be construed as following river, stream, and/or drainage channels; and

(5) Whenever any street is lawfully vacated, and when the lands within the boundaries thereof attach to and become a part of lands adjoining such street, the lands formerly within the vacated street shall automatically be subject to the same zoning district designation that is applicable to lands to which the street attaches. (Ord. 2875 § 1.080.030, 2003)


17.32.040 Unlisted use – Authorization of similar use.

(1) Purpose.

(a) It is not possible to contemplate all of the various uses which will be compatible within a zoning district. Therefore, unintentional omissions occur.

(b) The purpose of these provisions is to establish a procedure for determining whether certain specific uses would have been permitted in a zoning district had they been contemplated and whether such unlisted uses are compatible with the listed uses.

(2) Administration. The director shall maintain a list by zoning district of approved unlisted uses and the list shall have the same effect as an amendment to the use provisions of the applicable zone.

(3) Limitation.

(a) The director shall not authorize an unlisted use in a zoning district if the use is specifically listed in another zone as either a permitted use or a conditional use.

(b) The director shall only authorize a residential use that has on-site staff providing residential care, treatment, or training as defined in ORS 443.400 if the use is licensed or certified by a state agency to operate in Oregon prior to final occupancy.

(c) The decision of the director may be appealed in accordance with SHMC 17.24.290.

(4) Approval Standards. Approval or denial of an unlisted use application by the director shall be based on findings that:

(a) The use is consistent with the comprehensive plan;

(b) The use is consistent with the intent and purpose of the applicable zoning district;

(c) The use is similar to and of the same general type as the uses listed in the zoning district;

(d) The use has similar intensity, density, and off-site impacts as the uses listed in the zoning district; and

(e) The use has similar impacts on the community facilities as the listed uses. (Ord. 3032 § 1(3), 2007; Ord. 2875 § 1.080.040, 2003)


17.32.050 Suburban residential zone – R-10.

(1) Purposes. The R-10 zone is intended to provide minimum development standards for residential purposes and to establish larger urban residential home sites.

(2) Uses Permitted Outright. In an R-10 zone, the following uses are permitted outright:

(a) Auxiliary dwelling unit (per Chapter 17.128 SHMC).

(b) Home child care.

(c) Home occupation (per Chapter 17.120 SHMC).

(d) Public facilities, minor.

(e) Public park after site design review.

(f) Residential facility.

(g) Residential home.

(h) Single-dwelling unit, detached.

(3) Conditional Uses (See Chapter 17.100 SHMC). In an R-10 zone, the following conditional uses may be permitted upon application:

(a) Children’s day care or day nursery.

(b) Cultural exhibits and library services.

(c) Elderly/convalescent care facility.

(d) Private park.

(e) Public facilities, major.

(f) Public safety facilities.

(g) Religious assembly.

(4) Standards. In the R-10 zone the following standards shall apply:

(a) The minimum lot size shall be 10,000 square feet for all uses.

(b) The minimum lot width at the building line shall be 70 feet, except on a corner lot it shall be 85 feet.

(c) The minimum lot width at the street shall be 60 feet.

(d) The minimum lot width at the street on an approved cul-de-sac shall be 30 feet.

(e) The minimum lot depth shall be 100 feet.

(f) The minimum front yard shall be 20 feet.

(g) The minimum side yard width shall be 10 feet except on corner lots where the setback shall be 20 feet when facing a street other than an alley.

(h) The minimum rear yard depth shall be 20 feet.

(i) The minimum front and side yards or other setbacks as stated herein shall be increased where such yard or setback abuts a street having insufficient right-of-way widths to serve the area; in such cases, the planning commission shall determine the necessary setback requirements.

(j) The maximum building height shall be 35 feet, except as required in SHMC 17.68.040.

(k) Structures and buildings shall not occupy more than 35 percent of the lot area.

(l) No lot shall have more than one principal building thereon.

(m) The minimum landscaping shall be 25 percent of the lot area.

(5) All chapters of the Development Code apply. (Ord. 3232 § 2 (Att. A), 2018; Ord. 3215 § 4 (Att. D), 2017; Ord. 3032 § 1(4), 2007; Ord. 2875 § 1.080.050, 2003)


17.32.060 Moderate residential zone – R-7.

(1) Purpose. The R-7 zone is intended to provide minimum development standards for residential purposes and to establish urban moderate density residential home sites.

(2) Uses Permitted Outright. In an R-7 zone, the following uses are permitted outright:

(a) Auxiliary dwelling unit (per Chapter 17.128 SHMC).

(b) Home child care.

(c) Home occupation (per Chapter 17.120 SHMC).

(d) Public facilities, minor.

(e) Public park after site design review.

(f) Residential home.

(g) Single-dwelling unit, detached.

(3) Conditional Uses (See Chapter 17.100 SHMC). In an R-7 zone, the following conditional uses may be permitted upon application:

(a) Bed and breakfast, homestay, boarding house.

(b) Children’s day care/day nursery.

(c) Community recreation facility.

(d) Cultural exhibits and library services.

(e) Duplex residential units.

(f) Neighborhood store/plaza.

(g) Elderly/convalescent home.

(h) Private park.

(i) Public facilities, major.

(j) Public safety facilities.

(k) Religious assembly.

(4) Standards. In the R-7 zone the following standards shall apply:

(a) The minimum lot size is 7,000 square feet for all uses except for duplexes which need 10,000 square feet on interior lots.

(b) The minimum lot width at the building line shall be 60 feet, except on a corner lot it shall be 85 feet.

(c) The minimum lot width at the street shall be 50 feet; except for duplexes, the minimum lot width shall be 60 feet.

(d) The minimum lot width at the street on an approved cul-de-sac shall be 30 feet.

(e) The minimum lot depth shall be 85 feet.

(f) The minimum front yard shall be 20 feet.

(g) The minimum side yard shall be seven feet except on corner lots where the setback shall be 14 feet when facing a street other than an alley.

(h) The minimum rear yard depth shall be 20 feet.

(i) The minimum front and side yards or other setbacks as stated herein shall be increased where such yard or setback abuts a street having insufficient right-of-way widths to serve the area; in such cases, the planning commission shall determine the necessary setback requirements.

(j) The maximum building height shall be 35 feet.

(k) Buildings and structures shall not occupy more than 35 percent of the lot area.

(l) No lot shall have more than one principal building thereon.

(m) The minimum landscaping shall be 25 percent of the lot area.

(5) All chapters of the Development Code apply. (Ord. 3232 § 2 (Att. A), 2018; Ord. 3215 § 4 (Att. D), 2017; Ord. 3144 § 2 (Att. A), 2011; Ord. 3032 § 1(4), 2007; Ord. 2875 § 1.080.060, 2003)


17.32.070 General residential zone – R-5.

(1) Purpose. The R-5 zone is intended to provide minimum development standards for residential purposes and to establish sites for single-dwelling, detached and attached units for medium density residential developments.

(2) Uses Permitted Outright. In an R-5 zone, the following uses are permitted outright:

(a) Auxiliary dwelling unit (per Chapter 17.128 SHMC).

(b) Duplex dwelling units.

(c) Home child care.

(d) Home occupation (per Chapter 17.120 SHMC).

(e) Public facility, minor.

(f) Public park.

(g) Residential facility.

(h) Residential home.

(i) Single-dwelling units, attached (five units maximum together).

(j) Single-dwelling unit, detached.

(3) Conditional Uses (See Chapter 17.100 SHMC). In an R-5 zone, the following conditional uses may be permitted upon application:

(a) Bed and breakfast, homestay, and boarding house.

(b) Children’s day care/day nursery.

(c) Commercial recreation facility.

(d) Cultural exhibits and library services.

(e) Neighborhood store/plaza.

(f) Multidwelling units.

(g) Elderly/convalescent home.

(h) Private park.

(i) Public facilities, major.

(j) Public safety facilities.

(k) Religious assembly.

(4) Standards. In the R-5 zone, the following standards shall apply:

(a) For dwellings the minimum lot size shall be 5,000 square feet for the single-dwelling unit, detached and 5,800 square feet for a duplex dwelling structure and 2,500 square feet for each single-dwelling unit, attached (maximum of five units together). For multidwelling units, use duplex size as base plus 2,500 square feet for each multidwelling unit thereafter.

(b) The maximum building height shall be 35 feet except as required in SHMC 17.68.040.

(c) The minimum lot width at the building line and street shall be 50 feet for detached units. For duplex structures the width shall be a minimum of 58 feet and for attached single-dwelling units the width shall be at least 25 feet wide each. See SHMC 17.64.030 for multidwelling units. For flag lots the width at the street shall be a minimum of 20 feet.

(d) The minimum lot width at the street on an approved cul-de-sac shall be 30 feet.

(e) The minimum lot depth shall be 85 feet.

(f) The minimum front yard shall be 20 feet; see SHMC 17.64.020.

(g) No side yard shall be less than five feet wide for single-dwelling, detached, duplexes and single-dwelling, attached structures and 10 feet for multidwelling structures (see SHMC 17.64.030 for multidwelling units). Corner lots shall have a minimum side yard setback of 10 feet on the flanking street.

(h) The minimum rear yard depth shall be 10 feet. (See SHMC 17.64.030 on multidwelling units.)

(i) The minimum front and side yards or other setbacks as stated herein shall be increased where such yard or setbacks abut a street having insufficient right-of-way widths to serve the area; in such cases, the planning commission shall determine the necessary setback requirements.

(j) Buildings and structures shall not occupy more than 35 percent of the lot area except for single attached and multidwelling units, which can be up to 50 percent.

(k) No lot shall have more than one principal building constructed thereon, except for multidwelling structures.

(l) Multidwellings shall be subject to the special standards of SHMC 17.64.030.

(m) The minimum landscaping for dwellings other than multidwellings shall be 25 percent of the lot area.

(5) All chapters of the Development Code apply.

(6) Flag lots are possible in this zoning district. See SHMC 17.140.055. (Ord. 3232 § 2 (Att. A), 2018; Ord. 3215 § 4 (Att. D), 2017; Ord. 3144 § 2 (Att. A), 2011; Ord. 3032 § 1(4), 2007; Ord. 2875 § 1.080.070, 2003)


17.32.080 Apartment residential zone – AR.

(1) Purpose. The AR zone is intended to provide minimum development standards for residential purposes where complete community services are available and to provide for single dwellings, detached and attached, duplexes, and low/medium-rise multiple-dwelling residential units for heavy density residential development.

(2) Uses Permitted Outright. In an AR zone, the following uses are permitted outright:

(a) Auxiliary dwelling unit (per Chapter 17.128 SHMC).

(b) Duplex dwelling units.

(c) Home child care.

(d) Home occupation (per Chapter 17.120 SHMC).

(e) Multidwelling units.

(f) Public facility, minor.

(g) Public park. 

(h) Residential facility.

(i) Residential home.

(j) Single-dwelling unit, attached residential units (five units maximum together).

(k) Single-dwelling unit, detached residential units.

(3) Conditional Uses (See Chapter 17.100 SHMC). In an AR zone, the following conditional uses may be permitted upon application:

(a) Bed and breakfast, homestay, and boarding house.

(b) Children’s day care/day nursery.

(c) Community recreation, including structures.

(d) Commercial recreation facility.

(e) Neighborhood store/plaza.

(f) Hospitals, sanitariums, rest homes, and elderly homes.

(g) Lodge, fraternal, and civic assembly.

(h) Lodging facilities or rooming house.

(i) Parking facilities.

(j) Private parks.

(k) Public facilities, major.

(l) Religious assembly.

(m) Schools and related facilities.

(4) Standards. In the AR zone, the following standards shall apply:

(a) For dwellings the minimum lot size shall be 3,050 square feet for single-dwelling, detached units; 5,000 square feet minimum lot size for duplex structures; 1,600 square feet minimum lot size for single-dwelling, attached units each (maximum of five units together); and 1,500 square feet minimum lot size for each multidwelling unit over the base of 5,000 square feet for the first two units (with no maximum).

(b) The minimum front yard shall be 20 feet.

(c) For duplexes the minimum lot width at the street and building line shall be 50 feet; 30 feet for single detached dwelling units and no minimum for multidwelling unit lots; for flag lots and single attached dwelling units the minimum lot width at the street is 20 feet.

(d) The minimum lot depth shall be 85 feet, except single-dwelling units, attached shall be 80 feet.

(e) No single-dwelling, detached unit yard shall be less than five feet wide on both sides; corners shall be 10 feet wide on flanking street sides. Duplexes, single attached unit buildings, and multiplexes shall have a minimum of 10 feet on side yards.

(f) The minimum rear yard depth shall be 10 feet.

(g) The minimum front and side yards or other setbacks as stated herein shall be increased where such yard or setbacks abut a street having insufficient right-of-way widths to serve the area; in such cases, the planning commission shall determine the necessary setback requirements.

(h) The maximum building height shall be 35 feet, except as required in SHMC 17.68.040.

(i) Buildings and structures shall not occupy more than 50 percent of the lot.

(j) No lot shall have more than one principal building constructed thereon, except for multidwelling structures, in which case there is no such limitation.

(k) The minimum landscaping shall be 25 percent of the lot area except for multidwelling structures.

(5) All chapters of the Development Code apply.

(6) Flag lots are possible in this zoning district. See SHMC 17.140.055. (Ord. 3232 § 2 (Att. A), 2018; Ord. 3215 § 4 (Att. D), 2017; Ord. 3144 § 2 (Att. A), 2011; Ord. 3032 § 1(4), 2007; Ord. 2875 § 1.080.080, 2003)


17.32.090 Mobile home residential zone – MHR.

(1) Purpose. The MHR zone is intended to provide minimum development standards for residential purposes where complete community services are available, and where population concentrations of a moderate nature, including mobile home parks, may develop.

(2) Uses Permitted Outright. In the MHR zone, the following uses are permitted outright:

(a) Auxiliary dwelling unit (per Chapter 17.128 SHMC).

(b) Home child care.

(c) Home occupation (per Chapter 17.120 SHMC).

(d) Mobile home parks.

(e) Public parks.

(f) Public facility, minor.

(g) Residential facility.

(h) Residential home.

(i) Single-dwelling unit.

(3) Conditional Uses (See Chapter 17.100 SHMC). In the MHR zone, the following conditional uses may be permitted upon application:

(a) Bed and breakfast, homestay, and boarding house.

(b) Children’s day care or day nursery.

(c) Community recreation including structures.

(d) Duplexes.

(e) Neighborhood store/plaza. 

(f) Multidwelling units.

(g) Private park.

(h) Public facilities, major.

(i) Public or private school or college.

(j) Religious assembly.

(k) Sanitarium, rest home, senior or convalescent care facilities.

(l) Single-dwelling unit, attached.

(m) Travel trailer parks.

(4) Standards. In the MHR zone, the same standards as in the R-5 zone shall apply except for the following:

(a) Standards for mobile home parks shall conform to Chapter 17.60 SHMC.

(5) All chapters of the Development Code apply.

(6) Flag lots are possible in this zoning district. See SHMC 17.140.055. (Ord. 3232 § 2 (Att. A), 2018; Ord. 3215 § 4 (Att. D), 2017; Ord. 3144 § 2 (Att. A), 2011; Ord. 3032 § 1(4), 2007; Ord. 2875 § 1.080.090, 2003)


17.32.095 Mixed use zone – MU.

(1) Purpose. The MU zone is intended to provide for mixed uses in certain areas, generally between general commercial and residential zones. This method allows the market to mostly determine the uses.

(2) Uses Permitted Outright. In an MU zone, the following uses are permitted outright subject to the provisions of this code and especially the chapter on site development review (Chapter 17.96 SHMC):

(a) Animal sales and services: grooming, kennels, retail and veterinary (small animals).

(b) Auxiliary dwelling unit (per Chapter 17.128 SHMC).

(c) Car washes.

(d) Congregate housing.

(e) Continuing care retirement community.

(f) Cultural and library services.

(g) Dwellings: single detached or attached, duplexes, and dwellings above permitted uses.

(h) Eating and drinking establishments.

(i) Equipment (small) sales, rental and repairs.

(j) Financial institutions.

(k) Hardware store, without outdoor storage.

(l) Home child care.

(m) Home occupation (per Chapter 17.120 SHMC).

(n) Hotels and motels.

(o) Offices – all.

(p) Personal and business services such as barber shops, beauty shops, tailors, laundries, printing, and locksmiths. 

(q) Plumbing, HVAC, electrical and paint sales and service, without outdoor storage.

(r) Produce stands.

(s) Public facility, minor.

(t) Repair and maintenance of permitted retail products.

(u) Residential facility.

(v) Residential home.

(w) Retail sales establishments, not specifically catering to motorists.

(x) Studios.

(y) Theaters, except drive-ins.

(3) Conditional Uses. In the MU zone, the following conditional uses may be permitted upon application, subject to provision of Chapter 17.100 SHMC and other relevant sections of this code:

(a) Amusement services.

(b) Bar.

(c) Bed and breakfast facilities, homestay, and boarding house.

(d) Broadcast facilities without dishes over 36 inches or transmitter/receiver towers.

(e) Bus and train stations/terminals.

(f) Businesses with outdoor storage (those businesses permitted in subsection (2) of this section).

(g) Child care facility/day nursery.

(h) Drive-up businesses and services.

(i) Dwellings on same level as nonresidential use.

(j) Funeral homes.

(k) Hospitals and senior or convalescent care facilities.

(l) Laundromats and dry cleaners.

(m) Lodge, fraternal and civic assembly.

(n) Lodging facilities or rooming house.

(o) Marijuana retailer and/or medical marijuana dispensary.

(p) Multidwelling units.

(q) Nurseries and greenhouses.

(r) Parking lots.

(s) Parks, public and private.

(t) Pawn shops.

(u) Public and private schools.

(v) Public facilities, major.

(w) Public safety facilities.

(x) Recreation facilities (public or private).

(y) Religious assembly, including cemeteries.

(z) Shopping centers.

(aa) Travel trailer parks.

(bb) Vehicle repair, service, and sales.

(4) Standards. In the MU zone the following standards shall apply:

(a) Wherever a proposed structure abuts a residential zone, it may be required to be set back per Chapter 17.72 SHMC.

(b) The maximum building height shall be 45 feet, except as required in SHMC 17.68.040.

(c) Outdoor storage abutting or facing a lot in a residential zone shall comply with Chapter 17.72 SHMC.

(d) Maximum nonresidential lot coverage including all impervious surfaces shall be 90 percent.

(e) Multidwelling units and units above permitted uses must comply with AR standards and other applicable sections of this code.

(f) Single-dwelling units, attached or detached, shall comply with R-5 standards.

(g) Duplexes shall comply with R-5 standards.

(5) All chapters of the Development Code apply.

(6) Flag lots are possible in this zoning district. See SHMC 17.140.055. (Ord. 3232 § 2 (Att. A), 2018; Ord. 3215 § 4 (Att. D), 2017; Ord. 3190 § 2 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 3144 § 2 (Att. A), 2011; Ord. 3032 § 1(4), 2007; Ord. 2875 § 1.080.095, 2003)


17.32.100 Highway commercial – HC.

(1) Purpose. The HC zone is intended to recognize the existing commercial development along Highway 30 and to limit future commercial activity to retail concerns, activities that cater to motorists, and firms that deal in large goods and require unusual amounts of space.

(2) Uses Permitted Outright. In an HC zone, the following uses are permitted outright subject to the provisions of this code and in particular the chapter on site development review (Chapter 17.96 SHMC):

(a) Animal sales and services: grooming, kennels, retail, veterinary (small animals), and veterinary (large animals).

(b) Boat, trailer and recreational vehicle equipment sales, service and repair.

(c) Building supply firms that conduct business completely within an enclosed building except for outdoor storage.

(d) Bus and train stations/terminals.

(e) Car washes.

(f) Drive-up facilities (see specific requirements in Chapter 17.100 SHMC).

(g) Eating and drinking establishments, including drive-up and carry-out.

(h) Financial institutions, including drive-through (see specific requirements in Chapter 17.100 SHMC).

(i) Gasoline stations.

(j) Home occupation (per Chapter 17.120 SHMC).

(k) Motels and hotels.

(l) Motor vehicle sales, service and repair.

(m) Nurseries and greenhouses.

(n) Offices catering to motorists (e.g., insurance claims).

(o) Personal and business services such as barber shops, beauty shops, tailors, laundries, printing, and locksmiths.

(p) Parking lot.

(q) Plumbing, HVAC, electrical and paint sales and service.

(r) Produce stands.

(s) Public facility, minor.

(t) Retail sales establishments, specifically catering to motorists, including drive-in.

(u) Retail sales of large equipment items and repair and maintenance concerns that conduct business completely within an enclosed building except for outdoor storage.

(v) Shopping plaza (permitted businesses only).

(w) Small equipment rentals, sales and repair.

(x) Theaters, except drive-ins.

(y) Tire shops within an enclosed building.

(3) Conditional Uses. In the HC zone, the following conditional uses may be permitted upon application, subject to provision of Chapter 17.100 SHMC and other relevant sections of this code:

(a) Amusement services.

(b) Dry cleaners and laundromats.

(c) Dwelling units above outright permitted uses.

(d) Funeral homes.

(e) Hospitals.

(f) Marijuana retailer and/or medical marijuana dispensary.

(g) Parks.

(h) Public facilities, major.

(i) Recreation facilities.

(j) Religious assembly. 

(k) Retail establishments not directly catering to motorists.

(l) Schools.

(m) Shopping centers (can include all retail, personal services, professional services, medical, and dental offices). 

(n) Travel trailer parks.

(4) Standards. In the HC zone the following standards shall apply:

(a) The maximum building height shall be 40 feet.

(b) The minimum yard (as defined by Chapter 17.16 SHMC) adjacent to US 30 shall be 10 feet. The setback shall be occupied by landscaping or pedestrian-oriented amenities (such as a walkway, seating, or a plaza, including such amenities as part of a transit stop) in addition to landscaping. Landscaping in the setback may be credited toward the minimum landscape requirement for the site established in subsection (4)(f) of this section.

(c) Outdoor storage abutting or facing a lot in a residential zone shall comply with Chapter 17.72 SHMC.

(d) Parking shall comply with Chapter 17.80 SHMC.

(e) Maximum lot coverage including all impervious surfaces shall be 90 percent.

(f) Minimum landscaping shall be 10 percent of gross land area associated with the use.

(5) All chapters of the Development Code apply. (Ord. 3232 § 2 (Att. A), 2018; Ord. 3215 § 4 (Att. D), 2017; Ord. 3190 § 2 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 3181 § 4 (Att. C), 2015; Ord. 3164 § 3 (Att. B), 2012; Ord. 2875 § 1.080.100, 2003)


17.32.110 General commercial – GC.

(1) Purpose. The GC zone is intended to provide for a broad range of commercial operations and services required for the proper and convenient functioning of commercial activities serving the general public locally and regionally but not specifically the traveling motorists.

(2) Uses Permitted Outright. In a GC zone, the following uses are permitted outright subject to the provisions of this code and especially the chapter on site development review (Chapter 17.96 SHMC):

(a) Animal sales and services: grooming, kennels, retail, veterinary (small animals), and veterinary (large animals).

(b) Car washes.

(c) Cultural and library services.

(d) Dwellings above permitted uses (use AR standards).

(e) Eating and drinking establishments.

(f) Equipment (small) sales, rental and repairs.

(g) Financial institutions.

(h) Hardware store, without outdoor storage.

(i) Historic structures (as listed in the comprehensive plan).

(j) Home occupation (per Chapter 17.120 SHMC).

(k) Hotels and motels.

(l) Offices – all.

(m) Personal and business services such as barber shops, beauty shops, tailors, laundries, printing, and locksmiths. 

(n) Plumbing, HVAC, electrical and paint sales and service, without outdoor storage.

(o) Produce stands.

(p) Public facility, minor.

(q) Repair and maintenance of permitted retail products.

(r) Retail sales establishments, not specifically catering to motorists.

(s) Studios.

(t) Theaters, except drive-ins.

(3) Conditional Uses. In the GC zone, the following conditional uses may be permitted upon application, subject to provision of Chapter 17.100 SHMC and other relevant sections of this code:

(a) Amusement services.

(b) Bar.

(c) Bed and breakfast facilities, homestay, and boarding house.

(d) Broadcast facilities without dishes over 36 inches or transmitter/receiver towers.

(e) Bus and train stations/terminals.

(f) Businesses with outdoor storage (those businesses permitted in subsection (2) of this section).

(g) Child care facility/day nursery.

(h) Congregate housing.

(i) Drive-up businesses and services (including those associated with food/restaurants).

(j) Funeral homes.

(k) Hospitals and senior or convalescent care facilities.

(l) Laundromats and dry cleaners.

(m) Lodge, fraternal and civic assembly.

(n) Lodging facilities or rooming house.

(o) Marijuana retailer and/or medical marijuana dispensary.

(p) Multidwelling units.

(q) Nurseries and greenhouses.

(r) Parking lots.

(s) Parks, public and private.

(t) Pawn shops.

(u) Public and private schools.

(v) Public facilities, major.

(w) Recreation facilities.

(x) Religious assembly, including cemeteries.

(y) Residential facility.

(z) Shopping centers and plazas.

(aa) Travel trailer parks.

(bb) Vehicle repair, service, and sales.

(4) Standards. In the GC zone the following standards shall apply:

(a) The maximum building height shall be 45 feet, except as required in SHMC 17.68.040.

(b) Outdoor storage abutting or facing a lot in a residential zone shall comply with Chapter 17.72 SHMC.

(c) The maximum lot coverage including all impervious surfaces shall be 90 percent.

(d) Multidwelling units must comply with AR standards and other applicable sections of this code.

(e) The minimum landscaping shall be 10 percent of the gross land area associated with the use.

(5) All chapters of the Development Code apply. (Ord. 3232 § 2 (Att. A), 2018; Ord. 3215 § 4 (Att. D), 2017; Ord. 3190 § 2 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 3032 § 1(4), 2007; Ord. 2875 § 1.080.110, 2003)


17.32.120 Marine commercial – MC.

Repealed by Ord. 3215. (Ord. 3144 § 2 (Att. A), 2011; Ord. 3032 § 1(4), 2007; Ord. 2923 § 2, 2004; Ord. 2875 § 1.080.120, 2003)


17.32.130 Light industrial – LI.

(1) Purpose. The light industrial or LI zone is intended to provide appropriate locations for general industrial use including light manufacturing and related activities with few, if any, nuisance characteristics such as noise, glare, and smoke. It is to permit manufacturing, processing, assembling, packaging or treatment of products from previously prepared materials and to discourage residential use and limit commercial use.

(2) Uses Permitted Outright. In the LI zone the following buildings and uses are permitted after compliance with the provisions of this section and others of this code:

(a) Agricultural supplies/sales, machinery sales and repairs but not slaughterhouses or tanneries.

(b) Animal sales and services: kennels, veterinary (small animals), and veterinary (large animals).

(c) Auction sales, services and repairs.

(d) Boat repairs.

(e) Building maintenance services.

(f) Building material sales including outdoor storage.

(g) Commercial gasoline stations.

(h) Equipment (light and heavy) sales, storage, repair and rentals.

(i) Laboratories and research services.

(j) Manufacturing, repairing, compounding, research, assembly, fabricating, or processing activities of previously prepared materials and without off-site impacts.

(k) Mini storage and storage site.

(l) Motor vehicle sales, service, repair, and painting.

(m) Nurseries, greenhouse operations and sales.

(n) Parking lots, private or public.

(o) Public facility, minor.

(p) Transmitting and/or receiving towers with or without broadcast facilities. 

(q) Utility distribution plants and service yards.

(r) Vehicle wash operations.

(s) Warehousing, enclosed.

(t) Wholesale trade.

(3) Conditional Uses. In the LI zone, in addition to the buildings and uses permitted outright, a conditional use permit can be granted for the following buildings and uses:

(a) Bar.

(b) Child care facilities.

(c) Concrete mixing (concrete batching plant).

(d) Drive-in theater.

(e) Dwelling for caretaker or superintendent which is located on the same site with the permitted industrial use and is occupied exclusively by a caretaker or superintendent of the industrial use and family (same applies to a kennel).

(f) Eating and drinking establishments.

(g) Entertainment, adult.

(h) Industrial park to combine light manufacturing, office and complementary related commercial uses to include such activities as postal services, veterinary services, communication services, construction sales, business support services, financial services, insurance services, real estate services, laundry services, medical/dental services, sports and health services, professional and administrative offices, convenience sales, personal services, eating and drinking establishments and such.

(i) Manufacturing, repairing, compounding, research, assembly, fabricating, processing or packing of resource materials with some off-site impacts.

(j) Public and private recreational and amusement facilities.

(k) Public facilities, major.

(l) Public parks.

(m) Public safety and support facilities.

(n) Temporary asphalt batching (six-month maximum).

(o) Travel trailer parks.

(p) Wrecking and junkyards.

(4) Standards.

(a) The standards for the LI zone shall be determined by the proximity to residential zones and the anticipated off-site impacts.

(b) The maximum height within 100 feet of any residential zone shall be 35 feet.

(5) All chapters of the Development Code apply. (Ord. 3215 § 4 (Att. D), 2017; Ord. 2875 § 1.080.130, 2003)


17.32.140 Heavy industrial – HI.

(1) Purpose. The heavy industrial or HI zone is intended to provide appropriate locations for intensive manufacturing activities including fabrication, processing, or assembling of semifinished or finished products from raw materials, outdoor storage areas, and the storage of heavy equipment. It is also intended to provide locations for activities that need to be separated from more easily impacted activities such as schools, churches, etc.

(2) Uses Permitted Outright. In the HI zone the following buildings and uses are permitted after compliance with the provisions of this section and others of this code:

(a) Agricultural supplies/sales, machinery sales and repairs including slaughterhouses or tanneries (carried out in an enclosed building).

(b) All manufacturing, repairing, compounding, research, assembly, fabricating, or processing activities without off-site impacts.

(c) Auction sales, services and repairs.

(d) Building maintenance services.

(e) Building material sales including outdoor storage.

(f) Commercial gasoline stations.

(g) Equipment, heavy – sales and service.

(h) Motor vehicle sales, service, repair, and painting.

(i) Nursery/greenhouse operation and sales.

(j) Public facility, minor.

(k) Transmitting and/or receiving towers with or without broadcasting facilities. 

(l) Trucking yards/terminals, including warehousing.

(m) Utility distribution plants and service yards.

(n) Wholesaling, warehousing and storing of automobiles, trucks, buses, consumer goods, contractors’ equipment, building materials, food products, liquid fuel, household goods, ice, lumber (except log storage or ponding), and such.

(3) Conditional Uses. In the HI zone, in addition to the buildings and uses permitted outright, a conditional use permit can be granted for the following buildings and uses:

(a) Caretaker dwelling.

(b) Entertainment, adult.

(c) Hazardous waste collection and/or treatment site.

(d) Manufacture, repair, etc., with some off-site impact.

(e) Natural mineral resources development including necessary building, apparatus and appurtenances for rock, sand, gravel and mineral extraction and dredging, processing and stockpiling and all types of mineral recovery or mining, excluding smelters and ore reduction.

(f) On-site retailing of product manufactured, processed, etc., on site.

(g) Permitted uses which require special permits from the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality.

(h) Public parks.

(i) Public facilities, major.

(j) Public safety and support facilities.

(k) Recycling collection center.

(l) Solid waste disposal site or transfer station.

(m) Special hazardous uses such as:

(i) Two thousand gallons or more of flammable (Class I or II) materials.

(ii) Fifty gallons or more of unstable liquids, fireworks, blasting agents or explosives.

(iii) Magazines, Class II (Class I magazines are not permitted).

(iv) Five hundred pounds or more or 200 gallons or more of hazardous chemicals, including corrosive liquids, flammable solids, highly toxic materials, oxidizing materials, poisonous gases and any amount of radioactive materials. 

(v) Unstable (reactive) chemicals, including organic peroxides and nitromethane.

(vi) Fifty pounds or more of ammonium nitrate.

(vii) Two thousand or more gallons of liquefied petroleum gases.

(n) Storage facilities such as personal lockers/garages and for recreational-type vehicles.

(o) Temporary asphalt batching (six months maximum).

(p) Travel trailer parks.

(q) Wrecking and junkyards.

(4) Standards. The standards for the HI zone shall be determined by the proximity to residential zones and the anticipated off-site impacts.

(a) No off-site impacts are permitted which exceed the standards of this code on lands permitting dwellings.

(b) The city noise ordinance and adopted DEQ regulations for locations near noise-sensitive uses such as dwellings, churches, schools and hospitals shall be the noise standard for off-site impacts.

(c) Vibrations that are continuous, frequent or repetitive and discernible to a person of normal sensibilities on nonindustrial zoned lands are prohibited except as listed below (continuous, frequent or repetitive vibrations shall not exceed 0.002g peak on nonindustrial lands):

(i) Vibrations from temporary construction and vehicles which leave the site, such as trucks, trains, and helicopters, are excluded. Vibrations from primarily on-site vehicles and equipment are included.

(ii) Vibrations of no more than five minutes in any one day shall not be deemed continuous, frequent or repetitive for this regulation.

(d) Glare shall not directly or indirectly from reflection cause illumination in excess of one-half foot candle on nonindustrial zoned lands. Glare is illumination caused by incandescent, fluorescent or arc lighting or from high temperature processes such as welding or metallurgical refining.

(e) No off-site impacts from odor, dust, smoke, gas or chemical contaminants shall exceed the applicable local, state or federal standards.

(f) The maximum height within 100 feet of any residential zone shall be 35 feet.

(5) All chapters of the Development Code apply. (Ord. 3215 § 4 (Att. D), 2017; Ord. 3203 § 2 (Att. A), 2016; Ord. 2875 § 1.080.140, 2003)


17.32.150 Public lands – PL.

(1) Purpose. The purpose of the public lands zone is to delineate lands that are owned by public or semipublic entities and that are used, or have the potential to be used, for public or semipublic purposes such as schools, parks, and playgrounds.

(2) Uses Permitted Outright. In the PL zone the following uses are allowed outright after compliance with the site development review chapter (Chapter 17.96 SHMC) and other relevant sections of this code:

(a) Cultural exhibits.

(b) Library services.

(c) Public facility, minor.

(d) Public or private park.

(e) Public or private playground.

(f) Public or private school and/or college.

(3) Conditional Uses. In the PL zone the following uses are permitted if approved under the conditional use chapter (Chapter 17.100 SHMC) and other applicable provisions of this code:

(a) Public facilities, major.

(b) Public support and safety facilities.

(c) Travel trailer park in public parks of over four acres in size to include a buffer of 20 feet where abutting a residential zone.

(d) Hospitals.

(4) Standards. 

(a) The standards for the PL zone shall be determined by proximity to residential zones and the anticipated off-site impacts.

(b) The maximum building height shall be determined on a case-by-case basis (see SHMC 17.68.040).

(c) See subsection (5) of this section, Additional Requirements.

(5) All chapters of the Development Code apply. (Ord. 3215 § 4 (Att. D), 2017; Ord. 3144 § 2 (Att. A), 2011; Ord. 2936 § 2, 2005; Ord. 2875 § 1.080.150, 2003)


17.32.160 Willamette Greenway – WG.

(1) Purpose. The purpose of the WG zone is to protect, conserve, enhance and maintain the natural, scenic, historical, agricultural, economic, and recreational quality of lands along the Willamette River. The WG zone is a superimposed zone to be used in combination with the existing underlying zone. Within the jurisdiction of St. Helens, those lands in the Willamette zone are within an urban area zoned heavy industrial because of existing and historical uses.

(2) Procedure. All activities within the WG zone are subject to review by the director. The director shall notify the Department of Transportation of any development, intensification, or proposed change of use, and of any action taken on those proposals. If the director determines that the proposed activities conflict with the purpose and uses allowed in this section, the permit shall be denied, or approved with conditions. The applicant may appeal the director’s decision to the planning commission which shall review the proposal in accordance with established conditional use procedures; in its deliberations, the planning commission shall consider the purpose of this section, as well as the criteria for granting conditional uses.

(3) Uses Allowed. Within the WG zone, development shall be directed away from the Willamette River to the greatest practicable degree; provided, however, lands committed to urban uses shall be permitted to continue and intensification or development associated with existing or historical urban uses shall be allowed subject to the approval of the director.

Urban uses shall include industrial and commercial activities. Industrial and commercial uses shall include facilities relating to the production, storage and transportation of timber and paper products.

In evaluating a proposal, the director shall take into consideration the proposed activity’s impact on fish and wildlife, public access, safety, and the vegetative fringe. The director may impose a setback in the WG zone if he/she believes these aspects have not been reasonably taken into account. Non-water-dependent and non-water-related uses shall be set back 150 feet from the river bank.

In areas in which there are industrial and commercial activities, public access shall be discouraged when there is a potential for physical harm to members of the public.

(4) Standards. Within the WG zone, the implementation of the allowed activity shall provide maximum practicable landscaping, aesthetic enhancement, open space or vegetation between the activity and the Willamette River.

(5) Definitions.

(a) “Change of use” means a different use of the land or water than that which existed on December 6, 1975. It includes a change which requires construction, alterations of the land, water or other areas outside of the existing buildings or structures and which substantially alters or affects the land or water. It does not include a change of use of a building or other structure which does not substantially alter or affect the land or water upon which it is situated. Change of use shall not include the completion of a structure for which a valid permit had been issued as of December 6, 1975, and under which permit substantial construction has been undertaken by July 1, 1976. The sale of property is not in itself considered to be a change of use. An existing open storage area shall be considered to be the same building.

Landscaping, construction of driveways, modifications of existing structures, or the construction or placement of such subsidiary structures or facilities as are usual and necessary to the use and enjoyment of existing improvements shall not be considered a change of use.

(b) “Intensification” means any additions which increase or expand the area or amount of an existing use, or the level of activity. Remodeling of the exterior of a structure not excluded below is an intensification when it will substantially alter the appearance of the structure. Intensification shall not include the completion of a structure for which a valid permit was issued as of December 6, 1975, and under which permit substantial construction has been undertaken by July 1, 1976. Maintenance and repair usual and necessary for the continuance of an existing use is not an intensification of use. Reasonable emergency procedures necessary for the safety or the protection of property are not an intensification of use. Residential use of lands within the Greenway includes the practices and activities customarily related to the use and enjoyment of one’s home. Landscaping, construction of driveways, modification of existing structures or construction or placement of such subsidiary structures or facilities adjacent to the residence as are usual and necessary to such use and enjoyment shall not be considered an intensification. Seasonal increases in gravel operations shall not be considered an intensification of use.

(c) “Water-dependent” means a use or activity which can be carried out only on, in, or adjacent to water areas because the use requires access to the water body for waterborne transportation, recreation, energy production, or source of water.

(d) “Water-related” means uses which are not directly dependent upon access to a water body, but which provide goods or services that are directly associated with water-dependent land or waterway use, and which, if not located adjacent to water, would result in a public loss of quality in the goods or services offered. Except as necessary for water-dependent or water-related uses or facilities, residences, parking lots, spoil and dump sites, roads and highways, restaurants, businesses, factories, and trailer parks are not generally considered dependent on or related to water location needs. (Ord. 2875 § 1.080.160, 2003)


17.32.170 Riverfront district – RD.

The riverfront district represents the lands along the St. Helens waterfront that are not designated principally as industrial or residential. These lands provide a mix of uses and generally have greater public access and interaction with the Columbia River or Multnomah Channel. The riverfront district is divided into subdistricts as follows and as depicted by Ordinance No. 3215, Attachment C:

	Marina	RD, Marina	SHMC 17.32.171

	Plaza	RD, Plaza	SHMC 17.32.172

	Mill	RD, Mill	SHMC 17.32.173

(Ord. 3215 § 4 (Att. D), 2017)


17.32.171 Riverfront district – RD, marina.

(1) Purpose. The marina subdistrict is intended to encourage a wide range of water-related activities both commercial and residential. This is the northernmost area of the riverfront district and an area historically occupied by marinas and related uses.

(2) Uses Permitted Outright. In the marina subdistrict the following uses are permitted outright subject to the provisions of this code and especially the site development review chapter (Chapter 17.96 SHMC):

(a) Boathouses.

(b) Boat launching or moorage facilities and marine boat charter services.

(c) Boat or marine equipment sales, service, storage, rental, or repair (including gas for marine vehicle use).

(d) Dwellings located above permitted uses (use AR standards, except yard requirements, which are based on the use at ground level below the dwelling or dwellings).

(e) Eating and drinking establishments including carry-out.

(f) Home occupation (per Chapter 17.120 SHMC).

(g) Hotels and motels.

(h) Houseboats.

(i) Parking lots.

(j) Public facility, minor.

(k) Public parks and public recreational facilities.

(l) Retail sale of sporting goods, groceries, and similar commodities required by marine recreationists.

(m) Retail sale of handicraft and tourist goods.

(n) Marine-related club facility.

(3) Conditional Uses. In the marina subdistrict the following uses may be permitted upon approval subject to the provisions of this code, especially those in Chapter 17.100 SHMC for conditional uses:

(a) Commercial amusement and recreational facilities.

(b) Multidwelling units (must comply with AR standards and other applicable sections of this code).

(c) Private parks.

(d) Public facilities, major.

(e) Travel trailer parks.

(4) Standards. In the marina subdistrict the following standards shall apply:

(a) The maximum building height shall be determined on a case-by-case basis (also see SHMC 17.68.040).

(b) Outdoor storage abutting or facing a lot in a residential zone shall comply with Chapter 17.72 SHMC.

(c) The maximum lot coverage including all impervious surfaces shall be 90 percent.

(d) The minimum landscaping shall be 10 percent of gross land area associated with the use.

(5) All chapters of the Development Code apply except as modified herein. (Ord. 3232 § 2 (Att. A), 2018; Ord. 3215 § 4 (Att. D), 2017)


17.32.172 Riverfront district – RD, plaza.

(1) Purposes. The plaza subdistrict is intended to provide an innovative and flexible zoning category that may be used to implement the St. Helens comprehensive plan economic goals and policies and the strategic plan goals and policies for economic development.

The strategy is to provide opportunities for traditional neighborhood design and mixed residential and commercial uses in redeveloping riverfront district areas. The plaza subdistrict is designed to preserve and revitalize older developed areas, by eliminating nonconformities, providing for more mixed use development in individual buildings, and other more flexible development regulations which acknowledge the developed nature of the properties involved. The plaza subdistrict also allows for the establishment of special design and aesthetic standards for development, consistent with a community plan for redevelopment, preservation, and conservation. The location for the establishment of this subdistrict shall be targeted for existing developed areas, such as the existing commercial downtown, which could benefit from revitalization in the form of specific long-range planning, mixed uses and innovative development options and community improvement programs. This area is the commercial core of historic St. Helens.

(2) Uses Permitted Outright. In the plaza subdistrict, the following uses are permitted outright, subject to the modifications to development standards and conditions as specified herein and all other applicable provisions of this code as noted under additional requirements:

(a) Historic residential structures with or without any auxiliary dwelling unit per Chapter 17.128 SHMC. This is listed here separate from other residential uses given subsection (5)(a)(i) of this section. This does not mean historic residential structures are prohibited in other zones per SHMC 17.32.040(3)(a).

(b) Residential above Nonresidential Permitted Uses.

(i) Dwelling, single-family.

(ii) Dwelling, duplex.

(iii) Dwelling, townhouse.

(iv) Dwelling, multifamily.

(v) Other residential uses as per ORS Chapter 443.

(c) Home occupation (per Chapter 17.120 SHMC).

(d) Public and institutional uses.

(e) Amphitheater public uses.

(f) Historical and cultural facilities and exhibits.

(g) Education and research facilities.

(h) Library services.

(i) Government administrative facilities/offices.

(j) Lodge, fraternal and civic assembly.

(k) Parking lots, public.

(l) Public facilities, minor.

(m) Public facilities, major.

(n) Public or private park.

(o) Public or private recreation facilities.

(p) Public or private schools/colleges.

(q) Public safety and support facilities.

(r) Artisan workshops.

(s) Art studios, galleries.

(t) Amusement services.

(u) Bars.

(v) Bed and breakfast facilities.

(w) Business and personal services, such as barber shops, beauty shops, tailors, laundries, printing, and locksmiths.

(x) Eating and drinking establishments – all (e.g., restaurant, diner, coffee shop).

(y) Offices – all (e.g., medical, business or professional).

(z) Financial institutions.

(aa) Hardware stores, without outdoor storage.

(bb) Health and fitness clubs.

(cc) Hotels or motels.

(dd) Kiosks.

(ee) Animal sales and services: grooming and retail.

(ff) Repair and maintenance facilities/shops for permitted retail products.

(gg) Rental centers.

(hh) Residential storage facilities (in conjunction with three or more dwelling units).

(ii) Retail sales establishments.

(jj) Small equipment sales, rental and repairs facilities/shops, without outside storage.

(kk) Theaters, indoors.

(ll) Trade and skilled services without outdoor storage, such as plumbing, HVAC, electrical, and paint sales/services facilities/shops.

(mm) Type I and II home occupation in dwelling unit above nonresidential permitted uses.

(nn) Transient housing.

(oo) Watercraft sales, rental, charters, without outdoor storage.

(3) Conditional Uses. In the plaza subdistrict, the following conditional uses may be permitted upon application, subject to provision of Chapter 17.100 SHMC and other relevant sections of this code:

(a) Animal sales and services: veterinary (small animals).

(b) Auction sales, services and repairs.

(c) Broadcast facilities without dishes over 36 inches or transmitter/receiver towers.

(d) Bus and train stations/terminals.

(e) Business with outdoor storage (those businesses permitted in permitted uses).

(f) Child care facility/day nursery.

(g) Hospitals, clinics, nursing homes, and convalescent homes.

(h) Laundromats and dry cleaners.

(i) Marijuana retailer and/or medical marijuana dispensary.

(j) Religious assembly excluding cemeteries.

(k) Parking lots/facilities, private.

(l) Pawn shop.

(4) Standards Applicable to All Uses. In the plaza subdistrict, the following standards and special conditions shall apply and shall take precedence over any conflicting standards listed in this code:

(a) The maximum building height shall be 45 feet. Building height limitations of SHMC 17.68.040, Building height criteria for scenic resources, do not apply.

(b) The maximum lot coverage including all impervious surfaces shall be 90 percent; provided, however, for new construction or existing legally constructed buildings seeking new or revised development approvals, lot coverage may be increased up to 100 percent by payment of a lot coverage fee established by resolution of the city council. The lot coverage fee shall be deposited into the riverfront district community capital improvement account to offset loss of landscaping in the RD zone.

(c) There is no minimum lot size requirement.

(d) No minimum setback requirements applicable to all uses except for as required in Chapter 17.64 SHMC.

(e) The maximum front yard setback shall be zero feet. The maximum setback may be increased with the condition that 100 percent of the increased setback is used for pedestrian amenities with the building use, such as patio dining for restaurant, sidewalk cafe, plaza, or courtyard.

(f) Interior or Side Yard Setbacks. New buildings containing any nonresidential use abutting residential districts require one foot of setback for each foot of building wall height on the side abutting the residential zone, with a minimum setback of 10 feet. For yards abutting other nonresidential districts, no setback is required, subject to building code requirements. Note: Where the plaza subdistrict abuts a residential zone and the uses are more than 30 feet above the proposed commercial use, then the height of the topography counts as part of the setback, e.g., 35-foot bluff behind a commercial building is same as 35-foot setback on that side.

(g) Rear Yard Setbacks. New buildings containing nonresidential uses abutting residential districts require one foot of setback for each foot of building wall height with a minimum setback of 10 feet (see above note). For yards abutting other nonresidential districts, no rear setback is required, subject to building code requirements.

(h) The minimum lot width at the street and building line shall be 20 feet.

(i) The minimum lot depth shall be 50 feet.

(j) Minimum open space shall be 10 percent, except when the lot coverage fee is paid as per subsection (4)(b) of this section.

(k) No maximum building size.

(l) No additional or new on-site parking is required for sites with existing development footprint coverage in excess of 50 percent of the site area (change of use or remodeling without a change to the existing footprint of existing development are also exempt).

(m) Except for subsection (4)(l) of this section, new development shall meet required on-site parking requirements with credit, on one-for-one basis of parking spaces in rights-of-way abutting the site. On-street parking (in rights-of-way) shall be based upon parallel parking, or existing; fractions do not count. Moreover, parking standards shall be for normal sized vehicles, for the purpose of the parking credit.

(n) New development can buy out of on-site parking requirements by paying into the RD community capital improvement account (a fund shall be designated for future RD located parking facilities) in an amount set by city council in a resolution.

(5) Special Conditions Permitted and Conditional Uses.

(a) Residential Uses.

(i) Except for historic residential structures (listed in city’s comprehensive plan and/or registered and recognized by the state or federal government), residential use is prohibited on the first floor of any building in the plaza subdistrict.

(ii) There is no minimum lot size requirement for residential use above permitted nonresidential uses.

(iii) Residential density above permitted uses shall be based on the standard of one dwelling unit for each full 500 interior square feet of non-residential use provided. Outdoor dining areas and similar permitted outdoor uses may only be included in the calculation when such areas are not located within a right-of-way.

(b) Outdoor storage of goods and materials must be screened.

(c) Outdoor display of goods and materials for retail establishments is permitted on private property in front of the retail establishment, provided such displays do not block safe ingress and egress from all entrances, including fire doors. In addition, outdoor display goods and materials shall be properly and safely stored inside during non-business hours. No outdoor display may block safe pedestrian or vehicular traffic. Outdoor displays shall not encroach in public rights-of-way, including streets, alleys or sidewalks, without express written permission of the city council.

(d) Kiosks may be allowed on public property, subject to the approval of a concession agreement with the city.

(6) Additional Requirements.

(a) Residential Density Transition. The residential density calculation and transition provisions of Chapter 17.56 SHMC shall not apply to the plaza subdistrict for residential uses above permitted uses. Densities are determined for residential uses by the formula in subsection (5)(a)(iii) of this section.

(b) Overlay District. Chapter 17.148 SHMC, Planned Development, shall not apply to the plaza subdistrict.

(c) The visual clearance area requirements of Chapter 17.76 SHMC do not apply to the plaza subdistrict.

(d) Chapter 17.40 SHMC, wetlands and riparian corridors, shall not apply to the plaza subdistrict.

(e) All chapters of the Development Code apply except as modified herein.

(7) Architectural Character Review.

(a) In the plaza subdistrict, permanent exterior architectural changes to buildings (including new construction and signs) and freestanding signs that are not designated landmarks or historic resources of statewide significance as defined and otherwise governed by Chapter 17.36 SHMC shall comply with the architectural design guidelines, attached to Ordinance No. 3164 as Attachment A, as amended, except:

(i) For ordinary maintenance not requiring a building permit.

(ii) Painting of buildings except when painting previously unpainted masonry or stone.

(b) The historic landmark commission as established by Chapter 17.36 SHMC shall advise the approving authority on the character of permanent exterior architectural changes to all buildings within the plaza subdistrict that are not designated landmarks or historic resources of statewide significance as defined and otherwise governed by Chapter 17.36 SHMC.

(c) The historic landmark commission shall make a recommendation to the approving authority as to whether the commission believes any proposed permanent exterior architectural changes to buildings, including new construction, per subsections (7)(a) and (b) of this section comply with the architectural design guidelines. Such recommendation shall be prior to any such applicable decision being made, including but not limited to limited land use decisions of the planning commission or director, and other authorizations of the director such as building permit approval. (Ord. 3232 § 2 (Att. A), 2018; Ord. 3215 § 4 (Att. D), 2017; Ord. 3190 § 2 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 3180 § 1 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 3164 § 3 (Att. B), 2012; Ord. 3144 § 2 (Att. A), 2011; Ord. 3043 § 2, 2007; Ord. 2875 § 1.080.170, 2003. Formerly 17.32.170)


17.32.173 Riverfront district – RD, mill.

(1) Purpose. The mill subdistrict is to provide an alternative zoning and development option that may be used to allow for flexibility of possible land uses and standards while ensuring maximum public access along and to the waterfront to compliment other land uses that develop in the district. Development of this site is intended to provide a complimentary extension of the historic commercial core in use and form and facilitate transportation connections. This area was an important industrial site from the founding of St. Helens until the early part of the twenty-first century, when industrial development ceased with the Great Recession (2007 through 2009).

(2) Uses Permitted Outright. The following uses are permitted outright, subject to all provisions of the SHMC including specifically the modifications to development standards and conditions specified in this section. Moreover, the applicable provisions of Chapter 17.96 SHMC, Site Development Review, apply, except those modified by this chapter.

(a) Residential.

(i) Single dwelling units, attached.

(ii) Multidwelling units.

(iii) Auxiliary dwelling unit (per Chapter 17.128 SHMC).

(b) Residential above Nonresidential Permitted Uses.

(i) Dwelling, single-family.

(ii) Congregate care facility.

(iii) Single dwelling units, attached.

(iv) Multidwelling units.

(v) Residential care facility.

(c) Public and Institutional Uses.

(i) Amphitheater public uses.

(ii) Historical and cultural facilities and exhibits.

(iii) Education and research facilities.

(iv) Library services.

(v) Government administrative/office.

(vi) Lodge, fraternal and civic assembly.

(vii) Parking lots, public.

(viii) Public facility, minor.

(ix) Public facility, major.

(x) Public or private park.

(xi) Public or private recreation facilities.

(xii) Public or private school/college.

(xiii) Public safety and support facilities.

(d) Manufacturing.

(i) Artisan workshop.

(ii) Art studios, galleries.

(iii) Laboratories and research facilities.

(e) Commercial.

(i) Amusement services.

(ii) Animal sales and services: grooming and retail.

(iii) Medical facilities such as clinics, out-patient services, health care facilities, etc.

(iv) Bed and breakfast facilities.

(v) Business and personal services, such as barber shops, beauty shops, tailors, laundries, printing, and locksmiths.

(vi) Eating and drinking establishments – all (e.g., restaurant, diner, coffee shop).

(vii) Financial institutions.

(viii) Offices – all (e.g., medical, business or professional).

(ix) Hardware store, without outdoor storage.

(x) Health and fitness club.

(xi) Hotels or motels.

(xii) Kiosks.

(xiii) Parking lots, public.

(xiv) Plumbing, HVAC, electrical and paint sales and services, without outdoor storage.

(xv) Repair and maintenance of permitted retail products.

(xvi) Rental center.

(xvii) Residential storage facility (in conjunction with three or more dwelling units).

(xviii) Retail sales establishments.

(xix) Small equipment sales, rental and repairs, without outside storage.

(xx) Theaters, indoors.

(xxi) Trade and skilled services.

(xxii) Home occupation (per Chapter 17.120 SHMC).

(f) Marine Commercial.

(i) Houseboat(s), also known as floating homes.

(ii) Boathouse(s).

(iii) Boat launching, moorage facilities and marine boat charter services.

(iv) Boat or marine equipment sales, service, storage, rental or repair.

(v) Watercraft sales, rental, charters, without outdoor storage.

(vi) Bait and tackle shops.

(vii) Accessory marine related uses.

(viii) Marina.

(ix) Docks.

(3) The following conditional uses may be permitted upon application, subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.100 SHMC, Conditional Use, and other relevant sections of this code, except those modified by this chapter:

(a) Animal sales and services: veterinary (small animals).

(b) Auction sales, services and repairs.

(c) Broadcast facilities without dishes over 36 inches in diameter or transmitter/receiver towers.

(d) Bus stations/terminals.

(e) Businesses with outdoor storage (for businesses that are permitted uses only).

(f) Child care facility/day nursery.

(g) Hospitals, nursing homes, and convalescent homes.

(h) Postal services.

(i) Communication services.

(j) Laundromats and dry cleaners.

(k) Religious assembly.

(l) Boat building.

(4) Standards Applicable to All Uses. The following standards and special conditions shall apply to all uses in the mill subdistrict:

(a) The maximum building height shall be 55 feet. The building height limitations of SHMC 17.68.040, Building height criteria for scenic resources, do not apply in the mill subdistrict.

(b) Landscaping Required. The minimum landscaping shall be 10 percent of the gross land area associated with use, except as required by Chapter 17.96 SHMC. The maximum lot coverage including all impervious surfaces shall be 90 percent.

(c) There is no minimum lot size requirement. Lots or parcels shall be of sufficient size to accommodate all applicable development standards for intended or potential land uses.

(d) No required yard (setbacks) from rights-of-way.

(e) Interior Setbacks. New buildings containing any nonresidential use abutting a residential zoning district require one foot of setback for each foot of wall height with a minimum setback of 10 feet. For yards abutting nonresidential districts, no interior setback is required, subject to building code requirements. Note: this setback may be reduced proportionately when the residential zoning district is topographically above the base level of new construction.

(f) The minimum lot width at the street and building line shall be 20 feet.

(g) The minimum lot depth shall be 50 feet.

(h) No maximum building size.

(i) There is no maximum residential density.

(j) Outdoor storage of goods and materials as an independent use not in conjunction with another use is prohibited. Outdoor storage is allowed for conditional uses in this zone only when said storage is completely screened from the street and adjacent properties.

(k) Outdoor display of goods and materials for retail establishments is permitted on private property in front of the retail establishment, provided such displays do not block safe ingress and egress from all entrances and exits including those specifically for emergency use, block safe pedestrian or vehicular circulation areas, block required parking areas, block emergency accessways, interfere with landscape areas such that those areas will be prone to damage, or otherwise create a hazard. In addition, outdoor display of goods and materials shall be properly and safely stored inside during nonbusiness hours. Moreover, outdoor displays shall not encroach in public rights-of-way, including but not limited to streets, alleys or sidewalks, without express written permission of the city council as reflected in an executed temporary license, release and hold harmless agreement. License agreements shall require safe, sturdy and secure outdoor displays and may be subject to an annual fee determined by resolution of the St. Helens city council.

(5) Additional Requirements.

(a) In addition to other applicable standards, all development, division of land, lot line adjustment, replat and such subject to review by the city shall also comply with the St. Helens Waterfront Framework Plan, attached to Ordinance 3215 as Attachment E, as amended. Whenever the standards or requirements of the Waterfront Framework Plan are in conflict with other city codes, the approval authority may consider those of the Waterfront Framework Plan to be of the higher standard per SHMC 17.12.010.

(b) The architectural character review provisions pursuant to SHMC 17.32.172(7) shall apply to the mill subdistrict.

(c) As part of any development, division of land, lot line adjustment, replat and such, a minimum 50-foot width, measured from the top of bank/shoreline of the Columbia River landward, shall be dedicated for public access. The approval authority shall deny any proposal that prevents public access along the waterfront. A width less than 50 feet may be considered when the approval authority finds the intent of the Waterfront Framework Plan can still be met. Dedication may be by easement or right-of-way dedication. This is in addition to the requirements of SHMC 17.152.110. If possible, it is recommended that the reservation for public shoreline access be a condition of property sale (e.g., when the city is the land owner) or other agreement outside of a permit or authorization of land use.

(d) All chapters or sections of the Development Code shall apply to the mill subdistrict, except the following, which do not apply:

(i) Chapter 17.56 SHMC, Density Computations;

(ii) Chapter 17.40 SHMC, Protective Measures for Significant Wetlands, Riparian Corridors, and Protection Zones;

(iii) Building height limitations of SHMC 17.68.040, Building height criteria for scenic resources;

(iv) Chapter 17.76 SHMC, Visual Clearance Areas; and

(v) Chapter 17.148 SHMC, Planned Development.

(e) To address the unique status of the mill subdistrict, the city and one or more property owners may modify or exempt development from the otherwise applicable provisions of the St. Helens Community Development Code pursuant to a statutory development agreement as provided in ORS Chapter 94, as amended; provided, that the approval authority finds that the development complies with the St. Helens Waterfront Framework Plan, attached to Ordinance No. 3215, attachment E, as amended. A development agreement shall be reviewed as provided in SHMC 17.24.090. Chapter 17.46 SHMC, Floodplains and Floodways, shall not be modified or exempted. (Ord. 3232 § 2 (Att. A), 2018; Ord. 3215 § 4 (Att. D), 2017; Ord. 3180 § 1 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 3107 § 2 (Att. A), 2009. Formerly 17.32.180)


17.32.179 RD guidelines adopted.

(1) The city hereby adopts the architectural design guidelines for the plaza subdistrict and mill subdistrict, attached to the ordinance codified in this section as Attachment A, as amended, and made part of this chapter by reference.

(2) The city hereby adopts the St. Helens Waterfront Framework Plan for the mill subdistrict, attached to the ordinance codified in this section as Attachment E, as amended, and made part of this chapter by reference. (Ord. 3215 § 4 (Att. D), 2017; Ord. 3180 § 1 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 3164 § 2, 2012. Formerly 17.32.172)


17.32.180 Houlton business district – HBD.

(1) Purpose. The HBD zone is intended to provide an innovative and flexible zoning category that may be used to implement the St. Helens comprehensive plan economic goals and policies and the strategic plan goals and policies for economic development. The strategy is to provide opportunities for traditional neighborhood design and mixed residential and commercial uses in the redeveloping Houlton area. The HBD zone is designed to preserve and revitalize older developed areas by eliminating certain nonconformities, providing for more mixed use development in individual buildings, and other more flexible development regulations which acknowledge the developed nature of the properties involved. The location for the establishment of the HBD zone shall be targeted for existing developed areas, such as the existing commercial uptown, which could benefit from revitalization in the form of specific long-range planning, mixed uses and innovative development options and community improvement programs. This is the commercial core of what was once a town known as Houlton that was separate from St. Helens.

(2) Uses Permitted Outright. In the HBD zone, the following uses are permitted outright, subject to the modifications to development standards and conditions as specified herein and all other applicable provisions of this code as noted under additional requirements:

(a) Dwellings: single detached or attached, duplexes, and dwellings above permitted uses.

(b) Auxiliary dwelling unit (per Chapter 17.128 SHMC).

(c) Public and institutional uses.

(d) Amphitheater public uses.

(e) Historical and cultural facilities and exhibits.

(f) Education and research facilities.

(g) Library services.

(h) Government administrative facilities/ offices.

(i) Lodge, fraternal and civic assembly.

(j) Parking lots, public.

(k) Public facilities, minor.

(l) Public facilities, major.

(m) Public or private park.

(n) Public or private recreation facilities.

(o) Public or private schools/colleges.

(p) Public safety and support facilities.

(q) Artisan workshops.

(r) Art studios, galleries.

(s) Amusement services.

(t) Bars.

(u) Bed and breakfast facilities.

(v) Business and personal services, such as barber shops, beauty shops, tailors, laundries, printing, and locksmiths.

(w) Eating and drinking establishments – all (e.g., restaurant, diner, coffee shop).

(x) Offices – all (e.g., medical, business or professional).

(y) Financial institutions.

(z) Hardware stores, without outdoor storage.

(aa) Health and fitness clubs.

(bb) Hotels or motels.

(cc) Kiosks.

(dd) Pawn shops.

(ee) Animal sales and services: grooming and retail.

(ff) Repair and maintenance facilities/shops for permitted retail products.

(gg) Rental centers.

(hh) Residential storage facilities (in conjunction with three or more dwelling units).

(ii) Retail sales establishments – all.

(jj) Small equipment sales, rental and repairs facilities/shops, without outside storage.

(kk) Theaters, indoors.

(ll) Trade and skilled services without outdoor storage, such as plumbing, HVAC, electrical, and paint sales/services facilities/shops.

(mm) Home occupation (per Chapter 17.120 SHMC).

(nn) Transient housing.

(oo) Watercraft sales, rental, charters, without outdoor storage.

(pp) Car washes.

(qq) Produce stands.

(rr) Shopping centers and plazas.

(ss) Residential facility.

(tt) Residential home.

(3) Conditional Uses. In the HBD zone, the following conditional uses may be permitted upon application, subject to provisions of Chapter 17.100 SHMC and other relevant sections of this code:

(a) Animal sales and services: veterinary (small animals).

(b) Auction sales, services and repairs.

(c) Broadcast facilities without dishes over 36 inches or transmitter/receiver towers.

(d) Bus and train stations/terminals.

(e) Business with outdoor storage (those businesses permitted in permitted uses).

(f) Child care facility/day nursery.

(g) Drive-up businesses and services (including those associated with food sales, pharmacies and such).

(h) Dwellings on same level as nonresidential use.

(i) Funeral homes.

(j) Hospitals, clinics, nursing homes, and convalescent homes.

(k) Laundromats and dry cleaners.

(l) Marijuana retailer and/or medical marijuana dispensary.

(m) Multidwelling units.

(n) Religious assembly, excluding cemeteries.

(o) Parking lots/facilities, private.

(p) Nurseries and greenhouses.

(q) Vehicle repair, service, and sales.

(4) Standards Applicable to All Uses. In the HBD zone, the following standards and special conditions shall apply and shall take precedence over any conflicting standards listed in this code:

(a) The maximum building height shall be 45 feet.

(b) The maximum lot coverage including all impervious surfaces shall be 90 percent; provided, however, for new construction or existing legally constructed buildings seeking new or revised development approvals, lot coverage may be increased up to 100 percent by payment of a lot coverage fee established by resolution of the city council. The lot coverage fee shall be deposited into the Houlton business district community capital improvement account to offset loss of landscaping and open space in the HBD zone.

(c) There is no minimum lot size requirement.

(d) No minimum setback requirements applicable to all uses except for as required in Chapter 17.64 SHMC.

(e) The maximum front yard setback shall be zero feet. The maximum setback may be increased with the condition that 100 percent of the increased setback is used for pedestrian amenities with the building use, such as patio dining for restaurant, sidewalk cafe, plaza, or courtyard.

(f) Interior or Side Yard Setbacks. New buildings containing any nonresidential use abutting residential districts require one foot of setback for each foot of building wall height on the side abutting the residential zone, with a minimum setback of 10 feet. For yards abutting other nonresidential districts, no setback is required, subject to building code requirements.

Note: Where the HBD zone abuts a residential zone and the uses are more than 30 feet above the proposed commercial use, then the height of the topography counts as part of the setback; e.g., a 35-foot bluff behind a commercial building is the same as a 35-foot setback on that side.

(g) Rear Yard Setbacks. New buildings containing nonresidential uses abutting residential districts require one foot of setback for each foot of building wall height with a minimum setback of 10 feet (see note in subsection (4)(f) of this section). For yards abutting other nonresidential districts, no rear setback is required, subject to building code requirements.

(h) The minimum lot width at the street and building line shall be 20 feet.

(i) The minimum lot depth shall be 50 feet.

(j) Minimum open space shall be 10 percent, except when the lot coverage fee is paid as per subsection (4)(b) of this section.

(k) No maximum building size.

(l) No additional or new on-site parking is required for sites with existing development footprint coverage in excess of 50 percent of the site area (change of use or remodeling without a change to the existing footprint of existing development is also exempt).

(m) Except for subsection (4)(l) of this section, new development shall meet required on-site parking requirements with credit, on a one-for-one basis of parking spaces in rights-of-way abutting the site. On-street parking (in rights-of-way) shall be based upon parallel parking or existing and fractions do not count. Moreover, parking standards shall be for normal sized vehicles, for the purpose of the parking credit.

(n) New development can buy out of on-site parking requirements by paying into the HBD community capital improvement account (a fund shall be designated for future HBD located parking facilities), an amount set by the city council in a resolution.

(o) Notwithstanding the standards of subsections (4)(a) through (n) of this section, these residential uses are subject to the following:

(i) Single-dwelling units, attached or detached, and duplexes shall comply with the R-5 standards; and

(ii) Multidwelling units shall comply with AR standards.

(5) Special Conditions Permitted and Conditional Uses.

(a) Residential density above permitted uses shall be based on the standard of one dwelling unit for each full 500 interior square feet of nonresidential use provided. Outdoor dining areas and similar permitted outdoor uses may only be included in the calculation when such areas are not located within a right-of-way.

(b) Outdoor storage of goods and materials must be screened.

(c) Outdoor display of goods and materials for retail establishments is permitted on private property in front of the retail establishment, provided such displays do not block safe ingress and egress from all entrances, including fire doors. In addition, outdoor display goods and materials shall be properly and safely stored inside during nonbusiness hours. No outdoor display may block safe pedestrian or vehicular traffic. Outdoor displays shall not encroach in public rights-of-way, including streets, alleys or sidewalks, without express written permission of the city council.

(d) Kiosks may be allowed on public property, subject to the approval of a concession agreement with the city.

(6) Additional Requirements.

(a) Residential Density Transition. The residential density calculation and transition provisions of Chapter 17.56 SHMC shall not apply to the HBD zone for residential uses above permitted uses. Densities are determined for residential uses by the formula in subsection (5)(a) of this section.

(b) The visual clearance area requirements of Chapter 17.76 SHMC do not apply to the Houlton business district.

(c) Overlay district Chapter 17.148 SHMC, Planned Development, shall not apply to the HBD zone.

(d) All chapters of the Development Code apply except as modified herein. (Ord. 3232 § 2 (Att. A), 2018; Ord. 3215 § 4 (Att. D), 2017; Ord. 3197 § 2 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 3190 § 2 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 3110 § 5 (Att. B), 2009. Formerly 17.32.175)


Chapter 17.36 HISTORIC SITES AND OVERLAY DISTRICT

Sections:

17.36.005    Purpose.

17.36.010    Definitions.

17.36.015    Applicability of provisions and initiation.

17.36.020    Historic landmark commission.

17.36.025    Inventory of historic resources.

17.36.030    Designated Landmarks Register.

17.36.035    General administration and approval process.

17.36.040    Criteria for alteration.

17.36.050    Additional criteria and conditions for relocation or demolition.

17.36.055    Prevention of demolition by neglect.

17.36.060    Application submission requirements.

17.36.065    Expiration of approval – Standards for extension of time.

17.36.070    The site plan.

17.36.080    Architectural drawings.

17.36.090    Landscape plan.

17.36.100    Sign drawings.

17.36.110    Additional information required and waiver of requirements.

17.36.120    Exceptions to nonconforming situations.


17.36.005 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to implement the comprehensive plan. Implementation may be accomplished as follows:

(1) Effect and accomplish the protection, enhancement, and perpetuation of such improvements and of districts which represent or reflect elements of the city’s cultural, social, economic, political, and architectural history;

(2) Safeguard the city’s historic, aesthetic, and cultural heritage as embodied and reflected in such improvements and districts;

(3) Complement any registered historic or cultural areas designated in the city;

(4) Stabilize and improve property values in such districts;

(5) Foster civic pride in the beauty and noble accomplishments of the past;

(6) Protect and enhance the city’s attractions to tourists and visitors and the support and stimulus to business and industry thereby provided;

(7) Strengthen the economy of the city; and

(8) Promote the use of historic districts and landmarks for the education, pleasure, energy conservation, housing, and public welfare of the city. (Ord. 3084 § 3, 2008)


17.36.010 Definitions.

The following definitions apply to terms used in this chapter and supplement the definitions in Chapter 17.16 SHMC. In the event of conflict, the definitions in this chapter shall control.

“Alteration” means an addition, removal, or reconfiguration which significantly changes the character of a historic resource. Painting is not an alteration. 

“Demolition” means the razing, destruction, or dismantling of a historic resource to the degree that its historic character is substantially obliterated.

“Demolition by neglect” means a situation in which the owner or other person(s) or entities who may have legal possession, custody and control of a building, structure or object allows the condition of the building, structure or object to suffer such deterioration, potentially beyond the point of repair, as to threaten the structural integrity of the building, structure or object or its relevant architectural detail such that the building, structure or object and its character may be lost to current and future generations.   

“Designated landmark” means a historic resource officially recognized by the city of St. Helens as important in its history.

“Designated Landmarks Register” means the list of and record of information about historic resources, designated landmarks specifically, officially recognized by the city of St. Helens as important in its history.

“Extraordinary historic importance” means the quality of historic significance achieved outside the usual norms of age, association, or rarity.

“Historic integrity” means the quality of wholeness of historic location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and/or association of a resource, as opposed to its physical condition.

“Historic resource” means a building, structure, object, site, or district that is or has the potential to be, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, a designated landmark for inclusion onto the Designated Landmarks Register. Historic resource types are further described as follows: 

(a) “Building” means a construction made for purposes of shelter or habitation (e.g., house, barn, store, theater, train station, garage, school, etc.).

(b) “Structure” means a construction made for functions other than shelter or habitation (e.g., bridge, windmill, dam, highway, boat, kiln, etc.).

(c) “Object” means a construction which is primarily artistic or commemorative in nature and not normally movable or part of a building or structure (e.g., statue, fountain, milepost, monument, sign, etc.).

(d) “Site” means the location of a significant event, use, or occupation which may include associated standing, ruined, or underground features (e.g., battlefield, shipwreck, campsite, cemetery, natural feature, garden, food-gathering area, etc.).

(e) “District” means a geographically defined area possessing a significant concentration of buildings, structures, objects, and/or sites which are unified historically by plan or physical development (e.g., downtown, residential neighborhood, military reservation, ranch complex, etc.).

“Historic resources of statewide significance” means specific buildings, structures, objects and sites which are listed on the National Register of Historic Places.

“Inventory of historic resources” means the record of information about historic resources potentially significant in the history of the city of St. Helens.

“Relocation” means the removal of a historic resource from its historic context. (Ord. 3084 § 3, 2008)


17.36.015 Applicability of provisions and initiation. 

(1) Historic sites and overlay district shall apply to the following:

(a) Historic resources listed in the comprehensive plan and/or included in the Designated Landmarks Register; and

(b) Cultural resources listed in the comprehensive plan and/or included in the Designated Landmarks Register.

(2) The provisions of this chapter apply to:

(a) The alteration of designated landmarks and historic resources of statewide significance; and

(b) The demolition of designated landmarks and historic resources of statewide significance. (Ord. 3084 § 3, 2008)


17.36.020 Historic landmark commission.

(1) The mayor with council concurrence shall appoint a historic landmark commission, hereinafter the commission, of at least three but not to exceed five members with a demonstrated positive interest, knowledge, or competence in historic preservation to carry out the provisions of this chapter. A majority of the members shall reside within the corporate boundaries of the city of St. Helens. Members shall serve without compensation, but are eligible for reimbursement of expenses related to their service.

Alternatively, the planning commission may serve as the historic landmarks commission when thus appointed, provided the appointed members of the planning commission have a demonstrated positive interest, knowledge, or competence in historic preservation to carry out the provisions of this chapter.

(2) Initial appointments to the commission (originally three members) shall be for terms of one, two, and three years. Subsequent or new terms of appointment shall be for three years or, in the case of a replacement, for the remainder of the unexpired term. Members shall be eligible for reappointment.

(3) A simple majority of the seated members shall constitute a quorum to conduct official business.

(4) A chair and vice-chair shall be elected annually by and from the seated membership. Officers are eligible for reelection.

(5) The commission shall meet at least twice a year, and as required to conduct business in a timely fashion. Notice of the meetings shall be in accordance with applicable state law. Minutes, applications, staff reports, findings, and decisions of the commission shall be maintained as public records in accordance with applicable state law.

(6) The commission has the following powers and duties:

(a) The commission may adopt and amend by-laws, subject to approval by the city of St. Helens council, to regulate its internal operations.

(b) For purposes consistent with this chapter and subject to the approval of the city council, the commission may seek, accept, and expend public appropriations; seek, accept, and expend grant and gift funds; cooperate with public and private entities; and employ clerical and expert assistance.

(c) The commission may undertake to inform the citizens of, and visitors to, the city of St. Helens regarding the community’s history and prehistory; promote research into its history and prehistory; collect and make available materials on the preservation of historic resources; provide information on state and federal preservation programs; document historic resources prior to their alteration, demolition, or relocation and archive that documentation; assist the owners of historic resources in securing funding for the preservation of their properties; and recommend public incentives and code amendments to the city council.

(d) The commission may develop and publish, or adopt, written and graphic guideline and example materials to clarify the criteria in this chapter and to assist applicants in developing complete and viable applications.

(e) Employing the procedures and criteria in SHMC 17.36.025, the commission shall periodically identify and evaluate the historic resources of the city of St. Helens and maintain an inventory of historic resources. At such time as surveys are being conducted, owners of the subject properties shall be notified and invited to provide comment and input.

(f) Employing the procedures and criteria in SHMC 17.36.030, the commission shall recommend to the city council revisions (i.e., adding or deleting properties) to the Designated Landmarks Register and/or comprehensive plan as needed. 

(g) Employing the applicable procedures and criteria of this chapter, the commission shall review and act upon applications for the alteration, relocation, or demolition of designated landmarks and historic resources of statewide significance.

(h) The commission shall advise and make policy recommendations to the city council and the planning commission on matters relating to historic preservation; and shall make an annual report, in writing, to the city council on its activities and expenditures during the preceding 12 months, and its projected activities and expenditures for the following 12 months. 

(i) The commission shall make recommendations for architecture character review pursuant to SHMC 17.32.172(7) and 17.32.173(5)(b). (Ord. 3215 § 4 (Att. D), 2017; Ord. 3176 § 1, 2014; Ord. 3168 § 1, 2013; Ord. 3144 § 2 (Att. A), 2011; Ord. 3084 § 3, 2008)


17.36.025 Inventory of historic resources.

(1) The commission shall determine and periodically revise priorities for the identification and evaluation of historic resources.

(2) Unless the commission finds “extraordinary historic importance” (as defined by SHMC 17.36.010), only properties over 50 years of age shall be considered for inclusion in the inventory of historic resources. 

(3) The commission shall develop or adopt a system, based on historic integrity and significance, for evaluating historic resources. The system shall rank surveyed historic resources as eligible, potentially eligible, or ineligible for listing on the Designated Landmarks Register. Owners of surveyed properties shall be notified of these findings.

(4) Documentation of properties in the inventory of historic resources shall be on forms compatible with the Statewide Inventory of Historic Properties, and upon completion, copies of the forms shall be supplied to the State Historic Preservation Office. 

(5) Records concerning archaeological sites shall not be made available to the public. (Ord. 3084 § 3, 2008)


17.36.030 Designated Landmarks Register.

(1) Properties listed on the National Register of Historic Places, including all properties within National Register Historic District boundaries, are eligible for automatic listing on the Designated Landmarks Register. However, only properties listed on the Designated Landmarks Register shall be eligible for public incentives and code considerations pursuant to this chapter.

(2) Any individual or group, including the commission acting on its own initiative, may nominate a historic resource for inclusion on or removal from the Designated Landmarks Register by submitting a complete application to the planning director. The burden of proof lies with the applicant. No property shall be so designated without the written consent of the owner or, in the case of multiple ownership, all of the owners.

(3) The planning director shall establish standards for a complete application. Upon acceptance of a complete application the planning director shall schedule a public hearing pursuant to the applicable state laws and provisions of the St. Helens Development Code.

(4) In order to be included or maintained on the Designated Landmarks Register the city council (based on recommendation of the commission), pursuant to comprehensive plan amendment procedures, must find that the historic resource is over 50 years of age or of “extraordinary historic importance” (as defined by SHMC 17.36.010), and possesses sufficient “historic integrity” (as defined by SHMC 17.36.010), and:

(a) Is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of local, state, or national history; or

(b) Is associated with the lives of persons, or groups of people, significant in local, state, or national history; or

(c) Embodies the distinctive characteristics of an architectural type, style, period, or method of construction or that represents the work of a master (e.g., builder, designer or architect), or that possesses high artistic values, or that represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction; or

(d) Has yielded or is likely to yield information which is important in local, state, or national history.

(5) The commission and city council shall develop findings to support their decisions. These findings shall indicate those elements of a property, including archaeological features, that are included in the designation and subject to regulation under the provisions of this chapter.

(6) The age of a specific building or structure is not sufficient in itself to warrant listing on the Designated Landmarks Register.

(7) Procedure for removal from the Designated Landmarks Register shall be the same as inclusion to the register and may also include the following as a basis for the decision:

(a) Inclusion on the Designated Landmarks Register was done in error; or

(b) Inclusion on the Designated Landmarks Register is causing the property owner to bear an unfair economic burden to maintain the property as an historic resource or cultural resource.

(8) Any historic resource or cultural resource listed in the comprehensive plan shall be included in the Designated Landmarks Register. Addition or removal of historic resources or cultural resources in the comprehensive plan shall be based on the same criteria and procedure as the Designated Landmarks Register. (Ord. 3084 § 3, 2008)


17.36.035 General administration and approval process. 

(1) The application for an historic site or overlay district designation shall be as provided by SHMC 17.24.020; however, application for a demolition permit, or for new construction, or for alteration shall be submitted by the record owner of the property or an agent authorized in writing by the owner. 

(2) A preapplication conference with city staff is required. (See SHMC 17.24.040.)

(3) Due to possible changes in state statutes, or regional or local policy, information given by staff to the applicant during the preapplication conference is valid not more than six months:

(a) Another preapplication conference is required if any application is submitted more than six months after the preapplication conference; and

(b) Failure of the director to provide any of the information required by this chapter shall not constitute a waiver of the standards, criteria or requirements of the applications.

(4) The historic landmark commission shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny any application filed under the provisions of this chapter. The historic landmark commission shall apply the standards herein set forth in this chapter.

(a) Decisions of the historic landmark commission shall be made in a public meeting, notice of which has been posted in a conspicuous place on, at or near the affected historic resource or cultural resource at least five days prior to the meeting. 

(5) The decision of the historic landmark commission may be reviewed by the city council in accordance with SHMC 17.24.310(2).

(6) The director shall mail notice of any application to the persons who have a right to receive notice of a hearing before the historic landmark commission in accordance with SHMC 17.24.130. (Ord. 3084 § 3, 2008)


17.36.040 Criteria for alteration.

(1) Except as provided elsewhere in this chapter, no exterior alteration, relocation, or demolition of a designated landmark or historic resource of statewide significance shall be allowed without a permit issued pursuant to this chapter.

(2) Exterior remodeling, as governed by this chapter, shall include any change or alteration in design or other exterior treatment excluding painting.

(3) In order to approve an application for the alteration of a designated landmark or historic resource of statewide significance, the commission must find that the proposal meets the following standards:

(a) The purpose of the historic overlay district as set forth in SHMC 17.36.005.

(b) The provisions of the comprehensive plan.

(c) A property shall be used as it was historically or be given a new use that requires minimal change to its distinctive materials, features, spaces, and spatial relationships.

(d) The historic character of a property shall be retained and preserved. The removal or relocation of distinctive materials or alteration of features, spaces, and spatial relationships that characterize a property shall be avoided.

(e) A property shall be recognized as a physical record of its time, place, and use. Changes that create a false sense of historical development, such as adding conjectural features or elements from other historic properties, shall not be undertaken.

(f) Changes to a property that have acquired historic significance in their own right shall be retained and preserved.

(g) Distinctive materials, features, finishes, and construction techniques or examples of craftsmanship that characterize a property shall be preserved.

(h) Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired rather than replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires replacement of a distinctive feature, the new feature shall match the old in design, color, texture, and, where possible (including environmental considerations), materials. Replacement of missing features shall be substantiated by documentary and physical evidence.

(i) Chemical and physical treatments, if appropriate, shall be undertaken using the gentlest means possible. Treatments that cause damage to historic materials shall not be used.

(j) Archeological resources shall be protected and preserved in place. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures shall be undertaken.

(k) New additions, exterior alterations, or related new construction shall not destroy historic materials, features, and spatial relationships that characterize the property. The new work shall be differentiated from the old and shall be compatible in appearance with the historic materials, features, size, scale and proportion, and massing to protect the integrity of the property and its environment.

(l) New additions and adjacent or related new construction shall be undertaken in such a manner that, if removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the historic property and its environment would be unimpaired.

(4) Prior to alteration, current photographs and/or drawings of all elevations shall be provided to the city for its public records. Photographs and drawings shall be archival quality; proof of such shall be provided with the photographs and/or drawings.

(5) Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary repair or maintenance of a designated landmark or historic resource of statewide significance, when such action does not involve a change in design, materials, or appearance.

(6) Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the alteration, demolition, or relocation of a designated landmark or historic resource of statewide significance, when the building official certifies that such action is required for the public safety because of its unsafe or dangerous condition. (Ord. 3215 § 4 (Att. D), 2017; Ord. 3144 § 2 (Att. A), 2011; Ord. 3084 § 3, 2008)


17.36.050 Additional criteria and conditions for relocation or demolition.

(1) In addition to the criteria of SHMC 17.36.040, in order to approve an application for the relocation or demolition of a designated landmark or historic resource of statewide significance, the commission must find that:

(a) No prudent and feasible alternative exists; or

(b) The designated property is deteriorated beyond repair; or

(c) The value to the community of the proposed use of the property outweighs the value of retaining the designated landmark or historic resource of statewide significance.

(2) When considering an application involving relocation or demolition, the commission may also consider whether denial of the permit will subject the city to potential liability, involve substantial hardship to the applicant, and whether issuance of the permit would act to the substantial detriment of the public welfare and would be contrary to the intent and purposes of this code.

(3) Prior to relocation or demolition, current photographs and/or drawings of all elevations shall be provided to the city for its public records. Photographs and drawings shall be archival quality; proof of such shall be provided with the photographs and/or drawings. In addition, the commission may require:

(a) Salvage and curation of significant elements or artifacts; and/or

(b) Other reasonable mitigation measures. (Ord. 3215 § 4 (Att. D), 2017; Ord. 3084 § 3, 2008)


17.36.055 Prevention of demolition by neglect. 

(1) All designated landmarks and historic resources of statewide significance shall be preserved against decay and deterioration, and kept free of structural defects by the owner or other person(s) or entities who may have legal possession, custody and control thereof.

(2) Demolition by neglect shall be prohibited. (Ord. 3084 § 3, 2008)


17.36.060 Application submission requirements.

(1) All applications shall be made on forms provided by the director and shall be accompanied by:

(a) Five copies of the historic overlay district, exterior alteration, new construction or demolition site plan(s) and necessary data or narrative which explains how the proposal conforms to the standards:

(i) Sheet size for the proposed site plan and required drawings shall preferably not exceed 18 inches by 24 inches; and

(ii) The scale of the site plan shall be an engineering scale; and

(iii) All drawings of structure elevations shall be a standard architectural scale, being one-fourth-inch or one-eighth-inch; and

(b) The required fee.

(2) The required information may be combined and does not have to be placed on separate maps. (Ord. 3084 § 3, 2008)


17.36.065 Expiration of approval – Standards for extension of time.

(1) Approval of any alteration, relocation or demolition of designated landmarks or historic resources of statewide significance by the historic landmark commission shall be void if:

(a) Substantial progress in accordance with the approved application materials has not begun within a one-year or greater period; or

(b) The actual work done is a departure from the approved application materials.

(2) The director shall, upon written request by the applicant and payment of the required fee, grant an extension of the approval period not to exceed one year; provided, that:

(a) No changes are made to the original application materials as approved by the historic landmark commission;

(b) The applicant can show intent of initiating the proposal within the extension period.

(3) Notice of the decision shall be provided to the applicant. The director’s decision may be appealed by the applicant as provided by SHMC 17.24.310. (Ord. 3144 § 2 (Att. A), 2011)


17.36.070 The site plan.

The proposed historic site or overlay district plan shall include the following information:

(1) The proposed site and surrounding properties;

(2) The location, dimensions, and names of all existing streets;

(3) The location and dimension of:

(a) Entrances and exits on the site;

(b) Parking and circulation areas;

(c) Loading and services areas;

(d) Pedestrian and bicycle circulation;

(e) Outdoor common areas;

(f) Above ground utilities; and

(g) Existing landscaping;

(4) The location, dimensions, and setback distances of all:

(a) Existing structures, improvements, and utilities which are located within 25 feet of the sites and are on adjoining property; and

(b) Proposed structures, improvements, landscaping and utilities on the site. (Ord. 3084 § 3, 2008)


17.36.080 Architectural drawings.

The historic site or overlay district plan proposal shall include:

(1) Floor plans indicating the square footage of all structures existing and proposed for use on site; and

(2) Elevation drawings of each proposed structure and elevation drawings or photographs of each existing structure. (Ord. 3084 § 3, 2008)


17.36.090 Landscape plan.

The landscape plan shall be drawn at the same scale as the site plan or a larger scale if necessary and shall indicate:

(1) Location and height of fences, buffers, and screenings;

(2) Location of terraces, decks, shelters, and common open spaces; and

(3) Location, type, size and species of existing and proposed plant materials. (Ord. 3084 § 3, 2008)


17.36.100 Sign drawings.

Sign drawings shall be submitted in accordance with Chapter 17.88 SHMC. (Ord. 3084 § 3, 2008)


17.36.110 Additional information required and waiver of requirements.

(1) The director may require information in addition to that required by this chapter in accordance with SHMC 17.24.080(1).

(2) The director may waive a specific requirement for information in accordance with SHMC 17.24.080(2) and (3). (Ord. 3084 § 3, 2008)


17.36.120 Exceptions to nonconforming situations. 

Notwithstanding Chapter 17.104 SHMC, if a designated landmark is a lawfully existing nonconforming building or structure which could not be built under the terms of this code by reason of restrictions on lot area, lot coverage, height, yard, equipment, its location on the lot, or other requirements concerning the building or structure, and that building or structure is destroyed by fire or natural disaster, whether partially or wholly, it may be rebuilt; provided, that:

(1) The building or structure will be identical in appearance to the original building or structure as much as possible, as approved by the commission; and

(2) The building or structure is built on the same size or smaller footprint as the original, except right-of-way encroachment shall not be allowed; and 

(3) A permit from the city is obtained for the replacement building or structure within six months from the date of damage or destruction; and 

(4) The replacement building or structure remains on the Designated Landmarks Register as if the damage/destruction had not occurred. (Ord. 3084 § 3, 2008)




Chapter 17.40 PROTECTIVE MEASURES FOR SIGNIFICANT WETLANDS, RIPARIAN CORRIDORS, AND PROTECTION ZONES*

Sections:

17.40.005    Purpose.

17.40.010    Definitions.

17.40.015    Establishment of significant wetlands, riparian corridors and protection zones.

17.40.020    Applicability of chapter – Site-specific determination of significant wetland, significant riparian corridors and protection zone boundaries.

17.40.025    Prohibitions within significant wetlands, significant riparian corridors and protection zones.

17.40.030    Sworn statement, verification of federal, state and local permit compliance.

17.40.035    Exempt activities and uses within a significant wetland, riparian corridor and protection zone.

17.40.040    Protection zone exceptions – Limited activities and uses within the protection zone.

17.40.045    Resource exceptions – Limited activities and uses within significant wetlands, significant riparian corridors (resource areas).

17.40.050    Additional requirements for land divisions and new development.

17.40.055    General criteria for exceptions and other approvals.

17.40.060    Administration and approval processes.

17.40.065    Application requirements.

17.40.070    Additional information required and waiver of requirements.

17.40.075    Claims requirement.

*    Editor’s Note: The effective date for this chapter is December 1, 2003.


17.40.005 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to implement Statewide Planning Goal No. 5 and Oregon Administrative Rules requiring the establishment of regulatory protective measures for significant wetland areas and significant riparian corridors. This chapter establishes prohibitions and permit requirements for the significant wetlands and riparian corridors and their associated protection zones. 

The standards and requirements of this chapter shall apply in addition to other regulations of the Development Code applicable to the underlying zoning classification of lands within significant wetlands, riparian corridors, and protection zones. In case of any conflict between these regulations and any other regulation(s) of the city, the regulation(s) which provide more protection shall apply. (Ord. 2890 Att. A, 2003; Ord. 2875 § 1.091.005, 2003)


17.40.010 Definitions.

The following definitions supplement definitions in Chapter 17.16 SHMC. In the event of conflict the definitions in this chapter shall control.

“Alter” or “alteration” means any human-induced physical change to the existing condition of land or improvements thereon including but not limited to clearing, grubbing, draining, removal of vegetation (chemical or otherwise), excavation, grading, placement of fill material, placement of structures or impervious surfaces or other construction. “Permit to be altered” means allowing or failing to prevent the alteration. (Replaces definition in Chapter 17.16 SHMC for purposes of this chapter.)

“City” means the city of St. Helens.

“Clearing” means the removal, redistribution or disturbance to vegetation, soil or substrate that may include trees, brush, grass, ground cover, or other vegetative matter from a site.

“Enhancement” means the actions performed to improve the condition or functions and values of a wetland area, riparian corridor or fish and wildlife habitat area, or their associated protection zone. Enhancement actions include but are not limited to increasing plant diversity, increasing fish and wildlife habitat, installing environmentally compatible erosion controls, and removing invasive plant species. 

“Environmental assessment” means at a minimum that the property owner contract with a registered engineer and/or wetlands biologist as appropriate to determine the precise location of the top of bank, steep slopes, wetland, riparian corridor and protection zone or on a property. A licensed surveyor must then conduct a boundary survey that shows the locations of the tops-of-bank, steep slopes, wetlands, riparian corridors, and the protection zone setback locations on the subject property. Minimum requirements for environmental assessments are set forth in SHMC 17.40.065. The EA and supporting field investigation shall be performed by a qualified biologist or other environmental professional with experience in performing wetland/riparian corridor identification, delineation and evaluation.

“Fill material” means a deposit of earth or other natural or manmade material placed by artificial means.

“Filling” means the act of placing fill material in any amount, including the temporary stockpiling of fill material. 

“Legally created lot or parcel of record” for purposes of this chapter includes a lot or parcel that was legally created and recorded prior to the adoption of land division ordinances or a lot or parcel shown on a final plat approved and recorded prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. A “legally created lot or parcel of record” also includes a lot or parcel recorded after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, but only if the lot or parcel was approved on a preliminary plat approved prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and the final plat recordation is in compliance with the original approved timetable of development.

“Mitigation” means actions designed to replace project-induced sensitive area losses or impacts, including, but not limited to, restoration, creation or enhancement.

“Mitigation plan” means a plan that outlines the activities that will be undertaken to alleviate project impacts to sensitive areas.

“Nonnative species” means a plant species which is not indigenous to the local area.

“Noxious, invasive and/or nonnative vegetation” means poison oak, tree of heaven, garlic mustard, lesser celandine, Canada thistle, common thistle, western clematis, traveler’s joy, field morning-glory, lady’s-nightcap, pampas grass, hawthorn, except native species, Scot’s broom, Queen Anne’s lace, South American waterweed, common horsetail, giant horsetail, Crane’s bill, Robert geranium, English ivy, St. John’s wort, English holly, Yellow flag, duckweed, water lentil, fall dandelion, purple loosestrife, Eurasian water milfoil, reed canary grass, annual bluegrass, water smartweed, climbing bindweed, giant knotweed, English and Portuguese laurel, Himalayan blackberry, evergreen blackberry, tansy ragwort, blue bindweed, hairy nightshade, common dandelion, common bladderwort, periwinkle (large leaf), periwinkle (small leaf), spiny cocklebur, bamboo, and blackberry.

Power-Assisted Equipment or Machinery.

(a) “Non-power-assisted equipment” means equipment or machinery operated by hand or operated by electricity or battery power.

(b) “Power-assisted equipment” means equipment or machinery other than non-power-assisted equipment.

“Protection zone” means the wetland/riparian protection zone of varying width, located adjacent to all significant wetlands and all significant riparian corridors and established in SHMC 17.40.015(3).

“Resource” or “resources” means significant wetlands and/or significant riparian corridors as distinguished from protection zone, which extends upland from the resource area.

“Restoration” means efforts performed to re-establish the functional values and characteristics of a critical area that have been destroyed or degraded by past alterations (e.g., filling, grading or draining).

“Riparian area” or “significant riparian area” is the area adjacent to a river, lake, or stream, consisting of the area of transition from an aquatic ecosystem to a terrestrial ecosystem. These areas are part of significant riparian corridors identified in the PHS riparian area report to the city, designated in the comprehensive plan, Ordinance 2824 and SHMC 17.40.015(2).

“Significant riparian corridor” or “riparian corridor” is a Goal No. 5 resource identified in the PHS riparian area report to the city, designated in the comprehensive plan, Ordinance 2824 and SHMC 17.40.015(2). A riparian corridor includes the water areas, fish habitat, adjacent riparian areas, and wetlands within the riparian area boundary.

“Significant wetland” means a wetland that has been identified by the city as a significant Goal No. 5 resource in Ordinance 2807, the comprehensive plan and in SHMC 17.40.015(1).

“Site” means any legal parcel, lot, or right-of-way, or combination of contiguous lots or parcels or lots under the applicant’s ownership.

“Top of bank” means the stage or elevation at which water overflows the natural banks of streams or other waters of this state and begins to inundate the upland. In the absence of physical evidence, the two-year recurrence interval flood elevation may be used to approximate the bank full stage. 

“Utility line” means pipe, conduit, cable or other similar instrument by which services are conveyed to the public or individual recipients. Such services shall include, but are not limited to, water supply, electric power, natural gas, communications and sanitary sewer.

“Water-dependent” means a use which can be carried out only on, in, or adjacent to a body of water because it requires access to the water body for waterborne transportation or recreation. Water-dependent also includes development, which by its nature can be built only on, in, or over a water body. Bridges supported by piers or pillars, as opposed to fill, are water-dependent development.

“Water-related” means a use or development which is not directly dependent upon access to a water body but which provides goods or services that are directly associated with water-dependent lands or waterway use or development, and which, if not located adjacent to water, would result in a public loss of quality in the goods or services offered. Residences (including houseboats), parking areas, spoil and dump sites, roads and highways, restaurants, businesses, factories, and recreational vehicle parks are not considered dependent or related to water. Recreational trails and viewpoints adjacent to the water body or river are water-related development. Bridge exit and entrance ramps supported by piers or pillars, as opposed to fill, are water-related development.

“Wetland functions” are wildlife habitat, fish habitat, water quality, and hydrological control. (Ord. 2890 Att. A, 2003; Ord. 2875 § 1.091.010, 2003)


17.40.015 Establishment of significant wetlands, riparian corridors and protection zones.

(1) Wetlands. Ordinance 2807 adopted in November 1999 established and listed significant wetland areas within the city of St. Helens. Such areas were added to the comprehensive plan.

(a) The following significant wetlands are hereby established as Type I:

	D-6	J-3	MC-1

	D-10	M-7	MC-9

	D-11	M-8	MC-25

	D-16	M-10	UA-2

	D-17	M-11	UB-5A

	D-18	M-12	UB-5B

(b) The following significant wetlands are hereby established as Type II:

	D-1	D-20	M-5	MC-16

	D-2	D-21	M-15	MC-17

	D-3	D-22	MC-2	MC-20

	D-4	F-2	MC-3	MC-21

	D-7	F-4	MC-5	MC-22

	D-8	J-6	MC-8	MC-26

	D-19	M-3	MC-10	UB-6

(2) Riparian Corridors. Ordinance 2824 adopted in August 2000 established significant riparian corridors within the city of St. Helens. Such areas were added to the comprehensive plan.

(a) Significant riparian corridors are established in waterways within the city limits of the city of St. Helens as follows: Scappoose Bay, Multnomah Channel, Columbia River, Milton Creek, McNulty Creek, and North Fork of McNulty Creek.

(b) The following additional reaches or portions of streams together with their associated riparian areas are also listed as significant riparian corridors:

	R-MC-5b	R-MC-13R	R-MI-22

	R-MC-7R	R-MC-13L	R-MI-23R

	R-MC-7L	R-MC-15	R-MI-23L

	R-MC-8L	R-MC-16a	R-MI-24

	R-MC-10	R-MC-16b	R-MI-26a

	R-MC-12	R-MI-21	R-D-34

(c) The significant riparian corridors, including those with associated riparian areas, are more specifically defined in Ordinance 2824. Ordinance 2824 defines these corridors as those waterways identified as fish habitat by Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife and also those associated riparian areas identified by Pacific Habitat Services, Inc., report dated February 4, 2000, and amended March 24, 2000, as having two or more assessed functions that have been rated as High. 

(3) Protection Zone. There is hereby established a wetland/riparian protection zone (hereinafter “protection zone” or “PZ”) adjacent to all significant wetlands and all significant riparian corridors to protect their integrity, function and value. The protection zone shall be measured from the wetland edge, the riparian corridor edge, or the top of the bank of the waterway when no riparian area is included in the corridor. The width of the protection zone shall vary according to the type of wetland/riparian corridor as listed below:

(a) The required protection zone for Type I wetland shall extend 75 feet upland from the delineated wetland edge. 

(b) The required protection zone for Type II wetland shall extend 50 feet upland from the delineated wetland edge.

(c) The required protection zone for riparian corridor streams with an annual average stream flow greater than 1,000 cubic feet per second shall extend 75 feet upland from the top of bank. This provision concerns all portions of Scappoose Bay, Multnomah Channel, and the Columbia River.

(d) The required protection zone for riparian corridor streams with an average annual stream flow less than 1,000 cubic feet per second shall extend 50 feet upland from the top of bank or from the upland edge of the significant riparian area, whichever is greater. This provision concerns portions of Milton Creek, McNulty Creek and the North Fork of McNulty Creek as well as the following sections of streams and their associated riparian areas:

	R-MC-5b	R-MC-13R	R-MI-22

	R-MC-7R	R-MC-13L	R-MI-23R

	R-MC-7L	R-MC-15	R-MI-23L

	R-MC-8L	R-MC-16a	R-MI-24

	R-MC-10	R-MC-16b	R-MI-26a

	R-MC-12	R-MI-21	R-D-34

(Ord. 2890 Att. A, 2003; Ord. 2875 § 1.091.015, 2003)


17.40.020 Applicability of chapter – Site-specific determination of significant wetland, significant riparian corridor and protection zone boundaries.

(1) All those contemplating land purchase for development are urged to obtain environmental professional field delineations of wetlands and riparian corridors prior to decisions on land use and project design. The burden is on the property owner to demonstrate that the requirements of this chapter are met or are not applicable to development activity or other proposed use or alteration on the owner’s land. Accordingly, as part of any application involving land clearing, alteration or use on a site within 200 feet of a resource, an environmental assessment, prepared and certified by a qualified environmental professional showing the boundaries of the significant wetland, significant riparian corridor and protection zones on the property, is required. The EA shall be prepared at the applicant’s sole expense. Assistance from state and federal agencies is encouraged. Alternatively, the property owner may submit a sworn statement from a qualified environmental professional that no significant wetlands, significant riparian corridors or protection zones exist on the site. Environmental assessments must comply with minimum requirements in SHMC 17.40.065.

(2) Notwithstanding subsection (1) of this section, when the request is for verification of an exemption or for single-family lot of record development, the director may waive the requirement for a professionally prepared environmental assessment or statement, provided the director finds that the St. Helens zone map, resource map, combined with scaled maps provided by the applicant, or any other materials supplied by the applicant and used by the director, and a field check by the director, is sufficient to determine the location of the resource and protection zone boundaries or lack thereof on a particular site or portion thereof.

(3) The director shall incorporate findings of compliance or noncompliance with this chapter into decisions concerning development applications. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, a decision concerning compliance with this chapter shall be made a part of the requested development application, and not a separate land use decision. If no development application is submitted, then a decision on an exception shall be a director’s decision and not a separate land use decision. A decision under this chapter which would not otherwise be a land use decision shall be made a director’s decision in accordance with the procedures in SHMC 17.24.090.

(4) Precise wetland and riparian corridor boundaries may vary from those shown in the comprehensive plan exhibit if an EA is performed and accepted by the city, applicable state agencies and verified with on-site inspection. The more precise boundaries can be mapped, staked, and used for review and development without a change in the comprehensive plan wetlands map exhibit. (Ord. 2890 Att. A, 2003; Ord. 2875 § 1.091.020, 2003)


17.40.025 Prohibitions within significant wetlands, significant riparian corridors and protection zones.

(1) All significant wetlands, significant riparian corridors and protection zones shall be protected from alteration or development activities, except as specifically provided herein.

(2) Except as set forth in the exemption, exception, or other approval authorized in this chapter, no person or entity shall alter or allow, or permit or cause to be altered, any real property designated as a significant wetland, significant riparian corridor, or a wetland/riparian protection zone.

(3) Except as set forth in the exemption, exception, or other approval authorized in this chapter, no person or entity shall use or allow, or permit or cause to be used, property designated as a significant wetland, significant riparian corridor, or wetland/riparian protection zone. (Ord. 2890 Att. A, 2003; Ord. 2875 § 1.091.025, 2003)


17.40.030 Sworn statement, verification of federal, state and local permit compliance.

Prior to any land clearing, alteration, or physical construction (other than survey work or environmental testing) on a site, the property owner and developer, if any, shall execute a sworn statement, under penalty of perjury and false swearing, that owner/developer has obtained all required federal, state, and local authorizations, permits and approvals for the proposed development, including any proposed use, or alteration of the site, including also any off-site improvements. Owner/developer shall be solely responsible for obtaining all approvals, permits, licenses, insurance, and authorizations from the responsible federal, state and local authorities, or other entities, necessary to use the property in the manner contemplated, including all authorizations necessary to perform land clearing, construction and improvement of property in the location and manner contemplated. This provision includes, specifically, a permit or statement from the National Marine Fisheries Service and/or Fish and Wildlife Service that owner’s proposed use and/or development will not take or harm any endangered or threatened species as that term is defined in applicable federal statutes and administrative rules. The city of St. Helens has no duty, responsibility or liability for requesting, obtaining, ensuring, or verifying owner/developer’s compliance with the applicable state and federal agency permit or approval requirements. Any permit or authorization granted by the city, including any exemption, exception, permit, approval or variance pursuant to the Community Development Code shall not in any way be interpreted as a waiver, modification, or grant of any state or federal agency permits or authorizations or permission to violate any state or federal law or regulation. Owner/developer shall be held strictly liable, and shall hold the city of St. Helens harmless for administrative, civil and criminal penalties for any violation of federal and state statutes, including but not limited to the Clean Water Act, Endangered Species Act and regulations implementing such laws. Nothing herein shall be interpreted as restricting or limiting the city from bringing an enforcement action under Chapter 17.12 SHMC. (Ord. 2890 Att. A, 2003; Ord. 2875 § 1.091.030, 2003)


17.40.035 Exempt activities and uses within a significant wetland, riparian corridor and protection zone.

(1) The following activities do not require a permit or authorization from the city to be conducted or to continue in a significant wetland, riparian corridor or protection zone:

(a) Public and private conservation areas for water, soil, open space, forest, and wildlife resources.

(b) Nonimpact, nonalteration, nondevelopment, recreational uses such as but not limited to sport fishing, bird watching, scientific or educational study. 

(c) Noxious Vegetation Control.

(i) Alteration or removal of noxious, invasive and/or nonnative vegetation with electric or handheld (non-power-assisted) equipment. 

(ii) Alteration or removal of noxious, invasive and/or nonnative vegetation by state-licensed governmental, utility and transportation carrier personnel when performed with power- or non-power-assisted equipment or chemical control, provided any chemicals used are authorized and approved for such use by the Oregon Department of Agriculture or DEQ, and provided the alteration or removal is performed only in existing rights-of-way or on other public property and is limited to areas previously altered by such means.

(d) Planting of native vegetation with non-power-assisted equipment.

(e) Minimal site investigative work required by a city, state, or federal agency, such as surveys, soil logs, percolation tests, and other similar tests.

(f) Emergency Activities. Emergency repair or other remedial actions performed by governmental or public utility workers or authorized contractors or volunteers which must be undertaken immediately, or for which there is insufficient time for full compliance with this chapter, when it is necessary to:

(i) Prevent an imminent threat to public health or safety; or

(ii) Prevent imminent danger to public or private property; or

(iii) Prevent an imminent threat of serious environmental degradation.

(g) Hazard Prevention – Tree Removal or Flood Prevention. Emergency remedial action to remove a tree or portion thereof or sandbagging for flood prevention by a property owner which must be undertaken immediately, or for which there is insufficient time for full compliance with this chapter, when it is necessary to:

(i) Prevent an imminent threat to public health or safety; or

(ii) Prevent imminent danger to public or private property; or

(iii) Prevent an imminent threat of serious environmental degradation.

(h) Legally Established Nonconformities.

(i) A use or structure legally established prior to the adoption of this chapter, which would be prohibited by this chapter or which would be subject to the limitations and controls imposed by this chapter, shall be considered a nonconforming use or structure and may continue subject to the limitations of the nonconformities chapter (Chapter 17.104 SHMC). The following nonexclusive list represents uses or structures that may continue subject to the nonconformities chapter: 

(A) Maintenance and use of existing buildings and structures, including accessory structures, and maintenance and operation of equipment operating areas;

(B) Maintenance and operation of dikes, levees, ditches, drains or other facilities which were created, developed or utilized primarily as part of a drainage or diking system;

(C) Maintenance of existing, intentionally created wetlands or surface water systems, including irrigation and drainage ditches, grass-lined swales and canals, detention facilities, and landscape or ornamental amenities. Wetlands, streams, lakes, or ponds created as mitigation for violations or as consideration for approved land use activities shall be maintained in accordance with agency-approved management plans, a copy of which shall be filed with the city recorder;

(D) Maintenance and operation of existing public and private roads, streets, driveways, and utility lines, including the replacement of such improvements when located in city right-of-way or public easement;

(E) Maintenance (e.g., mowing) of ground cover vegetation.

(ii) Notwithstanding exempt status, a property owner may apply for a written determination of nonconforming use status pursuant to Chapter 17.104 SHMC. This director’s decision that the use was legally established, as well as a determination of the geographic extent, intensity, and frequency of the use, and that it otherwise complies with the nonconformities chapter is binding on the city. Without a binding nonconformity determination from the city, a property owner may be subject to enforcement action pursuant to Chapter 17.12 SHMC if the use or structure is not in compliance with the nonconformities chapter. 

(i) Preexisting Approvals and Vested Rights.

(i) Applications deemed complete prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter are protected from application of the requirements of this chapter for that development order only (not for future development orders) provided the application is processed in accordance with the time frames in the code, not to exceed 180 days.

(ii) Development orders approved prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall not be considered to be in conflict with this chapter, and shall be deemed consistent with this chapter; provided, that development is continuing in good faith, pursuant to, and in strict compliance with, its approved timetable of development or, if no timetable exists, development is completed within one year of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. For example, approved subdivisions may be constructed as approved; however, future development on individual lots shall be subject to the law in effect at the time the building permit is sought. Any amendments, including timetable amendments, to an existing development order shall require full and strict compliance with the requirements of this chapter to the extent of the amendment. 

(iii) “Development orders,” for purposes of this section, includes planned developments, subdivisions, and construction pursuant to site design approvals or any other development approval, permit or authorization issued pursuant to the St. Helens Community Development Code or building codes and ordinances.

(iv) Notwithstanding the above, individual lots for “vested” subdivisions or planned developments approved since the adoption of the Community Development Code in 1999 must comply with the requirements of this chapter at building permit issuance, except that contiguous lots in the same ownership shall not be required to be combined until one year after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

(v) Any person who desires a determination as to whether rights are vested for development on a property owned by that person may submit a request for such a determination to the city council.

(j) Dredging and channel maintenance conducted under permit from the state of Oregon.

(k) Placement of signs, markers, or other similar navigation aids by a public agency.

(l) Activities conducted to protect, conserve, enhance, and maintain public recreational, scenic, historical and natural uses of public lands, including, but not limited to, installation and maintenance of educational and interpretative signage and trail improvements, including elevated boardwalks no greater than necessary to comply with ADA requirements on public property by volunteers or city employees or contractors.

(m) Alterations of buildings or structures that do not increase building coverage.

(n) Measures taken by private property owners or governmental agencies to abate identified public health or safety hazards, public nuisances, and code violations as part of informal or formal resolution of violation proceedings. (Ord. 2890 Att. A, 2003; Ord. 2875 § 1.091.035, 2003)


17.40.040 Protection zone exceptions – Limited activities and uses within the protection zone.

Unless otherwise specified, findings by the approval authority concerning whether a proposed use or activity meets the exception criteria shall be incorporated into the underlying decision on the application. If the application concerns only an exception or is part of a building permit process, it shall be made as a director’s decision in accordance with the procedures in SHMC 17.24.090, unless otherwise specified.

(1) Protection Zone Reduction (Up to 50 Percent for Undeveloped Properties). The protection zone may be reduced by the approval authority up to 50 percent where equal or better protection for identified resources will be ensured through restoration, enhancement and similar measures. Specifically the following criteria and conditions must be met to be eligible for a protection zone reduction; the applicant must demonstrate that: 

(a) The application of the protection zone to the lot or parcel, as evidenced by the environmental assessment, precludes all reasonable use of the lot or parcel under the applicable zone designation and renders it not buildable, after consideration of all applicable limitations and restrictions in this code; and

(b) The lot or parcel is a “legally created lot or parcel of record” as defined in this chapter (this exception is not available for land divisions); and

(c) The lot or parcel must be combined for development purposes with contiguous lots or parcels in the same ownership on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter; and 

(d) The proposed development shall minimize disturbance to the protection zone by utilizing design options to minimize or reduce impacts of development: (i) multistory construction shall be used; (ii) parking spaces shall be minimized to no more than that required as a minimum for the use; (iii) no accessory structures allowed; (iv) paving shall be pervious; (v) engineering solutions shall be used to minimize additional grading and/or fill; and

(e) The proposed use or activity is designed to minimize intrusion into the protection zone. Specifically the use or activity is designed using up to a 50 percent adjustment to any dimensional standard (e.g., front yard, side yard or other setbacks, including height or lot area) to permit development as far outside or upland of the protection zone as is possible. Design shall be to the adjustment; and

(f) The protection of the significant riparian corridor and/or significant wetland can be assured through restoration, enhancement, and other similar measures in the protection zone and the resource area; and 

(g) All applicable general criteria in SHMC 17.40.055, including minimum restoration and enhancement requirements, shall be met.

(2) Micro-Siting Standards for Residential Lot of Record Development. When a “legally created lot or parcel of record” as defined in this chapter is proposed to be developed for single-dwelling residential use and all or part of the lot or parcel is encompassed within a protection zone, the development of the lot shall be permitted subject to compliance with the following micro-siting standards:

(a) The lot or parcel must be combined for development purposes with contiguous lots or parcels in the same ownership on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter; and 

(b) The building footprint encroaching into the protection zone shall be limited to that which is the minimum necessary to obtain reasonable use of the property for the primary use of single-dwelling residential purposes. Preference in location of the building footprint shall be given to areas devoid of native vegetation; and 

(c) The director or approving authority shall adjust the underlying zone setback standards to the extent necessary to reduce or minimize encroachment into the protection zone. Design shall be to this adjustment. The director or approving authority may approve up to a 50 percent adjustment to any dimensional standard (e.g., front yard, side yard or other setbacks, including height or lot area) to permit development as far outside or upland of the protection zone as is possible; and 

(d) The proposed development shall minimize disturbance to the protection zone by utilizing design options to minimize or reduce impacts of development: (i) multistory construction shall be used; (ii) parking spaces shall be minimized to no more than that required as a minimum for the use; (iii) no accessory structures allowed; (iv) paving shall be pervious; (v) engineering solutions shall be used to minimize additional grading and/or fill; and

(e) In no case shall the impervious surface area of the single-dwelling use (including building footprint, driveway, and parking areas and accessory structures) exceed 3,000 square feet or 50 percent of the protection zone on the lot or parcel, whichever is less; and

(f) All applicable general criteria in SHMC 17.40.055, including minimum restoration and enhancement requirements, shall be met.

(3) Micro-Siting Standards for Nonresidential Parcel of Record Development. When a “legally created lot or parcel of record” as defined in this chapter is proposed to be developed for nonresidential use and all or part of the lot or parcel is encompassed within a protection zone, the development of the lot shall be permitted subject to compliance with the following micro-siting standards:

(a) The lot or parcel must be combined for development purposes with contiguous lots or parcels in the same ownership on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter; and 

(b) The building footprint encroaching into the protection zone shall be limited to that which is the minimum necessary to obtain reasonable use of the property for a single use identified as permitted outright in the zoning district. Preference in location of the building footprint shall be given to areas devoid of native vegetation. The use permitted shall be of the minimum intensity necessary to obtain reasonable use of the property; and 

(c) The director or approving authority shall adjust the underlying zone setback standards to the extent necessary to reduce or minimize encroachment into the protection zone. Design shall be to this adjustment. The director or approving authority may approve up to a 50 percent adjustment to any dimensional standard (e.g., front yard, side yard or other setbacks, including height or lot area) to permit development as far outside or upland of the protection zone as is possible; and 

(d) The proposed development shall minimize disturbance to the protection zone by utilizing design options to minimize or reduce impacts of development: (i) multistory construction shall be used; (ii) parking spaces shall be minimized to no more than that required as a minimum for the use; (iii) no accessory structures allowed; (iv) paving shall be pervious; (v) engineering solutions shall be used to minimize additional grading and/or fill; and

(e) In no case shall the impervious surface area of the alteration and development footprint, including parking and accessory structures, exceed 50 percent of the protection zone on the lot or parcel, whichever is less; and

(f) All applicable general criteria in SHMC 17.40.055, including minimum restoration and enhancement requirements, shall be met.

(4) Encroachment, Where Necessary for Access to Upland Property. In conjunction with a development request, an exception shall be granted to permit access to property when the owner of the property demonstrates that encroachment of the protection zone is necessary for access to the site and no reasonable upland alternative exists. The approval authority must find that (a) the encroachment is the least damaging alternative, and (b) the encroachment is the minimum encroachment capable of providing the required access, and (c) the applicant submits an acceptable proposal for mitigation which will minimize damage to the protection zone such that there is no net loss of functions or spatial extent of the protection zone. In addition, design techniques, including but not limited to box culverts or piling support bridges, shall be used to minimize impacts on adjacent wetland and riparian resources. All applicable general criteria in SHMC 17.40.055, including minimum restoration and enhancement requirements, shall be met.

(5) Reconstruction. Reconstruction of legally established uses or structures is permitted in the same location, such as those uses or structures identified in SHMC 17.40.035(1)(h)(i)(A) through (E), as well as reconstruction of single-dwelling units and accessory structures and nonresidential structures under SHMC 17.104.040(1)(b), provided the structures, accessory structures, and uses are not expanded in geographic location (i.e., total footprint), intensity or frequency of use beyond existing established footprint boundaries; provided also, that the uses or structures were legally established, and otherwise comply with the nonconformities chapter. All applicable general criteria in SHMC 17.40.055, including minimum restoration and enhancement requirements, shall be met.

(6) Other Authorized Activities in the Protection Zone. The following uses, alteration and development activity shall be permitted in a protection zone provided the approval authority finds that proposed development uses or alterations are designed and constructed in a manner to minimize intrusion into the protection zone, and the applicant demonstrates compliance with specific requirements listed, and all applicable general criteria in SHMC 17.40.055, including minimum restoration and enhancement requirements, are met.

(a) Construction of new streets, roads and paths in public rights-of-way or easements.

(b) Construction of new drainage facilities, utilities and irrigation pumps in public rights-of-way or easements, existing or herein accepted by the city thereafter.

(c) Construction of water-related and water-dependent uses, provided removal of vegetation is limited to that necessary for the development of the water-related or water-dependent use.

(i) Water Access. Within the protection zone no development shall be permitted except to provide the property owner reasonable access to the water. Development shall be restricted to accessways running generally perpendicular to the shoreline, and such accessways shall represent the minimum alteration required for access, and shall be no greater than six feet in width. The use of heavy equipment shall be prohibited, and there shall be no temporary filling of any protection zone for access purposes. 

(ii) For those properties that are designated and zoned for marine commercial use and/or industrial use, development associated with access to the water through the protection zone must be accomplished in a manner that is least disruptive to the protection zone and generally shall not exceed a width of 30 feet. The access must be accepted by the director and be for water-dependent or water-related use or an industrial development need. Where vehicle turnaround and maneuver are needed, the area of alteration shall likewise be limited to 30 feet in width. Boat entry and retrieval facilities shall be allowed. This exception shall be used only to the extent necessary to provide commercial or industrial access to the water.

(iii) For those properties that are designated and zoned for public lands and used for parks, public boat ramps, docking facilities, fishing piers, and related facilities providing benefits which exceed those lost as a result of protection zone alterations, an accessway running generally perpendicular to the shoreline shall be no greater than 30 feet in width. Where vehicle turnaround and maneuver are needed, the area of alteration shall likewise be limited to 30 feet in width. Boat entry and retrieval facilities shall be allowed. Public use shall demonstrate the need for direct water access in any proposal for protection zone clearing under this subsection. This exception shall be used only to the extent necessary to provide public access to the water.

(d) Alteration or removal of noxious, invasive and/or nonnative vegetation with power-assisted equipment or machinery, or chemical control, provided any chemicals used are authorized and approved for such use by the Oregon Department of Agriculture or DEQ, upon a finding that the noxious plant infestation is extensive. 

(e) Planting of native vegetation when planted with power-assisted equipment or machinery.

(f) Nonemergency Activities. Repair or other remedial actions performed by governmental or public utility workers or their agents when it is necessary to:

(i) Prevent a threat to public health or safety; or

(ii) Prevent danger to public or private property; or

(iii) Prevent a threat of serious environmental degradation; or

(iv) Complete cleanup of contaminated properties.

(g) Tree Removal for Hazard Prevention. Remedial action to remove a tree or portion thereof by a property owner which must be undertaken to:

(i) Prevent a threat to public health or safety; or

(ii) Prevent danger to public or private property; or

(iii) Prevent a threat of serious environmental degradation.

(h) Construction of new accessory uses or structure(s) or expansion of existing uses or primary structure shall:

(i) Strictly comply with applicable standards of the Community Development Code, including specifically Chapter 17.124 SHMC; and 

(ii) Strictly comply with all applicable general criteria in SHMC 17.40.055, including restoration and enhancement requirements at three-to-one area ratio. (Ord. 2890 Att. A, 2003; Ord. 2875 § 1.091.040, 2003)


17.40.045 Resource exceptions – Limited activities and uses within significant wetlands, significant riparian corridors (resource areas).

Unless otherwise specified, findings concerning whether a proposed use or activity meets the exception criteria shall be incorporated into the underlying decision on the application. If the application concerns only an exception it shall be made as a director’s decision in accordance with the procedures in SHMC 17.24.090, unless otherwise specified.

(1) Micro-Siting for Residential Lot of Record Development. When a “legally created lot or parcel of record” as defined in this chapter is proposed to be developed for single-family residential use and all or part of the lot or parcel is encompassed within a significant wetland or riparian corridor, minimum development of the lot necessary to avoid a taking claim shall be permitted subject to compliance with the following micro-siting standards:

(a) The lot or parcel must be combined for development purposes with contiguous lots or parcels in the same ownership on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter; and 

(b) The building footprint encroaching into the resource area shall be limited to that which is the minimum necessary to obtain reasonable use of the property for the primary use of single-family residential purposes. The application of the resource and protection zone to the lot or parcel, as evidenced by the environmental assessment, precludes all reasonable use of the parcel under the applicable zone designation and renders it not buildable, after consideration of all applicable limitations and restrictions in this code; and

(c) Preference in location of the building footprint shall be given to areas devoid of native vegetation; and 

(d) The director or approving authority shall adjust the underlying zone setback standards to the extent necessary to reduce or minimize encroachment into the resource area and protection zone. Design shall be held to this adjustment. The director or approving authority may approve up to a 75 percent adjustment to any dimensional standard (e.g., front yard, side yard or other setbacks, including height or lot area) to permit development as far outside or upland of the protection zone as is possible; and 

(e) The proposed development shall minimize disturbance to the resource area and protection zone by utilizing design options to minimize or reduce impacts of development including but not limited to multistory construction, minimizing parking, garage space, and paving and use of retaining walls or other engineering solutions to minimize filling and grading; and

(f) In no case shall the impervious surface area of the single-family residence (including building footprint, driveway, and parking areas and accessory structures) exceed 3,000 square feet or 50 percent of the resource area and protection zone on the lot or parcel, whichever is less; and

(g) All applicable general criteria in SHMC 17.40.055, including minimum restoration and enhancement requirements at two-to-one area ratio, shall be met.

(2) Micro-Siting for Nonresidential Parcel of Record Development. When a “legally created lot or parcel of record” as defined in this chapter is proposed to be developed for nonresidential uses and all or part of the lot or parcel is encompassed within a significant wetland or riparian corridor, minimum development of the lot necessary to avoid a taking claim shall be permitted subject to compliance with the following micro-siting standards:

(a) The lot or parcel must be combined for development purposes with contiguous lots or parcels in the same ownership on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter; and 

(b) The building footprint encroaching into the protection zone shall be limited to that which is the minimum necessary to obtain reasonable use of the property for a single use identified as permitted outright in the zoning district. The application of the resource and protection zone to the lot or parcel, as evidenced by the environmental assessment, precludes all reasonable use of the parcel under the applicable zone designation and renders it not buildable, after consideration of all applicable limitations and restrictions in this code. Preference in location of the building footprint shall be given to areas devoid of native vegetation. The use permitted shall be of the minimum intensity necessary to obtain reasonable use of the property; and

(c) The director or approving authority shall adjust the underlying zone setback standards to the extent necessary to reduce or minimize encroachment into the protection zone. Design shall be to this adjustment. The director or approving authority may approve up to a 75 percent adjustment to any dimensional standard (e.g., front yard, side yard or other setbacks, including height or lot area) to permit development as far outside or upland of the resource area and protection zone as is possible; and 

(d) The proposed development shall minimize disturbance to the protection zone by utilizing design options to minimize or reduce impacts of development including but not limited to multistory construction, minimizing parking and accessory structures and use of retaining walls or other engineering solutions to minimize filling and grading; and

(e) In no case shall the impervious surface area of the alteration and development footprint, including parking and accessory structures, exceed 50 percent of the resource and protection zone on the lot or parcel; and

(f) All applicable general criteria in SHMC 17.40.055, including minimum restoration and enhancement requirements at two-to-one area ratio, shall be met.

(3) Encroachment (Necessary for Access to Upland Property). An exception shall be granted to permit access to property when the owner of the property demonstrates that encroachment of the significant wetland or riparian corridor and protection zone is necessary for access to the site and no reasonable upland alternative exists. The approval authority must find that (a) the encroachment is the least damaging alternative, and (b) the encroachment is the minimum encroachment capable of providing the required access, and (c) the applicant submits an acceptable proposal for mitigation which will minimize damage to the protection zone such that there is no net loss of functions or spatial extent of the significant wetland, riparian corridor and protection zone. In addition, design techniques, including but not limited to box culverts or piling support bridges, shall be used to minimize impacts on adjacent wetland and riparian resources. All applicable general criteria in SHMC 17.40.055, including minimum restoration and enhancement requirements, shall be met.

(4) Reconstruction. Reconstruction of legally established uses or structures in the same location or such as those uses or structures identified in SHMC 17.40.035(1)(h)(i)(A) through (E), as well as reconstruction of single-dwelling units and accessory structures and nonresidential structures under SHMC 17.104.040(1)(b), provided the structures, accessory structures, and uses are not expanded in geographic location (i.e., total footprint) intensity or frequency of use beyond existing established boundaries; provided also, that the uses or structures were legally established and otherwise comply with the nonconformities chapter; provided further, that all applicable general criteria in SHMC 17.40.055, including minimum restoration and enhancement requirements, shall be met.

(5) Other Authorized Activities in the Significant Wetland and Riparian Corridor. The following uses, alteration and development activity shall be permitted in a significant wetland and riparian corridor provided the approving authority finds that proposed development uses or alterations are designed and constructed in a manner to minimize intrusion into the wetland, riparian corridor and protection zone, and the applicant demonstrates compliance with specific requirements listed, and all applicable general criteria in SHMC 17.40.055, including minimum restoration and enhancement requirements at two-to-one area ratio, are met. 

(a) Construction of new streets, roads and paths in public rights-of-way or easements.

(b) Construction of new drainage facilities, utilities and irrigation pumps in public rights-of-way or easements.

(c) Construction of water-related and water-dependent uses, provided removal of vegetation is limited to that necessary for the development of the water-related or water-dependent use.

(i) Water Access. Within the riparian corridor no development shall be permitted except to provide the property owner reasonable access to the water. Development shall be restricted to accessways running perpendicular to the shoreline, and such accessways shall represent the minimum alteration required for access, and shall be no greater than six feet in width. The use of heavy equipment shall be prohibited, and there shall be no temporary filling of any protection zone for access purposes.

(ii) For those properties that are designated and zoned for marine commercial use and/or industrial use, development associated with access to the water through the riparian corridor and protection zone must be accomplished in a manner that is least disruptive to the riparian corridor and protection zone and generally shall not exceed a width of 30 feet. The access must be accepted by the director or approving authority and provide for either a public commercial benefit or an industrial development need. Where vehicle turnaround and maneuver are needed, the area of alteration shall likewise be limited to 30 feet in width as with the approach road, but they may be designed to be contiguous with the accessway. Boat entry and retrieval facilities shall be allowed. This exception shall be used only to the extent necessary to provide commercial or industrial access to the water.

(iii) For those properties that are designated and zoned for public lands and used for parks, public boat ramps, docking facilities, fishing piers, and related facilities providing benefits which exceed those lost as a result of riparian corridor and protection zone alterations, an accessway running generally perpendicular to the shoreline shall be no greater than 30 feet in width. Where vehicle turnaround and maneuver are needed, the area of alteration shall likewise be limited to 30 feet in width as with the approach road, but they may be designed to be contiguous with the accessway. Boat entry and retrieval facilities shall be allowed. Public use shall demonstrate the need for direct water access in any proposal for riparian corridor and protection zone clearing under this subsection. This exception shall be used only to the extent necessary to provide public access to the water.

(iv) Construction of docks or structures in waterways shall comply with SHMC 17.40.055.

(d) Alteration or removal of noxious, invasive and/or nonnative vegetation with power-assisted equipment or machinery, or chemical control, provided any chemicals used are authorized and approved for such use by the Oregon Department of Agriculture or DEQ, upon a finding that the plant infestation is extensive. 

(e) Planting of native vegetation when planted with power-assisted equipment or machinery.

(f) Nonemergency Activities. Repair or other remedial actions performed by governmental or public utility workers when it is necessary to:

(i) Prevent a threat to public health or safety; or

(ii) Prevent danger to public or private property; or

(iii) Prevent a threat of serious environmental degradation.

(g) Tree Removal for Hazard Prevention. Remedial action to remove a tree or portion thereof by a property owner which must be undertaken to:

(i) Prevent a threat to public health or safety; or

(ii) Prevent danger to public or private property; or

(iii) Prevent a threat of serious environmental degradation. (Ord. 2890 Att. A, 2003; Ord. 2875 § 1.091.045, 2003)


17.40.050 Additional requirements for land divisions and new development.

(1) Density Transfer. Except as provided below, residential density transfer shall not be available.

(a) Residential density transfer within the same property, or within contiguous properties within the same ownership, shall be permitted for planned development with a development agreement pursuant to ORS Chapter 94, subject to the following: 

(i) Density Bonus. The maximum gross density for the buildable area of the site shall not exceed 150 percent of the maximum density allowed by the underlying zoning district for that buildable area notwithstanding Chapter 17.56 SHMC.

(2) Design Standards. Except as provided below, significant wetlands, significant riparian corridors and protection zones shall not be permitted as part of individual lots or new streets or infrastructure areas and shall be made part of separate preservation tracts to be managed by a homeowners association or other entity responsible for preservation.

(a) Protection zones may be made part of individual lots and protection zones may vary in width provided average protection zone width complies with this chapter in planned developments with a development agreement pursuant to ORS Chapter 94, provided additional protection zones or off-site mitigation over the minimum standard is provided as consideration for such flexibility.

(3) A development agreement entered into pursuant to ORS Chapter 94, and in accordance with city requirements may be used where a planned development is not available to achieve flexibility in design standards, density transfer, and density bonuses as discussed in subsections (1) and (2) of this section. (Ord. 2890 Att. A, 2003; Ord. 2875 § 1.091.050, 2003)


17.40.055 General criteria for exceptions and other approvals.

The appropriate approval authority shall approve or approve with conditions an application request within a significant wetland, significant riparian corridor or protection zone based upon findings that all of the following criteria have been satisfied and the conditions herein are imposed:

(1) The extent and nature of the proposed alteration or development will not create site disturbances to an extent greater than the minimum required for the use;

(2) No loss of wetland/riparian area and function:

(a) Any wetland or riparian area alteration permitted through an exception or other approval shall be mitigated to ensure that there is no net loss of functions or the spatial extent of wetlands or riparian area within the city of St. Helens;

(b) Any encroachment or change in on-site or off-site drainage which would adversely impact wetland or riparian characteristics have been mitigated;

(3) Where natural vegetation has been removed due to alteration or development, erosion control provisions of the Community Development Code and “Engineering Department Public Facility Construction Standards Manual” shall be met;

(4) All applicable sensitive lands requirements of Chapter 17.44 SHMC have been met;

(5) Copies of all state and federal permit applications shall be submitted with development applications requiring compliance with this chapter. All required state and federal permits shall be obtained and copies provided to the city of St. Helens prior to alteration of the site;

(6) The protection of the significant riparian corridor or significant wetland can be assured through restoration, enhancement, and other similar measures in the protection zone and the resource area. The following minimum restoration and enhancement shall be required as a condition of approval:

(a) The applicant shall enter into a two-year contract for installation and maintenance of plant materials with the city. Financial security in an amount not less than 110 percent of the cost estimate for installation shall be provided. Within the time specified in the contract, the applicant shall remove noxious vegetation and restore or enhance with native plant materials and other approved resource enhancements all required portions of the protection or resource zone on the site, as well as restoration and enhancement in any associated contiguous resource area under the applicant’s ownership or control;

(b) Restoration and enhancement shall be on a 1:1 area basis or such greater ratios as specified in this chapter for the requested activity. Thus, at a minimum, for every 100 square feet of protection zone or resource area that is altered or used for development purposes, at least 100 square feet of the available remaining resource area and/or protection zone shall be enhanced or restored. Priority shall be given to removal of noxious vegetation and planting of native plant materials, including ground cover, under-story and canopy, in nonvegetated areas or areas where noxious plant species are removed. The number and type of plant materials shall be specified in the contract but shall at a minimum comply with the following requirements:

(i) Only plant materials approved by the director shall be installed in the protection zone or the resource areas. Plant materials shall be of high quality;

(ii) No noxious plants shall be installed and existing noxious materials shall be removed;

(iii) Plant materials shall consist of ground cover, under-story and canopy materials and shall be located in such a manner to maximize enhancement and restoration of the resource area and the protection zone, with particular emphasis on temperature reduction of watercourses, erosion control, and wildlife habitat enhancement;

(iv) Installation standards within the required enhancement area be as follows:

(A) Ground cover shall be hydro-seeded or planted at two-foot intervals or such other interval established by the approval authority as sufficient to attain coverage of the required area within the two-year contract period;

(B) Under-story shall be minimum one-gallon materials planted at six-foot intervals or such other interval approved by the approval authority as sufficient to attain adequate coverage within the two-year contract period;

(C) Canopy trees shall be planted at 20-foot intervals or such other interval as required to install all materials required for tree mitigation pursuant to the tree mitigation requirements of the Community Development Code;

(D) Additional materials or other habitat enhancements are encouraged;

(v) As a condition of approval the applicant shall implement a management plan for the entire protection zone and resource areas under the applicant’s ownership or control, including the areas restored and enhanced. The management plan must be approved by the city and shall be attached to the approval document. The management plan shall contain the following requirements and statements:

(A) Identification of resource and protection zone management practices to be conducted and proposed intervals; 

(B) Provisions for the perpetual maintenance of protection zone and resource areas by a responsible party;

(C) Provisions for the initial removal and ongoing management of exotic invasive vegetation and debris;

(D) Plans for the restoration and enhancement of any resource or protection areas with appropriate native plant material;

(E) Provisions for the protection of protected plant and animal species in accordance with recommendations from applicable state and federal agencies;

(F) Provision for protective barriers around all trees and vegetation to be saved in accordance with minimum city standards, and prohibiting all activity within these areas during construction;

(G) Specific provisions for city enforcement of the management plan as contained in the city-approved sample management plan;

(H) Any additional measures deemed necessary to protect and maintain the functions and values of the wetlands, riparian corridors and protection zones (e.g., signage delineating preserve boundaries);

(I) The following statements:

1. “There shall be no alteration of significant wetlands, riparian corridors or protection zones as delineated and shown on the attached plan” [attach reduced plan];

2. “There shall be no alteration of the size, shape or design of an approved protection area or resource area without the approval by the City of St. Helens” (modification to original permit);

3. “There shall be no amendment or change to this Management Plan without the approval of the City of St. Helens” (modification to original permit);

(c) The exception or other approval document shall be recorded in the public records to give notice of the protection zone and resource area restrictions and maintenance obligations and to ensure no further encroachment into the protection zone and resource area occurs;

(d) The applicant may dedicate a conservation easement or equivalent protection instrument to the city, homeowners association or a conservation organization, provided the form of the instrument is approved by the city attorney and accepted by the council, if offered. Applicants should consult with their legal counsel or tax professionals about the tax advantages of conservation easements;

(e) The director or approval authority may impose such additional reasonable conditions to mitigate other identified impacts resulting from development on the site. (Ord. 2890 Att. A, 2003; Ord. 2875 § 1.091.055, 2003)


17.40.060 Administration and approval processes.

Administration and approval processes shall be as set forth in Chapter 17.44 SHMC for other sensitive lands. (Ord. 2890 Att. A, 2003; Ord. 2875 § 1.091.060, 2003)


17.40.065 Application requirements.

Application requirements shall be as set forth in Chapter 17.44 SHMC for other sensitive lands, except that an environmental assessment (EA), as defined below, shall be required in addition to other application requirements.

(1) Minimum Requirement for Environmental Assessment. The EA shall include the following information:

(a) Vicinity map;

(b) Site designated on St. Helens local wetland inventory (LWI) map and/or riparian corridor map;

(c) The wetland/riparian corridor boundary must be accurately drawn at an appropriate engineering scale of one inch equals 400 feet or larger. Existing features must be distinguished from proposed features. The map must show:

(i) Site boundary property lines and roads;

(ii) Property lines, rights-of-way, easements, etc.;

(iii) Existing physical features of the site including buildings, fences, and other structures, roads, parking lots, utilities, water bodies, etc.;

(iv) Contours at the smallest readily available intervals, preferably at two-foot intervals;

(v) Delineated boundaries of wetlands, tops-of-bank, steep slopes, and protection zone;

(vi) Hydrologic mapping showing patterns of surface water movement into, through, and out of the site area; and

(vii) Location of all test holes and vegetation sample sites, numbers to correspond with flagging in the field and field data sheets.

(2) Where environmental impacts may be significant, an aerial photo with overlays displaying the site boundaries and wetland and protection zone/delineation may be required. Generally, an orthophotograph at a scale of one inch equals 400 feet or greater should be used. If an orthophotograph is not available a smaller scale aerial photograph enlarged to one inch equals 400 feet may be used.

The EA narrative shall describe the following:

(a) Location information including legal description and address;

(b) Methodology used for delineation of wetlands, tops-of-bank, steep slopes, and protection zone;

(c) General site conditions, including topography, acreage, and surface areas of wetlands and water bodies;

(d) Specific descriptions of plant communities, soils, and hydrology; and

(e) Wetland field data sheets, numbered to correspond with sample site locations as staked and flagged in the field.

(3) Supplemental EA requirements for all new land division and vacant land development applications (excluding lot of record exceptions) and such other applications when such additional information is required by the director pursuant to SHMC 17.40.070.

The EA report shall include an analysis of significant adverse impacts to the wetland and riparian corridor functions and values. The impact analysis is based on the resource functions and values identified in the local wetland inventory and riparian inventory reports. Potential impacts may include (but are not limited to) loss of flood storage potential, loss of wildlife habitat, loss of species diversity or quantity, changes in water quality, any increase in human intrusion, and impacts on associated wetland or water resources. To the extent that the wetlands and/or riparian corridors are part of a larger natural system such as a watershed, the evaluation must also consider the cumulative impacts on that system. An impact analysis shall include: identification, by characteristics and quantity, of the resources and the resource functions and values found on the site.

(4) Evaluation of alternative locations, design modifications, or alternative methods of development that avoid significant adverse impacts to identified resource functions and values. Such measures to avoid or reduce impacts may include:

(a) Limiting the degree or magnitude of the proposed activity;

(b) Limiting the implementation of the proposed activity;

(c) Using appropriate and best available technology;

(d) Taking affirmative steps to avoid or minimize impacts; and

(e) Design, siting, or construction of proposed activities so as to avoid potential impacts to wetlands, riparian corridors, and steep slopes.

(5) Determination of the alternative that best meets the applicable approval criteria and determination of unavoidable impacts. 

(6) The report shall contain an analysis of recommended measures to avoid significant adverse impacts to wetlands/riparian corridors and their associated protection zones and an identification of impacts that cannot be avoided or reduced.

The report shall contain:

(a) Recommended measures to mitigate unavoidable adverse impacts to wetlands/riparian corridors and their associated protection zones;

(b) A mitigation plan shall include, at a minimum:

(i) A description of the resources and the resource functions and values to be restored, created, or enhanced on the mitigation site;

(ii) A plan showing proposed disturbance limits; location, species, and size of proposed plantings; location, size, and details of other proposed mitigation measures; storm water management and erosion control features; and construction management measures;

(c) Documentation of coordination with appropriate local, regional, special district, state, and federal regulatory agencies; 

(d) Construction timetables; 

(e) Operations and maintenance practices; 

(f) Monitoring and evaluation procedures; and

(g) Remedial actions for unsuccessful mitigation. (Ord. 2890 Att. A, 2003; Ord. 2875 § 1.091.065, 2003)


17.40.070 Additional information required and waiver of requirements.

(1) The director may require information in addition to that required by this chapter in accordance with SHMC 17.24.080.

(2) The director may waive a specific requirement for information in accordance with SHMC 17.24.080(2) and (3). (Ord. 2890 Att. A, 2003; Ord. 2875 § 1.091.070, 2003)


17.40.075 Claims requirement.

(1) Takings. The regulations of this chapter shall not be construed or applied so as to prevent all reasonable use of property and constitute a taking of property without just compensation. Any property owner who believes the regulations in this chapter as applied or facially constitute a taking shall petition the city council for relief as part of a timely appeal of a land use action in which this chapter is applied. Any relief granted in an individual case shall constitute the minimum necessary to allow reasonable use of and to avoid a taking of the affected property.

(2) Vested Rights. Any person who desires a determination as to whether rights are vested for development on a property owned by that person shall submit a request for such a vested rights determination to the city council as part of a timely appeal of a land use action in which this chapter is applied. Said application shall address the standards for vested rights as provided in statutory and case law and shall include supporting documentation. Applications shall specify with particularity the governmental authorizations or approvals relied upon and shall document all expenditures alleged to be made in reliance on said authorizations or approvals. (Ord. 2890 Att. A, 2003; Ord. 2875 § 1.091.075, 2003)


Chapter 17.44 SENSITIVE LANDS

Sections:

17.44.010    Purpose.

17.44.015    Permitted and conditional use – Permit requirements.

17.44.020    Administration and approval process.

17.44.025    Maintenance of records.

17.44.026    Repealed.

17.44.028    General provisions for wetlands.

17.44.030    Expiration of approval – Standards for extension of time.

17.44.040    Approval standards.

17.44.050    Application submission requirements.

17.44.060    Additional information required and waiver of requirements.

17.44.070    Site conditions.

17.44.080    The site plan.

17.44.090    Grading plan.

17.44.100    Landscape plan.


17.44.010 Purpose.

(1) Sensitive lands are lands potentially unsuitable for development because of their location within:

(a) The 100-year floodplain per the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) map;

(b) Natural drainageways;

(c) Wetland areas which are regulated by the other agencies including the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the Division of State Lands, and/or are designated as significant wetland on the St. Helens comprehensive plan floodplain and local wetlands inventory maps;

(d) Steep slopes of 25 percent or greater and unstable ground;

(e) Fish and wildlife habitats as listed in acknowledged comprehensive plan;

(f) Archaeologically designated sites or culturally designated sites as listed in acknowledged comprehensive plan;

(g) State and federal threatened/endangered species habitats as listed by the applicable authority; and

(h) Open space/open space design review areas shown on the comprehensive plan map.

(2) Sensitive land areas are designated as such to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the community through the regulation of these sensitive land areas.

(3) Sensitive land regulations contained in this chapter are intended to maintain the integrity of the rivers, streams, and creeks in St. Helens by minimizing erosion, promoting bank stability, maintaining and enhancing water quality and fish and wildlife habitats, and preserving scenic quality and recreation potential.

(4) The regulations of this chapter are intended to implement the comprehensive plan and the city’s floodplain management program as required by the National Flood Insurance Program, and help to preserve natural sensitive land areas from encroaching use.

All development within a floodplain or floodway or that may directly impact a floodplain or floodway shall follow the rules as stated in Chapter 17.46 SHMC. (Ord. 3031 Att. A, 2007; Ord. 2875 § 1.092.010, 2003)


17.44.015 Permitted and conditional use – Permit requirements.

(1) All uses are conditioned on obtaining a permit except:

The following listed uses are outright permitted uses within slopes that are 25 percent or greater, and unstable ground when the use does not involve paving. No permit is required for permitted use. For the purposes of this chapter, the word “structure” shall exclude: children’s play equipment, picnic tables, sand boxes, grills, basketball hoops and similar recreational equipment.

(a) Public and private conservation areas for water, soil, open space, forest, and wildlife resources; and

(b) Removal of invasive/exotic/nonnative vegetation (e.g., poison oak, tansy ragwort, blackberry) as determined by the director.

(2) Administrative Sensitive Lands Permit.

(a) Administrative sensitive lands permits in drainageways, slopes that are 25 percent or greater, and unstable ground shall be obtained from the appropriate authority for the following:

(i) The city engineer shall review the installation of public support facilities such as underground utilities and construction of roadway improvements including sidewalks, curbs, streetlights, and driveway aprons;

(ii) The city engineer shall review minimal ground disturbance(s) or landform alterations involving zero to 50 cubic yards of material for land that is within public easements and rights-of-way;

(iii) The director shall review minimal ground disturbance(s) or landform alterations involving zero to 50 cubic yards of material; 

(iv) The director shall review the repair, reconstruction, or improvement of an existing structure or utility in sensitive lands, the cost of which is less than 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement or the damage requiring reconstruction; 

(v) The director shall review all building permits for any construction in sensitive lands; see Chapter 17.116 SHMC, Temporary Uses; and 

(vi) The director shall review applications for paving on private property in sensitive lands.

(b) The responsible authority shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for a development permit, as described in subsection (2)(a) of this section, based on the standards set forth in SHMC 17.44.040.

(3) Jurisdictional Wetlands. See Chapter 17.40 SHMC.

(4) Sensitive Lands Permits Issued by the Director.

(a) The director shall have the authority to issue a sensitive lands permit in the following areas:

(i) Drainageways;

(ii) Slopes that are 25 percent or greater or unstable ground; and

(iii) Wetland areas.

(b) Sensitive lands permits shall be required for the areas in subsection (4)(a) of this section when any of the following circumstances apply:

(i) Ground disturbance(s) or landform alterations; 

(ii) Repair, reconstruction, or improvement of an existing structure or utility, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement or the damage requiring reconstruction; 

(iii) Residential and nonresidential structures intended for human habitation; and

(iv) Accessory structures.

(c) Cultural sites.

(5) Sensitive Lands Permits Issued by the Planning Commission.

(a) Fish and wildlife habitats as listed.

(b) State and federal threatened/endangered species habitats as listed.

(c) Open space design review.

(6) Except as explicitly authorized by other provisions of this chapter, all other uses are prohibited on sensitive land areas.

(7) A use established prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this code, which would be prohibited by this chapter or which would be subject to the limitations and controls imposed by this chapter, shall be considered a nonconforming use. Nonconforming uses shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.104 SHMC. 

(8) Threatened and endangered species habitats and areas also need permission of appropriate agency(ies). (Ord. 3031 Att. A, 2007; Ord. 2890 Att. A, 2003; Ord. 2875 § 1.092.015, 2003)


17.44.020 Administration and approval process.

(1) The applicant for a sensitive lands permit shall be the recorded owner of the property or an agent authorized in writing by the owner.

(2) A preapplication conference with city staff is required. (See SHMC 17.24.040.) If uncertainty exists in regards to the location or configuration of wetland areas, staff shall make an on-site inspection prior to an application being initiated to review the nature and extent of the resource. If necessary, assistance from state and federal agencies shall be sought to provide the applicant additional information.

(3) Due to possible changes in state statutes, or regional or local policy, information given by staff to the applicant during the preapplication conference is valid for not more than six months:

(a) Another preapplication conference is required if any variance application is submitted more than six months after the preapplication conference; and

(b) Failure of the director to provide any of the information required by this chapter shall not constitute a waiver of the standards, criteria or requirements of the application.

(4) The appropriate authority shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for an administrative sensitive lands permit within drainageways, slopes that are 25 percent or greater, and unstable ground as set forth in SHMC 17.44.015(2).

(5) The director shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for a sensitive lands permit as set forth in SHMC 17.44.015(4). The decision made by the director may be appealed to the planning commission as provided by SHMC 17.24.310.

(6) The appropriate approval authority shall review all sensitive lands permit applications to determine that all necessary permits shall be obtained from those federal, state, or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is also required.

(7) The appropriate approval authority shall apply the standards set forth in SHMC 17.44.040 and Chapter 17.46 SHMC when reviewing an application for a sensitive lands permit.

(8) The director shall give notice of applications to be heard by the planning commission as provided by SHMC 17.24.130.

(9) The director shall mail notice of sensitive lands application decisions in SHMC 17.44.015(4) and (5) to the persons entitled to notice under SHMC 17.24.120. (Ord. 3031 Att. A, 2007; Ord. 2875 § 1.092.020, 2003)


17.44.025 Maintenance of records.

The director shall maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions in this chapter. (Ord. 3031 Att. A, 2007; Ord. 2875 § 1.092.025, 2003)


17.44.026 General provisions for floodplain areas.

Repealed by Ord. 3031. (Ord. 2875 § 1.092.026, 2003)


17.44.028 General provisions for wetlands.

See Chapter 17.40 SHMC. (Ord. 3031 Att. A, 2007; Ord. 2890 Att. A, 2003; Ord. 2875 § 1.092.028, 2003)


17.44.030 Expiration of approval – Standards for extension of time.

(1) Approval of a sensitive lands permit shall be void if:

(a) Substantial construction of the approved plan has not begun within a one-and-one-half-year period; or

(b) Construction on the site is a departure from the approved plan.

(2) The director shall, upon written request by the applicant and payment of the required fee, grant an extension of the approval period not to exceed one year; provided, that:

(a) No changes are made on the original plan as approved by the approval authority;

(b) The applicant can show intent of initiating construction of the site within the one-year extension period; and

(c) There have been no changes to the applicable comprehensive plan policies and ordinance provisions on which the approval was based.

(3) Notice of the decision shall be provided to the applicant. The director’s decision may be appealed by the applicant as provided by SHMC 17.24.310. (Ord. 3031 Att. A, 2007; Ord. 2875 § 1.092.030, 2003)


17.44.040 Approval standards.

(1) The appropriate approval authority shall approve or approve with conditions an application request for a sensitive lands permit on slopes of 25 percent or greater or unstable ground in SHMC 17.44.015(2) and (4) based upon findings that all of the following criteria have been satisfied:

(a) The extent and nature of the proposed landform alteration or development will not create site disturbances to an extent greater than that required for the use;

(b) The proposed landform alteration or development will not result in erosion, stream sedimentation, ground instability, or other adverse on-site and off-site effects or hazards to life or property;

(c) The structures are appropriately sited and designed to ensure structural stability and proper drainage of foundation and crawl space areas for development with any of the following soil conditions: wet/high-water table; high shrink-swell capability; compressible/organic; and shallow depth-to-bedrock; and

(d) Where natural vegetation has been removed due to landform alteration or development, the areas not covered by structures or impervious surfaces will be replanted to prevent erosion in accordance with Chapter 17.72 SHMC.

(2) The appropriate approval authority shall approve or approve with conditions an application request for a sensitive lands permit within drainageways in SHMC 17.44.015(2) and (4) based upon findings that all of the following criteria have been satisfied:

(a) The extent and nature of the proposed landform alteration or development will not create site disturbances to the extent greater than that required for the use;

(b) The proposed landform alteration or development will not result in erosion, stream sedimentation, ground instability, or other adverse on-site and off-site effects or hazards to life or property;

(c) The water flow capacity of the drainageway is not decreased;

(d) Where natural vegetation has been removed due to landform alteration or development, the areas not covered by structures or impervious surfaces will be replanted to prevent erosion in accordance with Chapter 17.72 SHMC;

(e) The drainageway will be replaced by a public facility of adequate size to accommodate maximum flow in accordance with the adopted 1999 Master Drainage Plan; and

(f) The necessary U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and State of Oregon Land Board, Division of State Lands approvals shall be obtained.

(3) See Chapter 17.40 SHMC.

(4) The director shall approve or approve with conditions an application request for a sensitive lands permit within fish and wildlife habitats in SHMC 17.44.015(5) based upon findings that all of the following criteria have been satisfied:

(a) The proposed landform alteration or development is not within fish and wildlife habitats as listed;

(b) The extent and nature of the proposed landform alteration or development will not create site disturbances to an extent greater than the minimum required for the use; and

(c) All other sensitive lands requirements of this chapter have been met.

(5) The director shall approve or approve with conditions an application request for a sensitive lands permit within cultural areas and sites in SHMC 17.36.015(1) based upon findings that all of the following criteria have been satisfied:

(a) Applicable state regulations/permits; and 

(b) All requirements of a full site development review have been met.

(6) The director shall, within state and federal ESA habitats, require the applicant to obtain permission of state and federal authorities to grant permission to disturb this area.

(7) The director shall require a site development review for any alterations or development requests on lands designated as OS/SR or UOS. (Ord. 3031 Att. A, 2007; Ord. 2890 Att. A, 2003; Ord. 2875 § 1.092.040, 2003)


17.44.050 Application submission requirements.

(1) All applications for uses and activities identified in SHMC 17.44.015(2) through (5) shall be made on forms provided by the director and shall be accompanied by:

(a) Copies of the sensitive lands permit proposal and necessary data or narrative which explains how the proposal conforms to the standards (number to be determined at the preapplication conference) and:

(i) The scale for the site plan(s) shall be a standard engineering scale; and

(ii) All drawings or structure elevations or floor plans shall be a standard architectural scale, being one-fourth-inch or one-eighth-inch to the foot.

(b) The required fee.

(2) The required information may be combined on one map.

(3) The site plan(s), data and narrative shall include the following:

(a) An existing site conditions analysis, SHMC 17.44.070;

(b) A site plan, SHMC 17.44.080;

(c) A grading plan, SHMC 17.44.090; and

(d) A landscaping plan, SHMC 17.44.100. (Ord. 3031 Att. A, 2007; Ord. 2875 § 1.092.050, 2003)


17.44.060 Additional information required and waiver of requirements.

(1) The director may require information in addition to that required by this chapter in accordance with SHMC 17.24.080.

(2) The director may waive a specific requirement for information in accordance with SHMC 17.24.080(2) and (3). (Ord. 3031 Att. A, 2007; Ord. 2875 § 1.092.060, 2003)


17.44.070 Site conditions.

The site analysis drawings shall include:

(1) A vicinity map showing streets and access points, pedestrian and bicycle pathways, and utility locations;

(2) The site size and its dimensions;

(3) Contour lines at two-foot intervals for grades zero to 10 percent and five-foot intervals for grades over 10 percent;

(4) The location of drainage patterns and drainage courses;

(5) The location of natural hazard areas including:

(a) Floodplain areas (100-year floodplain and floodway);

(b) Slopes in excess of 25 percent;

(c) Unstable ground (areas subject to slumping, earth slides or movement);

(d) Areas having a high seasonal water table within 24 inches of the surface for three or more weeks of the year;

(e) Areas having a severe soil erosion potential, or as defined by the Soil Conservation Service; and

(f) Areas having severe weak foundation soils;

(6) The location of resource areas as shown on the comprehensive plan inventory map and as required in Chapter 17.46 SHMC including:

(a) Wildlife habitat; and

(b) Wetlands;

(7) The location of site features including:

(a) Rock outcroppings; and

(b) Trees with six inches caliper or greater measured four feet from ground level;

(8) The location of existing structures on the site and proposed use of those structures. (Ord. 3031 Att. A, 2007; Ord. 2875 § 1.092.070, 2003)


17.44.080 The site plan.

The proposed site development plan shall be at the same scale as the site analysis plan and shall include the following information:

(1) The proposed site and surrounding properties;

(2) Contour line intervals (see SHMC 17.44.070(3));

(3) The location, dimensions, and names of all:

(a) Existing and platted streets and other public ways and easements on the site and on adjoining properties; and

(b) Proposed streets or other public ways and easements on the site.

(4) The location and dimension of:

(a) Entrances and exits on the site;

(b) Parking and traffic circulation areas;

(c) Loading and services areas;

(d) Pedestrian and bicycle facilities;

(e) Outdoor common areas; and

(f) Utilities.

(5) The location, dimensions, and setback distances of all:

(a) Existing structures, improvements, and utilities which are located on adjacent property and are permanent in nature; and

(b) Proposed structures, improvements, and utilities on the site.

(6) The location of areas to be landscaped;

(7) The concept locations of proposed utility lines; and

(8) The method for mitigating any adverse impacts upon wetland, riparian, or wildlife habitat areas. (Ord. 3031 Att. A, 2007; Ord. 2875 § 1.092.080, 2003)


17.44.090 Grading plan.

The site plan shall include a grading plan which contains the following information:

(1) Requirements in SHMC 17.44.070 and 17.44.080;

(2) The identification and location of the benchmark and corresponding datum;

(3) Location and extent to which grading will take place indicating contour lines, slope ratios, and slope stabilization proposals; and

(4) A statement from a registered engineer supported by factual data substantiating:

(a) The validity of the slope stabilization proposals;

(b) That other off-site impacts will not be created;

(c) Stream flow calculations;

(d) Cut and fill calculations; and

(e) Channelization measures proposed. (Ord. 3031 Att. A, 2007; Ord. 2875 § 1.092.090, 2003)


17.44.100 Landscape plan.

(1) The landscape plan shall be drawn at the same scale as the site analysis plan, or a larger scale if necessary, and shall indicate:

(a) Location and height of fences, buffers, and screenings;

(b) Location of terraces, decks, shelters, play areas, and common open spaces where applicable; and

(c) Location, type, and size of existing and proposed plant materials.

(2) The landscape plan shall include a narrative which addresses:

(a) Soil conditions; and

(b) Erosion control measures that will be used. (Ord. 3031 Att. A, 2007; Ord. 2875 § 1.092.100, 2003)


Chapter 17.46 FLOODPLAINS AND FLOODWAYS

Sections:

17.46.010    Authorization, findings of fact, purpose, and objectives.

17.46.020    Definitions.

17.46.030    General provisions.

17.46.040    Administration.

17.46.045    Variances and FIRM boundary appeal.

17.46.050    Provisions for flood hazard reduction.


17.46.010 Authorization, findings of fact, purpose, and objectives.

(1) Authorization. The state of Oregon has in the home rule provisions of the Oregon Constitution delegated the responsibility to the city of St. Helens to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. 

(2) Findings of Fact.

(a) The flood hazard areas of the city of St. Helens are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.

(b) These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and velocities and, when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated, or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.

(3) Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:

(a) To protect human life and health;

(b) To minimize expenditure of public money and costly flood control projects;

(c) To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

(d) To minimize prolonged business interruptions;

(e) To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;

(f) To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas; 

(g) To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and

(h) To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions.

(4) Objectives. In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions for:

(a) Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;

(b) Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;

(c) Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters;

(d) Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; 

(e) Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or may increase flood hazards in other areas; and 

(f) Coordinating and supplementing the provisions of the state building code with local land use and development ordinances. (Ord. 3138 § 2 (Att. A), 2010; Ord. 3031 Att. A, 2007; Ord. 2875 § 1.093.010, 2003)


17.46.020 Definitions.

Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in common usage, to give this chapter its most reasonable application, and shall apply only to requirements of this chapter and Chapter 17.44 SHMC.

(1) “Appeal” means a request for a review of the interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.

(2) “Area of shallow flooding” means a designated AO or AH Zone on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. AO is characterized as sheet flow and AH indicates ponding.

(3) “Area of special flood hazard” means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Designation on maps always includes the letter “A.”

(4) “Base flood” means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Also referred to as the “100-year flood.” Designation on maps always includes the letter “A.”

(5) “Base flood elevation (BFE)” means the water surface elevation during the base flood in relation to a specified datum. The base flood elevation (BFE) is depicted on the FIRM to the nearest foot and in the FIS to the nearest 0.1 foot.

(6) “Basement” means any portion of a structure or building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides.

(7) “Below-grade crawl space” means an enclosed area below the base flood elevation in which the interior grade is not more than two feet below the lowest adjacent exterior grade and the height, measured from the interior grade of the crawlspace to the top of the crawlspace foundation, does not exceed four feet at any point.

(8) “Building codes” means the combined specialty codes adopted under ORS 446.062, 446.185, 447.020(2), 455.020(2), 455.496, 455.610, 455.680, 460.085, 460.360, 479.730(1) or 480.545, but does not include regulations adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to ORS chapter 476 or ORS 479.015 through 479.200 and 479.210 through 479.220.

(9) “Critical facility” means a facility for which even a slight chance of flooding might be too great. Critical facilities include, but are not limited to, schools, nursing homes, hospitals, police, fire and emergency response installations, and installations which produce, use or store hazardous materials or hazardous waste.

(10) “Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood hazard. 

(11) “Digital FIRM (DFIRM)” means the digital flood insurance rate map. It depicts flood risk and zones and flood risk information. The DFIRM presents the flood risk information in a format suitable for electronic mapping applications.

(12) “Elevated building” means, for insurance purposes, a nonbasement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.

(13) “Flood” or “flooding” means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:

(a) The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or

(b) The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.

(14) “Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)” means the official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and/or the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

(15) “Flood insurance study (FIS)” means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the flood boundary-floodway map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.

(16) “Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also the channel of a river/watercourse and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel required to discharge and store the floodwater or flood flows associated with the regulatory flood.

(17) “Historic structure” means a structure that is: 

(a) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;

(b) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or to a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 

(c) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 

(d) Any “designated landmark” pursuant to Chapter 17.36 SHMC. 

(18) “Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than basement area, is not considered a structure’s lowest floor; provided, that the enclosed area is built and maintained in accordance with the applicable design requirements of the building codes.

(19) “Manufactured dwelling” or “manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term “manufactured dwelling” or “manufactured home” does not include a recreational vehicle.

(20) “Manufactured home park or subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

(21) “New construction” means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

(22) “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:

(a) Built on a single chassis;

(b) Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

(c) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and

(d) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

(23) “Start of construction” includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The “actual start” means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. “Permanent construction” does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the “actual start” of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

(24) “State building code” means the combined specialty codes adopted by the state of Oregon.

(25) “Structure” means a walled and roofed building, a manufactured dwelling, a modular or temporary building, or a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.

(26) “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

(27) “Substantial improvement” means reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The market value of the structure should be:

(a) The appraised real market value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or

(b) In the case of damage, the appraised real market value of the structure prior to the damage occurring.

The term does not, however, include either:

(a) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

(b) Any alteration of a historic structure; provided, that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure.

(28) “Variance” means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter and shall follow the requirements as established in Chapter 17.108 SHMC and SHMC 17.46.045.

(29) “Water-dependent” means a structure for commerce or industry which cannot exist in any other location and is dependent on the water by reason of the intrinsic nature of its operations. (Ord. 3138 § 2 (Att. A), 2010; Ord. 3031 Att. A, 2007; Ord. 2875 § 1.093.020, 2003)


17.46.030 General provisions.

(1) Lands to Which This Chapter Applies. This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city of St. Helens.

(2) Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled “The Flood Insurance Study for Columbia County, Oregon and Incorporated Areas,” dated November 26, 2010, with accompanying flood insurance rate map (FIRM) is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The flood insurance study and FIRM are on file at City Hall. The best available information for flood hazard area identification as outlined in SHMC 17.46.040(3)(b) shall be the basis for regulation until a new FIRM is issued which incorporates the data utilized under SHMC 17.46.040(3)(b).

(3) Penalties for Noncompliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violations of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined and/or imprisoned pursuant to SHMC 17.12.030, for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city of St. Helens from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.

(4) Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. 

(a) This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another chapter, state building code, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more restrictions shall prevail.

(b) Severability. If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this chapter is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. 

(5) Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:

(a) Considered as minimum requirements;

(b) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and

(c) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes and rules including the state building code.

(6) Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city of St. Helens, an officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 3138 § 2 (Att. A), 2010; Ord. 3031 Att. A, 2007; Ord. 2875 § 1.093.030, 2003)


17.46.040 Administration.

(1) Establishment of Development Permit.

(a) Development Permit Required. A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in SHMC 17.46.030(2). The permit shall be for all structures including manufactured homes, as set forth in the definitions (SHMC 17.46.020), and for all development including fill and other activities, also as set forth in the definitions (SHMC 17.46.020).

(b) Application for Development Permit. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the community development department and may include but not be limited to plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:

(i) Elevation (based on the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88)) in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures;

(ii) Elevation (based on the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88)) in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been floodproofed;

(iii) Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the floodproofing criteria in SHMC 17.46.050(2)(b); and

(iv) Description of the extent to which a watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.

(2) Designation of the Planning Director. The planning director is hereby appointed to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions.

(3) Duties and Responsibilities of the Planning Director. Duties of the planning director shall include, but not be limited to:

(a) Permit Review.

(i) Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements and conditions of this chapter have been satisfied.

(ii) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state, or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.

(iii) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway, assure that the encroachment provisions of SHMC 17.46.050(4)(a) are met.

(b) Use of Other Base Flood Data (in A Zones). When base flood elevation data has not been provided (A zones) in accordance with SHMC 17.46.030(2), Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard, the planning director shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer SHMC 17.46.050(2), Specific Standards, and 17.46.050(4), Floodways.

(c) Information to Be Obtained and Maintained.

(i) Where base flood elevation data is provided through the flood insurance study, FIRM, or as required in subsection (3)(b) of this section, obtain and record the actual (as-built) elevation (in relation to mean sea level based on the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88)) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains a basement.

(ii) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures where base flood elevation data is provided through the flood insurance study, FIRM, or as required in subsection (3)(b) of this section:

(A) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level based on the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88)) to which the structure was floodproofed, and

(B) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in subsection (1)(b)(iii) of this section.

(iii) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter.

(d) Alteration of Watercourses.

(i) Notify adjacent communities, the State Department of Land Conservation and Development, and other appropriate state and federal agencies prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.

(ii) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished.

(e) Interpretation of FIRM Boundaries. Make interpretations, where needed, as to exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in SHMC 17.46.045. (Ord. 3138 § 2 (Att. A), 2010; Ord. 3031 Att. A, 2007; Ord. 2875 § 1.093.040, 2003)


17.46.045 Variances and FIRM boundary appeal. 

(1) The applicable approval authority shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.

(2) The applicable appellate authority shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the city of St. Helens in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.

(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the applicable approval authority, or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the applicable appellate authority, in accordance with the St. Helens Development Code.

(4) In passing upon such applications, the applicable approval authority shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and: 

(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;

(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;

(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;

(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;

(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;

(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and

(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges.

(5) Upon consideration of the factors of subsection (4) of this section and the purposes of this chapter, the approval authority may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.

(6) The planning director shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) upon request.

(7) Conditions for Variances.

(a) Generally, the only condition under which a variance from the elevation standard may be issued is for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items in subsections (4)(a) through (k) of this section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.

(b) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of historic structures without regard to the procedures set forth in this section.

(c) Variances shall not be issued within a designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.

(d) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.

(e) Variances shall only be issued upon:

(i) A showing of good and sufficient cause;

(ii) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and

(iii) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.

(f) Variances as interpreted in the National Flood Insurance Program are based on the general zoning law principle that they pertain to a physical piece of property; they are not personal in nature and do not pertain to the structure, its inhabitants, economic or financial circumstances. They primarily address small lots in densely populated residential neighborhoods. As such, variances from the flood elevations should be quite rare.

(g) Variances may be issued for nonresidential buildings in very limited circumstances to allow a lesser degree of floodproofing than watertight or dry floodproofing, where it can be determined that such action will have low damage potential, complies with all other variance criteria except subsection (7)(a) of this section, and otherwise complies with SHMC 17.46.050(1)(a) through (c).

(h) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. (Ord. 3138 § 2 (Att. A), 2010)


17.46.050 Provisions for flood hazard reduction.

(1) General Standards. In all areas of special flood hazard, the following standards are required:

(a) Anchoring.

(i) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure.

(ii) All manufactured homes must likewise be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement, and shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. Anchoring methods may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors (reference FEMA’s “Manufactured Home Installation in Flood Hazard Areas” guidebook for additional techniques).

(b) Construction Materials and Methods.

(i) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.

(ii) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.

(iii) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or otherwise elevated or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.

(c) Utilities.

(i) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;

(ii) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and

(iii) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding consistent with the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality.

(d) Subdivision Proposals.

(i) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;

(ii) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; 

(iii) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage; and

(iv) Where base flood elevation data has not been provided or is not available from another authoritative source, it shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments which contain at least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).

(e) Review of Building Permits. Where elevation data is not available either through the flood insurance study, FIRM, or from another authoritative source (SHMC 17.46.040(3)(b)), applications for building permits shall be reviewed to assure that proposed construction will be reasonably safe from flooding. The test of reasonableness is a local judgment and includes use of historical data, high-water marks, photographs of past flooding, etc., where available. Failure to elevate the lowest floor at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade in these zones may result in higher insurance rates.

(f) AH Zone Drainage. Adequate drainage paths are required around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.

(2) Specific Standards. In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data has been provided (zones A1 through A30, AH and AE on the community’s FIRM) as set forth in SHMC 17.46.030(2), Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard, or 17.46.040(3)(b), Use of Other Base Flood Data (in A Zones), the following provisions are required:

(a) Residential Construction.

(i) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated a minimum of one foot or more above the base flood elevation.

(ii) Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding are prohibited, or shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:

(A) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.

(B) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.

(C) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.

(b) Nonresidential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at or above the base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:

(i) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;

(ii) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy;

(iii) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting provisions of this subsection based on their development and/or review of the structural design, specifications and plans. Such certifications shall be provided to the official as set forth in SHMC 17.46.040(3)(c)(ii);

(iv) Nonresidential structures that are elevated, not floodproofed, must meet the same standards for space below the lowest floor as described in subsection (2)(a)(ii) of this section;

(v) Applicants floodproofing nonresidential buildings shall be notified that flood insurance premiums will be based on rates that are one foot below the floodproofed level (e.g., a building floodproofed to the base flood level will be rated as one foot below the base flood level).

(c) Manufactured Homes.

(i) The ground area reserved for the placement of a manufactured dwelling shall be a minimum of 12 inches above BFE unless the foundation walls are designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must be either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:

(A) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided;

(B) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and

(C) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 

(ii) The bottom of the longitudinal chassis frame beam in A zones shall be a minimum of 12 inches above BFE (see definition of “lowest floor” in the Manufactured Dwelling Specialty Code).

(iii) The manufactured dwelling shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement during the base flood. Anchoring methods may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors (Reference FEMA’s “Manufactured Home Installation in Flood Hazard Areas” guidebook for additional techniques); and

(iv) Electrical crossover connections (see Manufactured Dwelling Specialty Code) shall be a minimum of 12 inches above BFE.

(d) Recreational Vehicles. Recreational vehicles placed on sites are required to either:

(i) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;

(ii) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, on its wheels or jacking system, be attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and have no permanently attached additions; or

(iii) Meet the requirements of subsection (2)(c) of this section and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes.

(e) Below-grade crawlspaces (i.e., crawlspaces below the lowest adjacent exterior grade), as described in FEMA Technical Bulletin 11-01, are prohibited. 

(f) Accessory Structures. Accessory buildings or accessory structures as defined by Chapter 17.16 SHMC that qualify under the definition of “structure” pursuant to SHMC 17.46.020 are not considered residential construction or nonresidential construction pursuant to subsections (2)(a) and (b) of this section for the purpose of administering the standards of structures in areas of special flood hazard, as long as such structure represents a minimal investment (i.e., no more than 10 percent of the total assessed value of the property based on current Columbia County assessor’s records) and such structure is not greater than 200 square feet in gross floor area. Such structure need not be subject to elevation or dry floodproofing requirements provided all of the following performance standards are met: 

(i) Structure shall not be used for human habitation;

(ii) Structure shall be designed to have low flood damage potential;

(iii) Structure shall be constructed and placed so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters;

(iv) Structure shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation which may result in damage to other structures, and shall have floodwater openings; and

(v) Any service facilities incorporated into the structure such as electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated above the base flood elevation or floodproofed; flood-resistant materials shall be used below the base flood elevation.

(3) Before Regulatory Floodway. In areas where a regulatory floodway has not been designated, no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1 through A30 and AE on the community’s FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community.

(4) Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in SHMC 17.46.030(2) are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:

(a) Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development unless certification by a registered professional civil engineer is provided demonstrating through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.

(b) If subsection (4)(a) of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this section.

(c) Projects for stream habitat restoration may be permitted in the floodway provided:

(i) The project qualifies for a Department of the Army, Portland District, regional general permit for stream habitat restoration (NWP-2007-1023); and

(ii) A qualified professional (a registered professional engineer or staff of NRCS, the county, or fisheries, natural resources, or water resources agencies) has provided a feasibility analysis and certification that the project was designed to keep any rise in 100-year flood levels as close to zero as practically possible given the goals of the project; and

(iii) No structures would be impacted by a potential rise in flood elevation; and

(iv) An agreement to monitor the project, correct problems, and ensure that flood-carrying capacity remains unchanged is included as part of the local approval.

(d) New installation (including replacement) of manufactured dwellings is prohibited. 

(5) Critical Facility. Construction of new critical facilities shall be, to the extent possible, located outside the limits of the special flood hazard area (SFHA) (100-year floodplain). Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible within the SFHA if no feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities construction within the SFHA shall have the lowest floor elevated three feet or to the height of the 500-year flood, whichever is higher. Access to and from the critical facility should also be protected to the height utilized above. Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities to the extent possible. (Ord. 3138 § 2 (Att. A), 2010; Ord. 3031 Att. A, 2007; Ord. 2875 § 1.093.050, 2003)


Chapter 17.48 SOLAR ACCESS REQUIREMENTS

Sections:

17.48.010    Purpose.

17.48.020    Applicability of provisions.

17.48.030    Definitions.

17.48.040    Solar access for new development.

17.48.050    Solar balance point.


17.48.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to implement comprehensive plan policies to promote the use of renewable energy sources by establishing criteria to allow improved access to sunlight for single detached dwelling unit and duplex residences. (Ord. 2875 § 1.096.010, 2003)


17.48.020 Applicability of provisions.

The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the creation of lots which are intended for single detached dwelling unit or duplex residences and the construction of single detached dwelling unit or duplex residences. (Ord. 2875 § 1.096.020, 2003)


17.48.030 Definitions.

The definitions to be used in this chapter are in addition to Chapter 17.16 SHMC, Definitions. In the case of similar or identical terminology, the definitions in this section shall govern for this chapter.

(1) “Crown cover” means the area within the drip line or perimeter of the foliage of a tree.

(2) “Development” means any partition, subdivision or planned development that is created under the city land division or zoning regulations.

(3) “Exempt tree or vegetation” means the full height and breadth of vegetation that the director has identified as “solar friendly” that are listed and kept on file in the office of the community development department; and any vegetation listed on a plat map, a document recorded with the plat, or a solar access permit is exempt.

(4) “Front lot line” means, for purposes of the solar access regulations, a lot line abutting a street. For corner lots, the front lot line is that with the narrowest frontage. When the lot line abutting a street is curved, the front lot line is the chord or straight line connecting the ends of the curve. For a flag lot, the front line is the shortest lot line adjoining the pole portion of the lot, excluding the unbuildable portion of the pole (see Figure 1).

(5) “Nonexempt tree or vegetation” means vegetation that is not exempt.

(6) “Northern lot line” means the lot line that is the smallest angle from a line drawn east-west and intersecting the northernmost point of the lot, excluding the pole portion of a flag lot. If the north line adjoins an undevelopable area other than a required yard area, the northern lot shall be at the north edge of such undevelopable area. If two lot lines have an identical angle relative to a line drawn east-west, or if the northern lot line is less than 35 feet, then the northern line shall be a line 35 feet in length within the lot parallel with and at a maximum distance from the front lot line (see Figure 2).

(7) “North-south dimension” means the length of a line beginning at the midpoint of the northern lot line and extending in a southerly direction perpendicular to the northern lot line until it reaches a property boundary (see Figure 3).

(8) “Protected solar building line” means a line on a plat or map recorded with the plat that identifies the location on a lot where a point two feet above may not be shaded by structures or nonexempt trees (see Figure 10).

(9) “Shade” means a shadow cast by the shade point of a structure or vegetation when the sun is at an altitude of 21.3 degrees and an azimuth ranging from 22.7 degrees east and west of true south.

(10) “Shade point” means the part of a structure or nonexempt tree that casts the longest shadow onto the adjacent northern lot(s) when the sun is at an altitude of 21.3 degrees and an azimuth ranging from 22.7 degrees east and west of true south; except a shadow caused by a narrow object such as a mast or whip antenna, a dish antenna with a diameter of three feet or less, a chimney, utility pole, or wire. The height of the shade point shall be measured from the shade point to either the average elevation at the front lot line or the elevation at the midpoint of the front lot line. If the shade point is located at the north end of a ridgeline of a structure oriented within 45 degrees of a true north-south line, the shade point height computed according to the preceding sentence may be reduced by three feet. If a structure has a roof oriented within 45 degrees of a true east-west line with a pitch that is flatter than five feet (vertical) in 12 feet (horizontal), the shade point will be the eave of the roof. If such a roof has a pitch that is five feet in 12 feet or steeper, the shade point will be the peak of the roof (see Figures 4 and 5).

(11) “Shade reduction line” means a line drawn parallel to the northern lot line that intersects the shade point (see Figure 6).

(12) “Shadow pattern” means a graphic representation of an area that would be shaded by the shade point of a structure or vegetation when the sun is at an altitude of 21.3 degrees and an azimuth ranging between 22.7 degrees east and west of true south (see Figure 12).

(13) “Solar access height limit” means a series of contour lines establishing the maximum permitted height nonexempt vegetation is allowed to grow on lots to which a solar access permit applies.

(14) “Solar feature” means a device or combination of devices or elements that does or will use direct sunlight as a source of energy for such purposes as heating or cooling of a structure, heating or pumping of water, and generating electricity. Examples of a solar feature include a window or windows that contain(s) at least 20 square feet of glazing oriented within 45 degrees east and west of true south, a solar greenhouse, or a solar hot water heater. A solar feature may be used for purposes in addition to collecting solar energy, including but not limited to serving as a structural member or part of a roof, wall, or window. A south-facing wall without windows and without other features that uses solar energy is not a solar feature for purposes of this chapter.

(15) “Solar gain line” means a line parallel to the northern property line(s) of the lot(s) south of and adjoining a given lot, including lots separated only by a street, that intersects the solar feature on that lot (see Figure 7).

(16) “South” or “south-facing” means true south, or 20 degrees east of magnetic south.

(17) “Sun chart” means one or more photographs that plot the position of the sun between 10:30 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. on January 21st, prepared pursuant to guidelines issued by the director. The sun chart shall show the southern skyline through a transparent grid on which is imposed solar altitude for a 45-degree and 30-minute northern latitude in 10-degree increments and solar azimuth from true south in 15-degree increments.

(18) “Undevelopable area” means an area that cannot be used practicably for a habitable structure, because of natural conditions, such as slopes exceeding 20 percent in a direction greater than 45 degrees east or west of true south, severe topographic relief, water bodies, or conditions that isolate one portion of a property from another portion so that access is not practicable to the unbuildable portion; or manmade conditions, such as existing development which isolates a portion of the site and prevents its further development; or setbacks or development restrictions that prohibit development of a given area of a lot by law or private agreement; or existence or absence of easements or access rights that prevent development of a given area. (Ord. 2875 § 1.096.030, 2003)


17.48.040 Solar access for new development.

(1) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to ensure that land is divided so that structures can be oriented to maximize solar access and to minimize shade on adjoining properties from structures and trees.

(2) Applicability. The solar design standard in subsection (3) of this section shall apply to applications for a development to create lots in all zones allowing single-dwelling units, detached and duplexes and to create lots for single-dwelling units, detached and duplex dwellings in all other residential zones, except to the extent the approval authority finds that the applicant has shown one or more of the conditions listed in subsections (4) and (5) of this section exist, and exemptions or adjustments provided for therein are warranted.

(3) Design Standard. At least 80 percent of the lots in a development subject to this section shall comply with one or more of the options in this section; provided, a development may, but is not required to, use the options in subsection (3)(b) or (c) to comply with this section.

(a) Basic Requirement (See Figure 9). A lot complies with this section if it:

(i) Has a north-south dimension of 90 feet or more; and

(ii) Has a front lot line that is oriented within 30 degrees of a true east-west axis.

(b) Protected Solar Building Line Option (See Figure 10). In the alternative, a lot complies with this section if a solar building line is used to protect solar access as follows:

(i) A protected solar building line is designated on the plat or in documents recorded with the plat;

(ii) The protected solar building line is oriented within 30 degrees of a true east-west axis;

(iii) There is at least 70 feet between the protected solar building line and the middle of the north-south dimension of the lot to the south, measured along a line perpendicular to the protected solar building line; and

(iv) There is at least 45 feet between the protected solar building line and the northern edge of the buildable area of the lot, or habitable structures are situated so that at least 80 percent of their ground floor south wall will not be shaded by structures or nonexempt vegetation.

(c) Performance Option. In the alternative, a lot complies with this section if:

(i) Habitable structures built on that lot will have their long axis oriented within 30 degrees of a true east-west axis, and at least 80 percent of their ground floor south wall will be protected from shade by structures and nonexempt trees using appropriate deed restrictions; or

(ii) Habitable structures built on that lot will orient at 32 percent of their glazing and at least 500 square feet of their roof area to face within 30 degrees east or west of true south, and that glazing and roof area are protected from shade by structures and nonexempt trees using appropriate deed restrictions.

(4) Exemptions From Design Standard. A development is exempt from subsection (3) of this section if the approval authority finds the applicant has shown that one or more of the following conditions apply to the site. A development is partially exempt from subsection (3) of this section to the extent the approval authority finds the applicant has shown that one or more of the following conditions apply to a corresponding portion of the site. If a partial exemption is granted for a given development, the remainder of the development shall comply with subsection (3) of this section.

(a) Slopes. The site, or a portion of the site for which the exemption is sought, is sloped 20 percent or more in a direction greater than 45 degrees east or west of true south, based on a topographic survey by a licensed professional land surveyor or USGS or other officially recognized topographic information.

(b) Off-Site Shade. The site, or a portion of the site for which the exemption is sought, is within the shadow pattern of off-site features, such as but not limited to structures, topography, or nonexempt vegetation, which will remain after development occurs on the site from which the shade is originating.

(i) Shade from an existing or approved off-site dwelling in a single-family residential zone and from topographic features is assumed to remain after development of the site.

(ii) Shade from an off-site structure in a zone other than a single-family residential zone is assumed to be the shadow pattern of the existing or approved development thereon or the shadow pattern that would result from the largest structure allowed at the closest setback on adjoining land, whether or not that structure now exists.

(iii) Shade from off-site vegetation is assumed to remain after development of the site if:

(A) The vegetation that causes it is situated in a required setback area; or

(B) The vegetation is within a fully developed area, public park, or legally reserved open space; or

(C) The vegetation is within a developable remainder of a parcel that is separated by an undevelopable area or feature; or

(D) The vegetation is part of landscaping required pursuant to Chapter 17.72 SHMC.

(iv) Shade from other off-site sources is assumed to be shade that exists or that will be cast by development for which applicable local permits have been approved on the date a complete application for the development is filed.

(c) On-Site Shade. The site, or a portion of the site for which the exemption is requested, is:

(i) Within the shadow pattern of on-site features such as, but not limited to, structures and topography which will remain after the development occurs; or

(ii) Contains nonexempt trees at least 30 feet tall and more than six inches in diameter measured four feet above the ground which have a crown cover over at least 80 percent of the site, or the relevant portion. The applicant can show such crown cover exists using a scaled survey or an aerial photograph. If granted, the exemption shall be approved subject to the condition that the applicant preserve at least 50 percent of the crown cover that causes the shade that warrants the exemption. The applicant shall file a note on the plat or other documents in the office of the county recorder binding the applicant to comply with this requirement. The city shall be made a party to any covenant or restriction created to enforce any provision of this chapter. The covenant or restriction shall not be amended without written city approval.

(5) Adjustments to Design Standard. The approval authority shall reduce the percentage of lots that must comply with subsection (3) of this section to the minimum extent necessary if it finds the applicant has shown it would cause or is subject to one or more of the following conditions:

(a) Adverse Impacts on Density and Cost or Amenities.

(i) If the design standard in subsection (3)(a) of this section is applied, either the resulting density is less than that proposed, or on-site development costs (e.g., grading, water, storm drainage and sanitary systems, and road) and solar-related off-site development costs are at least five percent more per lot than if the standard is not applied. The following conditions, among others, could constrain the design of a development in such a way that compliance with subsection (3)(a) of this section would reduce density or increase per lot costs in this manner. The applicant shall show which, if any, of these or other similar site characteristics apply in an application for a development:

(A) The portion of the site for which the adjustment is sought has a natural grade that is sloped 10 percent or more and is oriented greater than 45 degrees east or west of true south based on a topographic survey of the site by the professional land surveyor or USGS or other officially recognized topographic information.

(B) There is a significant natural feature on the site, identified as such in the comprehensive plan or development ordinance, that prevents given streets or lots from being oriented for solar access, and it will exist after the site is developed.

(C) Existing road patterns must be continued through the site or must terminate on site to comply with applicable road standards or public road plans in a way that prevents given streets or lots in the development from being oriented for solar access.

(D) An existing public easement or right-of-way prevents given streets or lots in the development from being oriented for solar access.

(ii) If the design standard in subsection (3)(a) of this section applies to a given lot or lots, significant development amenities that would otherwise benefit the lot(s) will be lost or impaired. Evidence that a significant diminution in the market value of the lot(s) would result from having the lot(s) comply with subsection (3)(a) of this section is relevant to whether a significant development amenity is lost or impaired.

Refer to amenities that qualify or to relevant comprehensive plan provisions or inventories.

(b) Impacts of Existing Shade. The shadow pattern from nonexempt trees cover over at least 80 percent of the lot and at least 50 percent of the shadow pattern will remain after development of the lot. The applicant can show the shadow pattern using a scaled survey of nonexempt trees on the site or using an aerial photograph.

(i) Shade from nonexempt trees is assumed to remain if: the trees are situated in a required setback; or they are part of an existing or proposed park, open space, or recreational amenity; or they are separated from the developable remainder of their parcel by an undevelopable area or feature; or they are part of landscaping required pursuant to Chapter 17.72 SHMC; or they do not need to be removed for a driveway or other development.

(ii) Also, to the extent the shade is caused by on-site trees or off-site trees on land owned by the applicant, it is assumed to remain if the applicant files in the office of the county recorder a covenant binding the applicant to retain the trees causing the shade on the affected lots.

(6) Protection From Future Shade. Structures and nonexempt vegetation must comply with the solar balance point in SHMC 17.48.050 on all lots in a development subject to this chapter, including lots for which exemptions or adjustments to this chapter have been granted.

The applicant shall file a note on the plat or other documents in the office of the county recorder binding the applicant and subsequent purchasers to comply with the future shade protection standards in this subsection. The city shall be made a part of any covenant or restriction created to enforce any provision of this chapter. The covenant or restriction shall not be amended without written city approval.

(7) Application. An application for approval of a development subject to this chapter shall include:

(a) Maps and text sufficient to show the development complies with the solar design standard of subsection (3) of this section, except for lots for which an exemption or adjustment from subsection (3) of this section is requested, including all of the following items:

(i) The north-south lot dimension and front lot line orientation of each proposed lot.

(ii) Protected solar building lines and relevant building site restrictions, if applicable.

(iii) For the purpose of identifying trees exempt from subsection (6) of this section, a map showing existing trees at least 30 feet tall and over six inches diameter at a point four feet above grade, including their height, diameter and species, and stating that they are to be retained and are exempt.

(iv) Copies of all private restrictions relating to solar access.

(b) If an exemption or adjustment to subsection (3) of this section is requested, maps and text sufficient to show that given lots or areas in the development comply with the standards for such an exemption or adjustment in subsection (4) or (5) of this section shall also be required.

(8) Review Process. Compliance with this section shall be determined by the approval authority in conjunction with an application for a subdivision (Chapter 17.136 SHMC), or land partition (Chapter 17.140 SHMC). (Ord. 2875 § 1.096.040, 2003)


17.48.050 Solar balance point.

(1) Purpose. The purposes of this section are to promote the use of solar energy, to minimize shading of structures and accessory structures, and, where applicable, to minimize shading of structures by trees. Decisions related to this section are intended to be ministerial.

(2) Applicability. This section applies to an application for a building permit for all structures in all zones allowing single-dwelling units, detached and duplexes and all single-family detached and duplex structures in all other residential zones, except to the extent the approval authority finds the applicant has shown that one or more of the conditions listed in subsection (5) or (6) of this section exists, and exemptions or adjustments provided for them are warranted. In addition, nonexempt vegetation planted on lots subject to the provisions of SHMC 17.48.040(6) shall comply with the shade point height standards as provided in subsections (4) and (5) of this section.

(3) Solar Site Plan Required. An applicant for a building permit for a structure subject to this section shall submit a site plan that shows:

(a) The maximum shade point height allowed under subsection (4) of this section;

(b) If the maximum shade point height is adjusted pursuant to subsection (4)(a)(ii) of this section, the average elevation of the rear property line; and

(c) The location of the shade point, its height relative to the average elevation of the front lot line or the elevation at the midpoint of the front lot line, and its orientation relative to true south; and, if applicable,

(d) The solar balance point for the structure as provided in subsection (8) of this section.

(4) Maximum Shade Point Height Standard. The height of the shade point shall comply with either subsection (4)(a) or (b) of this section.

(a) Basic Requirement.

(i) The height of the shade point shall be less than or equal to the height specified in Table A or computed using the following formula. The height of the shade point shall be measured from the shade point to either the average elevation at the front lot line or the elevation at the midpoint of the front lot line. If necessary, interpolate between the five-foot dimensions listed in Table A.

	H =	(2 x SRL) – N + 150

	5

Where: 

	H	=	The maximum allowed height of the shade point (see Figures 4 and 5);

	SRL	=	Shade reduction line (the distance between the shade point and the northern lot line, see Figure 6); and

	N	=	The north-south lot dimension; provided, that a north-south lot dimension more than 90 feet shall use a value of 90 feet for this section.

(ii) Provided, the maximum allowed height of the shade point may be increased one foot above the amount calculated using the formula or Table A for each foot that the average grade at the rear property line exceeds the average grade at the front property line.

(b) Performance Option. The proposed structure, or applicable nonexempt vegetation, will shade not more than 20 percent of the south-facing glazing of existing habitable structure(s), or, where applicable, the proposed structure or nonexempt vegetation comply with SHMC 17.48.040(3)(b) or (c). If SHMC 17.48.040(3)(b), Protected Solar Building Line Option, is used, nonexempt trees and the shade point structures shall be set back from the protected solar building line two and one-half feet for every one foot of height of the structure or of the mature height of nonexempt vegetation over two feet.

(5) Exemption from the Maximum Shade Point Height Standard. The approval authority shall exempt a proposed structure or nonexempt vegetation from subsections (3) and (4) of this section if the applicant shows that one or more of the conditions in this subsection exist, based on plot plans or plats, corner elevations or other topographical data, shadow patterns, sun charts or photographs, or other substantial evidence submitted by the applicant.

(a) Exempt Lot. When created, the lot was subject to this chapter and was not subject to the provisions of SHMC 17.48.040(6).

(b) Preexisting Shade. The structure or applicable nonexempt vegetation will shade an area that is shaded by one or more of the following:

(i) An existing or approved building or structure;

(ii) A topographical feature; or

(iii) Nonexempt vegetation will remain after development of the site. It is assumed that this vegetation will remain after development if it:

(A) Is situated in a building setback required by this code; or

(B) Is part of a developed area or landscaping required by Chapter 17.72 SHMC, a public park or landscape strip, or legally reserved open space; or

(C) Is in a developable remainder of a parcel that is separated by an undevelopable area or feature; or

(D) Is on the applicant’s property and not affected by the development; or

(E) A duly executed covenant is used to preserve trees causing such shade.

(c) Slope. The site has an average slope that exceeds 20 percent in a direction greater than 45 degrees east or west of true south based on a topographic survey by a licensed professional land surveyor or USGS or other officially recognized topographic information.

(d) Insignificant Benefit. The proposed structure or nonexempt vegetation shades one or more of the following:

(i) An undevelopable area;

(ii) The wall of an unheated space, such as a typical garage;

(iii) An area without solar features; or

(iv) An undeveloped lot, other than a lot that was subject to this chapter, where:

(A) There are at least four single-family detached or attached homes or duplexes within 250 feet of the lot within the same subdivision or a phase of the subdivision; and

(B) A majority of the homes identified in subsection (5)(d)(iv)(A) of this section have no solar features.

(e) Public Improvement. The proposed structure is a publicly owned improvement.

(6) Adjustments to the Maximum Shade Point Height Standard. The approval authority shall increase the maximum permitted height of the shade point determined using this section to the extent it finds the applicant has shown one or more of the following conditions exist, based on plot plans or plats, corner elevations or other topographical data, shadow patterns, sun charts or photographs, or other substantial evidence submitted by the applicant.

(a) Physical Conditions. Physical conditions preclude development of the site in a manner that complies with subsection (4) of this section, due to such things as lot size less than 3,000 square feet, unstable or wet soils, or a drainageway, public or private easement, or right-of-way.

(b) Conflict between the Maximum Shade Point Height and Allowed Shade on the Solar Feature Standards. A proposed structure may be sited to meet the solar balance point standard described in subsection (8) of this section or be sited as near to the solar balance point as allowed by subsection (8) of this section, if:

(i) Siting the proposed structure to meet the maximum shade point height standard using subsection (4) of this section would cause its solar feature(s) to potentially be shaded as determined using subsection (7) of this section; and

(ii) The application includes a form provided for that purpose by the city that:

(A) Releases the applicant from complying with subsection (4) of this section and agrees that the proposed structure may shade an area otherwise protected by subsection (4) of this section;

(B) Releases the city from liability for damages resulting from the adjustment; and

(C) Is signed by the owner(s) of the properties that would be shaded by the proposed structure more than allowed by the provisions of subsection (4) of this section.

(iii) Before the city issues a permit for a proposed structure for which an adjustment has been granted pursuant to subsection (6)(b) of this section, the applicant shall file the form provided for in subsection (6)(b)(ii) of this section in the office of the county recorder with the deeds to the affected properties.

(7) Analysis of Allowed Shade on Solar Feature.

(a) An applicant may, but is not required to, perform the calculations in or comply with the standards of this subsection (7).

(b) Applicants are encouraged to design and site a proposed habitable structure so that the lowest height of any solar feature(s) will not be shaded by buildings or nonexempt trees on lot(s) to the south. The applicant should complete the following calculation procedure to determine if solar feature(s) of the proposed structure will be shaded. To start, the applicant should choose which of the following sources of shade originating from adjacent lot(s) to the south to use to calculate the maximum shade height at the north property line:

(i) Existing structure(s) or nonexempt trees; or

(ii) The maximum shade that can be cast from future buildings or nonexempt trees, based on Table C. If the lot(s) to the south can be further divided, then the north-south dimension is assumed to be the minimum lot width required for a new lot in that zone.

(c) The height of the lowest point of any solar feature of the proposed structure is calculated with respect to either the average elevation or the elevation at the midpoint of the front lot line of the lot to the south.

(d) The applicant can determine the height of the shadow that may be cast upon the applicant’s solar feature by the source of shade selected in subsection (7)(b) of this section by using the following formula or Table B:

 

SFSH = SH – (SGL/2.5)

Where:

	SFSH	=	The allowed shadow height on the solar feature (see Figure 8).

	SH	=	The height of the shade at the northern lot line of lot(s) to the south as determined in subsection (7)(b) of this section.

	SGL	=	The solar gain line (the distance from the solar feature to the northern lot line of adjacent lot(s) to the south, see Figure 7).

(e) If the allowed shade height on the solar feature calculated in subsection (7)(d) of this section is higher than the lowest height of the solar feature calculated in subsection (7)(c) of this section, the applicant shall be encouraged to consider changes to the house design or location which would make it practical to locate the solar feature so that it will not be shaded in the future.

(8) Solar Balance Point. If a structure does not comply with maximum shade point height standard in subsection (4) of this section and the allowed shade on a solar feature standard in subsection (7) of this section, then the solar balance point of the lot shall be calculated (see Figure 8). The solar balance point is the point on the lot where a structure would be the same from complying with both of these standards.

(9) Yard Setback Adjustment. The city shall grant an adjustment to the setback requirement(s) as indicated below if necessary to build a proposed structure so it complies with either the shade point height standard in subsection (4) of this section, the allowed shade on a solar feature standard in subsection (7) of this section, or the solar balance point standard in subsection (8) of this section as provided herein (see Figure 8). This adjustment is not intended to encourage reductions in available solar access or unnecessary modification of setback requirements, and shall apply only if necessary for a structure to comply with the applicable provisions of this chapter.

(a) R-5 and AR Zones.

(i) A front yard setback may be reduced to not less than 10 feet.

(ii) A rear yard setback may be reduced to not less than 10 feet.

(iii) A side yard setback may be reduced to not less than three feet and the aggregate must be the same as the zone.

(iv) Corner and through lot setbacks may be reduced to not less than 15 feet.

(v) Setback to the front of a garage may be reduced to not less than 18 feet.

(b) R-10 and R-7 Zones.

(i) A front yard setback may be reduced to not less than 15 feet.

(ii) A rear yard setback may be reduced to not less than 10 feet.

(iii) A side yard setback may be reduced to not less than three feet.

(iv) Corner and through lot setbacks may be reduced to not less than 15 feet.

(v) Setback to the front of a garage may be reduced to not less than 18 feet.

(10) Review Process. Compliance with this section shall be determined by the director in conjunction with an application for a building permit.

TABLE A – MAXIMUM PERMITTED SHADE POINT HEIGHT (in feet)

	Distance to Shade Reduction Line from Northern Lot Line (in feet)	North-South Lot Dimension (in feet)

	100+	95	90	85	80	75	70	65	60	55	50	45	40

	70	40	40	40	41	42	43	44	 	 	 	 	 	 

	65	38	38	38	39	40	41	42	43	 	 	 	 	 

	60	36	36	36	37	38	39	40	41	42	 	 	 	 

	55	34	34	34	35	36	37	38	39	40	41	 	 	 

	50	32	32	32	33	34	 	 	 	8	39	40	 	 

	45	30	30	30	31	32	33	34	35	36	37	38	39	 

	40	28	28	28	29	30	31	32	33	34	35	36	37	38

	35	26	26	26	27	28	29	30	31	32	33	34	35	36

	30	24	24	24	25	26	27	28	29	30	31	32	33	34

	25	22	22	22	23	24	 	26	27	28	29	30	31	32

	20	20	20	20	21	22	23	24	25	26	27	28	29	30

	15	18	18	18	19	20	21	22	23	24	25	26	27	28

	10	16	16	16	17	18	19	20	21	22	23	24	25	26

	5	14	14	14	15	16	17	18	19	20	21	22	23	24

TABLE B – MAXIMUM PERMITTED HEIGHT OF SHADOW AT SOLAR FEATURE (feet)

	Distance from Solar Gain Line to Lot Line (feet)	Allowed Shade Height at Northern Lot Line of Adjacent Lot(s) to the South (feet)

	22	21	20	19	18	17	16	15	14	13	12

	50	2	1	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	45	4	3	2	1	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	40	6	5	4	3	2	1	 	 	 	 	 

	35	8	7	6	5	4	3	2	1	 	 	 

	30	10	9	8	7	6	5	4	3	2	1	 

	25	12	11	10	9	8	7	6	5	4	3	2

	20	14	13	12	11	10	9	8	7	6	5	4

	15	16	15	14	13	12	11	10	9	8	7	6

	10	18	17	16	15	14	13	12	11	10	9	8

	5	20	19	18	17	16	15	14	13	12	11	10

Table C may be used to determine (SH) in the above formula.

TABLE C

	North-south lot dimension of adjacent lot(s) to south	100	95	90	5	80	75	70	65	60	55	50	45	40

	Allowed shade height at the north property line of adjacent lot(s) to south	12	12	12	13	14	15	16	17	18	19	20	21	22

(Ord. 2875 § 1.096.050, 2003)


[IMAGE]
      


[IMAGE]
      


[IMAGE]
      


[IMAGE]
      


[IMAGE]
      


[IMAGE]
      


[IMAGE]
      


[IMAGE]
      


[IMAGE]
      


[IMAGE]
      


[IMAGE]
      


[IMAGE]
    


Chapter 17.52 ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS

Sections:

17.52.010    Purpose.

17.52.020    General provisions.

17.52.030    Noise.

17.52.040    Visible emissions.

17.52.050    Vibration.

17.52.060    Odors.

17.52.070    Glare and heat.

17.52.080    Insects and rodents.


17.52.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to apply certain federal and state environmental laws, rules, and regulations to development within the city of St. Helens. (Ord. 2875 § 1.098.010, 2003)


17.52.020 General provisions.

(1) In addition to the regulations adopted in this chapter, each use, activity, or operation within the city of St. Helens shall comply with the applicable state and federal standards pertaining to noise, odor, and discharge of matter into the atmosphere, ground, sewer system, or stream.

(a) Regulations adopted by the State Environmental Quality Commission pertaining to nonpoint source pollution control and contained in the Oregon Administrative Rules shall by this reference be made a part of this chapter.

(2) Prior to issuance of a building permit, the director may require submission of evidence demonstrating compliance with state, federal, and local environmental regulations and receipt of necessary permits, e.g., air contaminant discharge permits (ACDP) or indirect source construction permits (ISCP).

(3) Compliance with state, federal, and local environmental regulations is the continuing obligation of the property owner and operator. (Ord. 2875 § 1.098.020, 2003)


17.52.030 Noise.

For the purposes of noise regulation, the provisions of St. Helens Ordinance 2405 (Chapter 8.16 SHMC), or successive ordinances governing noise, shall apply as the standard. (Ord. 2875 § 1.098.030, 2003)


17.52.040 Visible emissions.

Within the commercial and industrial park zoning districts, there shall be no use, operation, or activity which results in a stack or other point source emission, other than an emission from space heating, or the emission of pure uncombined water (steam) which is visible from a property line except where permits have been obtained from the Department of Environmental Quality. (Ord. 2875 § 1.098.040, 2003)


17.52.050 Vibration.

No vibration longer than 30 continuous seconds or a frequency of greater than once per hour other than that caused by highway vehicles, trains, and aircraft is permitted in any given zoning district which is discernible without instruments at the property line of the use concerned. (Ord. 2875 § 1.098.050, 2003)


17.52.060 Odors.

The emission of odorous gases or other matter in such quantities as to be readily detectable at any point beyond the property line of the use creating the odors is prohibited. DEQ rules for odors (OAR 340-028-090) apply. (Ord. 2875 § 1.098.060, 2003)


17.52.070 Glare and heat.

No direct or sky-reflected glare, whether from floodlights or from high temperature processes such as combustion or welding or otherwise, which is visible at the lot line shall be permitted, and:

(1) There shall be no emission or transmission of heat or heated air which is discernible at the lot line of the source; and

(2) These regulations shall not apply to signs or floodlights in parking areas or construction equipment at the time of construction or excavation work otherwise permitted by this code. (Ord. 2875 § 1.098.070, 2003)


17.52.080 Insects and rodents.

All materials including wastes shall be stored and all grounds shall be maintained in a manner which will not attract or aid the propagation of insects or rodents or create a health hazard. (Ord. 2875 § 1.098.080, 2003)


Chapter 17.56 DENSITY COMPUTATIONS

Sections:

17.56.010    Purpose.

17.56.020    Density calculation.

17.56.030    Transfer of residential density.

17.56.040    Residential density transition.


17.56.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to implement the comprehensive plan by establishing the criteria for determining the number of dwelling units permitted. (Ord. 2875 § 1.100.010, 2003)


17.56.020 Density calculation.

(1) Net development area, in acres, shall be determined by subtracting the following land area(s) from the gross acres, which is all of the land included in the legal description of the property:

(a) All sensitive land areas:

(i) Land within the 100-year floodplain;

(ii) Land or slopes exceeding 25 percent;

(iii) Drainageways;

(iv) Wetlands;

(v) Fish and wildlife habitats;

(vi) Archaeological sites;

(vii) Federal or state protected areas for listed threatened or endangered species; and

(viii) Designated open space and open space-design review areas;

(b) All land dedicated to the public for park purposes;

(c) All land dedicated for public right-of-way:

(i) Single-dwelling units: allocate 20 percent of gross acres for public facilities; and

(ii) Multiple-dwelling units: allocate 15 percent of gross acres for public facilities;

(d) All land proposed for private streets; and

(e) A lot of at least the size required by the applicable base zoning district, if an existing dwelling is to remain on the site.

(2) To calculate the net units per acre, divide the number of square feet in the net acres by the minimum number of square feet required for each lot by the applicable zoning district.

(3) All density calculations shall comply with the provisions of SHMC 17.56.040, Residential density transition.

For example:

	 	    100.00 acres gross R-7 land

	less	    38.23 acres 	(one acre flood, one acre hazard, three acres drainage, 10 acres wetlands, three acres park, 20 acres right-of-way, and .23 acre for existing house)

	 	    61.77 acres net buildable land (6.22 du/acre = 384.21 du)

(Ord. 2875 § 1.100.020, 2003)


17.56.030 Transfer of residential density.

(1) Units per acre calculated by subtracting land areas listed in SHMC 17.56.020(1)(a) from the gross acres may be transferred to the remaining buildable land areas subject to the following limitations:

(a) The number of units which can be transferred is limited to the number of units which would have been allowed on 25 percent of the unbuildable area if not for these regulations;

For example:

38.23 x 25% = 9.96 acres 

9.96 acres x 6.22 dwelling units/acre = 59.45 dwelling units

59.45 dwelling units + 384.21 = 443.60 dwelling units/100 acres;

(b) The number of units is limited to 25 percent of the total number of units which could have been constructed on the unbuildable area if not for these regulations; and

(c) The total number of units per site does not exceed 125 percent of the maximum number of units per gross acre permitted for the applicable comprehensive plan designation (maximum 777.5 dwelling units per 100 acres).

(2) Units per acre calculated by subtracting land areas listed in Chapter 17.44 SHMC from the gross acres may be transferred to the remaining buildable land areas on land zoned AR subject to the following limitations:

(a) The number of units which can be transferred is limited to the number of units which would have been allowed on the wetland area, if not for these regulations; and

(b) The total number of units per site does not exceed the maximum number of units per gross acre permitted for the applicable comprehensive plan designation.

(3) All density transfer development proposals shall comply with the development standards of the applicable underlying zoning district unless developed under the provisions of Chapter 17.148 SHMC, Planned Development. (Ord. 2875 § 1.100.030, 2003)


17.56.040 Residential density transition.

(1) Regardless of the allowed housing densities stated in SHMC 17.32.050 through 17.32.160, or in Chapter 17.148 SHMC, this chapter, or Chapter 17.60 SHMC, any property within 100 feet of an established area shall not be developed at a residential housing density greater than 125 percent of the allowed density in the adjacent established area(s). For purposes of this limitation only, the allowed density is as specified in the comprehensive plan land use designation, not as in the zoning district. For example, the property within 100 feet of an established low density residential area (one to five dwellings per acre) shall not be developed at residential densities greater than 6.25 dwellings per acre (6.25 = 5 x 1.25).

(2) Subsection (1) of this section shall not apply with regard to established areas that are separated from the proposed housing development by a collector road or by an arterial road.

(3) Subsection (1) of this section shall not apply where the actual density in the abutting established area exceeds the maximum density allowed under the land use plan map designation for the established area. The density transition still will not exceed 125 percent of the designated abutting established area density. (Ord. 2875 § 1.100.040, 2003)


Chapter 17.60 MANUFACTURED/MOBILE HOME REGULATIONS

Sections:

17.60.010    Purpose.

17.60.020    Manufactured/mobile home park standards.

17.60.030    Manufactured homes on individual building lots.

17.60.040    Nonconforming mobile homes.


17.60.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish criteria for the placement of manufactured/mobile homes in mobile home park developments and manufactured homes on individual building lots within the city of St. Helens. (Ord. 2875 § 1.102.010, 2003)


17.60.020 Manufactured/mobile home park standards.

(1) The design of the proposed manufactured/mobile home park shall be submitted for review in accordance with Chapter 17.96 SHMC, Site Development Review, and Chapter 17.100 SHMC, Conditional Use, where applicable.

(2) The design for the manufactured/mobile home park shall conform to all applicable state standards established by the State of Oregon Department of Commerce mobile home park standards (ref. ORS Chapter 446).

(3) The manufactured/mobile home park shall:

(a) Have a minimum lot gross area of 1.0 acres;

(b) Have a minimum frontage of 100 feet;

(c) Have a minimum depth of 150 feet;

(d) Have a front and rear yard setback of 25 feet;

(e) Have a side yard setback of 10 feet, except on a corner lot the side yards shall be 25 feet;

(f) Have a minimum of 60 square feet of outdoor recreation area, suitably improved for recreational use, provided for each unit exclusive of required yards. Each recreation area shall have a minimum size of 2,500 square feet;

(g) Have landscaping equivalent to 20 percent of the manufactured/mobile home park area; and

(h) Be partially screened from the public right-of-way and adjacent residential areas by a combination of a sight-obscuring fence, vegetation, berm, or any combination of the above as approved by the approval authority, except that within the required front yard any fence shall not exceed three feet in height.

(4) Evidence shall be provided that the park will be eligible for a certificate of sanitation required by state law.

(5) Each site shall be adequately serviced by public facilities such as water supply, sewers, sidewalks, and improved streets.

(6) Each unit shall be provided with a water, sewer, and electrical connection. The electrical connection shall provide for 110- and 220-volt service.

(7) No manufactured/mobile home, accessory building, or other structure shall be closer than 10 feet from another mobile home, accessory building, or other garage/carport structure.

(8) On any individual space no building shall be any closer than 20 feet from a street and no less than 10 feet from the rear of each space.

(9) No structure shall exceed 25 feet in height.

(10) Each manufactured/mobile home placed in a manufactured/mobile home park shall be inspected by the building official and shall meet the following standards:

(a) A state insignia indicating compliance with Oregon State Mobile Home Construction Standards in effect at the time of manufacture and including compliance for reconstruction of equipment installation made after manufacture shall be displayed on each manufactured/mobile home;

(b) Each manufactured/mobile home shall be in good repair, notwithstanding deterioration which may have occurred due to misuse, neglect, accident, or other cause;

(c) Each manufactured/mobile home shall contain a water closet, lavatory, shower or tub, and a sink in a kitchen or other food preparation space;

(d) Each manufactured/mobile home shall be installed under the provisions of the administrative rules adopted by the Director of Commerce and administered by the State Building Code Division; and

(e) Each manufactured/mobile home shall meet the standards of SHMC 17.60.030.

(11) Each vehicular way in a manufactured/mobile home park shall be named and marked with signs which are similar in appearance to those used to identify public streets, and:

(a) A map of the named vehicular ways shall be provided to the applicable fire district, the police department, and the public works division.

(12) If a manufactured/mobile home space or permanent structure in the park is more than 500 feet from a public fire hydrant, the park shall provide:

(a) Water supply lines designed with fire hydrants which shall be provided within 500 feet of such space or structure; and

(b) Each hydrant within the park shall be located on a vehicular way and shall conform in design and capacity to city and the applicable water district standards.

(13) Each manufactured/mobile home space in a manufactured/mobile home park shall have a minimum of 5,000 square feet of area.

(14) The wheels, tongue, and traveling lights of each manufactured/mobile home in a manufactured/mobile home park or subdivision shall be removed upon installation of unit.

(15) For each three manufactured home spaces, one additional parking space must be provided for residents’ recreational and other type vehicles.

(16) There shall be no outdoor storage of furniture, tools, equipment, building materials, or supplies belonging to the occupants or management of the park.

(17) Accessways or driveways shall be lighted in accordance with city standards.

(18) Primary access to the manufactured/mobile home park shall be from a public street and shall be in accordance with Chapter 17.84 SHMC, Access, Egress, and Circulation, and:

(a) Where necessary, additional street right-of-way shall be dedicated to the city to maintain adequate traffic circulation;

(b) Access driveways connecting units to a public street shall have a width of not less than 36 feet, of which not less than 20 feet shall be paved; and

(c) Driveways shall be designed to provide for all maneuvering and parking of units without encroaching on a public street.

(19) The maximum number of manufactured/mobile homes in the park or subdivision shall not exceed the amount calculated in Chapter 17.56 SHMC.

(20) Where landfill and/or development is allowed within or adjacent to the 100-year floodplain, the city shall require the dedication of sufficient open land area for a greenway adjoining and within the floodplain. (Ord. 2875 § 1.102.020, 2003)


17.60.030 Manufactured homes on individual building lots.

The establishment, location, and use of manufactured homes as scattered site residences shall be permitted in any zone permitting installation of a dwelling unit subject to requirements and limitations applying generally to such residential uses in the district, and provided such homes shall meet the following requirements and limitations:

(1) The manufactured home shall be multisectional and enclose a space of not less than 1,000 square feet;

(2) The manufactured home shall be placed on an excavated and backfilled foundation and enclosed at the perimeter such that the finished first floor of the manufactured home is located not more than 12 inches above grade (except on sloped lots);

(3) The manufactured home shall be securely anchored to the foundation system in accordance with the requirements of the State Building Codes Agency for Manufactured Structures;

(4) The manufactured home shall have a pitched roof with a slope of at least three feet in height for each 12 feet in width;

(5) The manufactured home shall have exterior siding and roofing which in material and appearance is similar to the exterior siding and roofing material commonly used on residential dwellings within the city as determined by the Building Division. This requirement shall not be interpreted to mean that the city is responsible for enforcing codes, covenants, and restrictions of any homeowners or other association;

(6) The manufactured home shall have an exterior thermal envelope in substantial compliance with performance standards equivalent to the performance standards required of single-family dwellings constructed under the State Building Code as defined in ORS 455.010, as determined by the Building Division; and

(7) Have minimum of two on-site parking spaces. (Ord. 2875 § 1.102.030, 2003)


17.60.040 Nonconforming mobile homes.

(1) Mobile home parks existing at the adoption of the ordinance codified in this code not meeting the standards set forth in this code shall be considered nonconforming and are subject to the standards set forth in SHMC 17.104.040(2).

(2) Replacement of nonconforming mobile homes in such parks when they are moved or destroyed must conform with the standards of SHMC 17.60.030. (Ord. 2875 § 1.102.040, 2003)


Chapter 17.64 ADDITIONAL YARD SETBACK REQUIREMENTS AND EXCEPTIONS

Sections:

17.64.010    Purpose.

17.64.020    Additional setback from centerline required.

17.64.030    No yard required – Structure not on property line.

17.64.040    Exceptions to yard requirements.

17.64.050    Projections into required yards.


17.64.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to permit or afford better light, air and vision clearance on more heavily traveled streets and on streets of substandard width, to make the location of structures compatible with the need for the eventual widening of streets by providing for additional yard setback distances, to ensure there is adequate distance between buildings on the site and to provide standards for projections into yard areas. (Ord. 2875 § 1.104.010, 2003)


17.64.020 Additional setback from centerline required.

(1) To ensure improved light, air, and sight distance and to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, structures in any zoning district which abut certain arterial and collector streets shall be set back a minimum distance from the centerline of the street.

(2) Where the street is not partially or fully improved, the measurement shall be made at right angles from the centerline or general extension of the street right-of-way:

(a) Arterial Streets. The required setback distance for buildings on arterial streets is the setback distance required by the zoning district plus the following distances measured from the centerline of the street:

	TSP Street Classification	Additional Centerline Setback Requirement

	Major Arterial	50 feet

	Minor Arterials	30 feet

(b) Collector Streets. The required setback distance for buildings on collector streets as classified by the transportation system plan is the setback distance required by the zoning district plus 25 feet measured from the centerline of the street.

(3) The minimum yard requirement shall be increased in the event a yard abuts a street having a right-of-way width less than required by its functional classification on the city’s transportation plan map and, in such case, the setback shall be not less than the setback required by the zone plus one-half of the projected road width as shown on the transportation map.

(4) The minimum distance from the wall of any building (except fences or other structures allowed in this code) to the centerline of an abutting street, however, shall not be less than 25 feet plus the yard required by the zone. This provision shall not apply to rights-of-way of 60 feet or greater in width. (Ord. 3164 § 3 (Att. B), 2012; Ord. 2875 § 1.104.020, 2003)


17.64.030 No yard required – Structure not on property line.

In zoning districts where a side yard or a rear yard setback is not required, a structure which is not to be built on the property line shall be set back from the property line by a distance in accordance with the applicable building code (as administered by the building official) requirements. (Ord. 3164 § 3 (Att. B), 2012; Ord. 2875 § 1.104.030, 2003)


17.64.040 Exceptions to yard requirements.

(1) If there are dwellings on both abutting lots with front yard depths less than the required depth for the zone, the depth of the front yard for the intervening lot need not exceed the average depth of the front yards of the abutting lots.

(2) If there is a dwelling on one abutting lot with a front yard of less depth than the required depth for the zone, the front yard for the lot need not exceed a depth half-way between the depth of the abutting lot and the required front yard depth. (Ord. 2875 § 1.104.040, 2003)


17.64.050 Projections into required yards.

(1) Cornices, eaves, belt courses, sills, canopies, or similar architectural features may extend or project into a required yard not more than 36 inches provided the width of such yard is not reduced to less than three feet.

(2) Fireplace chimneys may project into a required front, side, or rear yard not more than three feet provided the width of such yard is not reduced to less than three feet.

(3) Open porches, decks, or balconies not more than 36 inches in height and not covered by a roof or canopy may extend or project into a required rear or side yard provided such natural yard area is not reduced to less than three feet and the deck is screened from abutting properties. Porches may extend into a required front yard not more than 36 inches.

(4) Unroofed landings and stairs may project into required front or rear yards only.

(5) No building or portion thereof, regardless of size, shall be placed closer than three feet to a property line. (Ord. 2875 § 1.104.050, 2003)


Chapter 17.68 BUILDING HEIGHT LIMITATIONS – EXCEPTIONS

Sections:

17.68.010    Projections not used for human habitation.

17.68.020    Building height exceptions.

17.68.040    Building height criteria for scenic resources.


17.68.010 Projections not used for human habitation.

Projections such as chimneys, spires, domes, elevator shaft housings, towers excluding TV dish receivers, aerials, flag poles, and other similar objects not used for human occupancy are not considered buildings. (Ord. 2875 § 1.106.010, 2003)


17.68.020 Building height exceptions.

Any building located in an industrial zone may be built to a maximum height of 75 feet, provided:

(1) The total floor area of the building does not exceed one and one-half times the area of the site;

(2) The yard dimensions in each case are equal to at least the following:

(a) Half of the building height from any abutting residential (e.g., R-10, R-7, R-5, AR or MHR) or mixed use (e.g., MU, RD or HBD) zoning district; 

(b) As necessary to comply with the provisions of Chapter 17.72 SHMC; and

(c) Pursuant to Chapter 17.64 SHMC. (Ord. 3180 § 1 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 3164 § 3 (Att. B), 2012; Ord. 2875 § 1.106.020, 2003)


17.68.040 Building height criteria for scenic resources.

(1) No new development over one story, or 15 feet in height, shall significantly obstruct views of the Columbia River on lots fronting on Strand Street, South Second Street, North and South First Street, River Street, and Riverside Drive. 

(2) Notice and process for review of subsection (1) of this section shall follow the same as for site design review, major, except for criteria and standards.

(3) “Significantly obstruct” shall normally mean restrict the ability of people to see the full view of the Columbia River by more than 50 percent. This shall apply to an accumulation of view from all living spaces with views at time of new development application.

(4) It shall be the responsibility of anyone having views to show or demonstrate how the new development will block their views prior to the completion of the comment period.

(5) It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to refute the comments from those with claims of “significant obstruction” of views within two weeks of notice of such comments.

Example: A house with views has five windows in rooms that are for living such as family room, dining room, living room, breakfast room, but not including kitchens, bathrooms, closets, laundry rooms, etc. If only two windows are more than 50 percent obstructed based upon the view of a person five feet tall and three feet from the window, then the view is not considered “significantly obstructed” for this house. (Ord. 2875 § 1.106.040, 2003)


Chapter 17.72 LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING

Sections:

17.72.010    Purpose.

17.72.015    Applicability – Approval process.

17.72.020    General provisions.

17.72.030    Street trees.

17.72.035    Location of street trees.

17.72.040    Cut and fill around existing trees.

17.72.050    Replacement of street trees.

17.72.060    Exemptions.

17.72.070    Buffering and screening – General provisions.

17.72.080    Buffering and screening requirements.

17.72.090    Setbacks for fences or walls.

17.72.100    Height restrictions.

17.72.110    Screening – Special provisions.

17.72.120    Revegetation.

17.72.130    Buffer matrix.

17.72.140    Interior parking lot landscaping.


17.72.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards for landscaping, buffering, and screening of land use within St. Helens in order to enhance the aesthetic environmental quality of the city:

(1) By protecting existing street trees and requiring the planting of street trees in new developments;

(2) Through the use of plant materials as a unifying element;

(3) By using planting materials to define spaces and articulate the uses of specific areas; and

(4) By using trees and other landscaping materials to mitigate the effects of the sun, wind, noise, and lack of privacy by the provision of buffering and screening. (Ord. 2875 § 1.108.010, 2003)


17.72.015 Applicability – Approval process.

(1) The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all development where landscaping is required by this code including the construction of new structures (see SHMC 17.96.020, Applicability of provisions), and to a change of use which increases the on-site parking or loading requirements or which changes the access requirements, except as follows:

(a) Single-dwelling units and duplexes.

(b) Any use not requiring site design review or conditional use permits.

(2) Where the provisions of Chapter 17.96 SHMC, Site Development Review, do not apply, the director shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny a plan submitted under the provisions of this chapter. The decision may be appealed as provided by SHMC 17.24.310(1).

(3) The applicant shall submit a site plan which includes:

(a) Location of underground irrigation system sprinkler heads where applicable;

(b) Location and height of fences, buffers, and screenings;

(c) Location of terraces, decks, shelters, play areas, and common open spaces;

(d) Location, type, size, and species of existing and proposed plant materials; and

(e) A narrative which addresses:

(i) Soil conditions; and

(ii) Erosion control measures that will be used.

(4) The approval standards are the applicable standards contained in this chapter. (Ord. 2875 § 1.108.015, 2003)


17.72.020 General provisions.

(1) Unless otherwise provided by the lease agreement, the owner, tenant, and their agent, if any, shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of all landscaping which shall be maintained in good condition so as to present a healthy, neat and orderly appearance and shall be kept free from refuse and debris.

(2) All plant growth in landscaped areas of developments shall be controlled by pruning, trimming or otherwise so that:

(a) It will not interfere with the maintenance or repair of any public utility;

(b) It will not restrict pedestrian or vehicular access; and

(c) It will not constitute a traffic hazard because of reduced visibility.

(3) The installation of all landscaping shall be as follows:

(a) All landscaping shall be installed according to accepted planting procedures;

(b) The plant materials shall be of high grade; and

(c) Landscaping shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of this code.

(4) Certificates of occupancy shall not be issued unless the landscaping requirements have been met or other arrangements have been made and approved by the director such as the posting of a bond.

(5) Existing plant materials on a site shall be protected as much as possible:

(a) The developer shall provide methods for the protection of existing plant material to remain during the construction process; and

(b) The plants to be saved shall be noted on the landscape plans (e.g., areas not to be disturbed can be fenced, as in snow fencing which can be placed around individual trees).

(6) Appropriate methods for the care and maintenance of street trees and landscaping materials shall be provided by the owner of the property abutting the rights-of-way unless otherwise required for emergency conditions and the safety of the general public.

(7) The review procedures and standards for required landscaping and screening shall be specified in the conditions of approval during development review and in no instance shall be less than that required for conventional development.

(8) No trees, shrubs, or plantings more than 18 inches in height shall be planted in the public right-of-way abutting roadways having no established curb and gutter. (Ord. 2875 § 1.108.020, 2003)


17.72.030 Street trees.

(1) All development projects fronting on a public or private street, or a private driveway more than 100 feet in length approved after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this code shall be required to plant street trees in accordance with the standards in SHMC 17.72.035.

(2) Certain trees can severely damage utilities, streets, and sidewalks or can cause personal injury. Approval of any planting list shall be subject to review by the director. A list of suggested appropriate tree species is located at the end of this chapter. Additional or alternative tree species also may be recommended by the applicant or determined by the director based on information provided in adopted city plans, policies, ordinances, studies or resolutions. Proposals by the applicant shall require approval by the director. (Ord. 3181 § 4 (Att. C), 2015; Ord. 2875 § 1.108.030, 2003)


17.72.035 Location of street trees.

(1) Landscaping in the front and exterior side yards shall include trees with a minimum caliper of two inches at four feet in height as specified in the requirements stated in subsection (2) of this section.

(2) The specific spacing of street trees by size of tree shall be as follows:

(a) Small or narrow stature trees (under 25 feet tall and less than 16 feet wide branching) shall be spaced no greater than 20 feet apart;

(b) Medium sized trees (25 to 40 feet tall, 16 to 35 feet wide branching) shall be spaced no greater than 30 feet apart;

(c) Large trees (over 40 feet tall and more than 35 feet wide branching) shall be spaced no greater than 40 feet apart;

(d) Except for signalized intersections as provided in SHMC 17.72.060(3), trees shall not be planted closer than 20 feet from a street intersection, nor closer than two feet from private driveways (measured at the back edge of the sidewalk), fire hydrants, or utility poles in order to maintain visual clearance;

(e) No new utility pole location shall be established closer than five feet to any existing street tree;

(f) Tree pits shall be located so as not to include services (water and gas meters, etc.) in the tree well;

(g) On-premises services (water and gas meters, etc.) shall not be installed within existing tree well areas;

(h) Street trees shall not be planted closer than 20 feet to light standards;

(i) New light standards shall not be positioned closer than 20 feet to existing street trees except when public safety dictates, then they may be positioned no closer than 10 feet;

(j) Trees shall be planted at least two feet from the face of the curb;

(k) Where there are overhead power lines, the street tree species selected shall be of a type which, at full maturity, will not interfere with the lines; and

(l) Trees shall not be planted within two feet of any permanent hard surface paving or walkway:

(i) Space between the tree and the hard surface may be covered by a nonpermanent hard surface such as grates, bricks on sand, paver blocks, and cobblestones; and

(ii) Sidewalk cuts in concrete for tree planting shall be at least four feet by four feet to allow for air and water into the root area.

(3) Trees, as they grow, shall be pruned to provide at least eight feet of clearance above sidewalks and 13 feet above local street, 15 feet above collector street, and 18 feet above arterial street roadway surfaces. (Ord. 2875 § 1.108.035, 2003)


17.72.040 Cut and fill around existing trees.

(1) Existing trees may be used as street trees if no cutting or filling takes place within the dripline of the tree unless an exception is approved by the director.

(2) An exception will be approved if:

(a) The ground within the dripline is altered merely for drainage purposes; and

(b) It can be shown that the cut or fill will not damage the roots and will not cause the tree to die. (Ord. 2875 § 1.108.040, 2003)


17.72.050 Replacement of street trees.

(1) Existing street trees removed by development projects or other construction shall be replaced by the developer with those types of trees approved by the director.

(2) The replacement trees shall be of a size and species similar to the trees that are being removed unless lesser sized alternatives are approved by the director. (Ord. 2875 § 1.108.050, 2003)


17.72.060 Exemptions.

(1) Modifications to the street tree requirements or exemptions to the requirements may be granted by the director on a case-by-case basis.

(2) Exemptions shall be granted if it can be documented that one or more of the following applies to the site:

(a) The location of a proposed tree would cause potential problems with existing utility lines;

(b) The tree would cause visual clearance problems;

(c) There is not adequate space in which to plant street trees within the public right-of-way; or

(d) The ground conditions within the public right-of-way are unable to support street trees.

(3) The director may allow trees closer to specified intersections which are signalized, provided the provisions of Chapter 17.76 SHMC, Visual Clearance Areas, are satisfied.

(4) If one or more conditions described in subsection (2) of this section are shown to exist on the site, the director may require the following to fulfill the street tree requirements of this chapter:

(a) A landscaping easement outside the public right-of-way for the purposes of accommodating street trees. The location of the landscaping easement shall be located on site. A public utility easement may be used for this purpose.

(b) An applicant may, with the consent of the director, elect to compensate the city for costs commensurate with the number of street trees that would have otherwise been required for the site. The fee, established by resolution of the city council, will be generally based on the city’s street tree list in this chapter and market value of the tree(s). (Ord. 3181 § 4 (Att. C), 2015; Ord. 3150 § 3 (Att. B), 2011; Ord. 2875 § 1.108.060, 2003)


17.72.070 Buffering and screening – General provisions.

(1) It is the intent that these requirements shall provide for privacy and protection and reduce or eliminate the adverse impacts of visual or noise pollution at a development site, without unduly interfering with the view from neighboring properties or jeopardizing the safety of pedestrians and vehicles. 

(2) Buffering and screening are required to reduce the impacts on adjacent uses which are of a different type in accordance with the matrix in this chapter. The owner of each proposed development is responsible for the installation and effective maintenance of buffering and screening.

(3) In lieu of these standards, a detailed buffer area landscaping and screening plan may be submitted for the director’s approval as an alternative to the buffer area landscaping and screening standards, provided it affords the same degree of buffering and screening as required by this code. (Ord. 2875 § 1.108.070, 2003)


17.72.080 Buffering and screening requirements.

(1) A buffer consists of an area within a required interior setback adjacent to a property line and having a depth equal to the amount specified in the buffering and screening matrix and containing a length equal to the length of the property line of the abutting use or uses.

(2) A buffer area may only be occupied by utilities, screening, sidewalks and bikeways, and landscaping. No buildings, accessways, or parking areas shall be allowed in a buffer area except where an accessway has been previously approved by the city.

(3) A fence, hedge, or wall, or any combination of such elements which is located in any yard is subject to the conditions and requirements of this section.

(4) The minimum improvements within a buffer area shall consist of the following:

(a) At least one row of trees shall be planted. They shall be not less than 10 feet high for deciduous trees and five feet high for evergreen trees at the time of planting. Spacing for trees shall be as follows:

(i) Small or narrow stature trees, under 25 feet tall or less than 16 feet wide at maturity, shall be spaced no further than 15 feet apart; and

(ii) Medium sized trees, between 25 to 40 feet tall and with 16 to 35 feet wide branching at maturity, shall be spaced no greater than 30 feet apart; and

(iii) Large trees, over 40 feet tall and with more than 35 feet wide branching at maturity, shall be spaced no greater than 30 feet apart.

(b) In addition, at least 10 five-gallon shrubs or 20 one-gallon shrubs shall be planted for each 1,000 square feet of required buffer area; and

(c) The remaining area shall be planted in lawn, ground cover, or spread with bark mulch.

(5) Where screening is required, the following standards shall apply in addition to those required for buffering:

(a) A hedge of narrow or broadleaf evergreen shrubs shall be planted which will form a four-foot continuous screen within two years of planting; or

(b) An earthen berm planted with evergreen plant materials shall be provided which will form a continuous screen six feet in height within two years. The unplanted portion of the berm shall be planted in lawn, ground cover or bark mulch; or

(c) A five-foot or taller fence or wall shall be constructed to provide a continuous sight-obscuring screen.

(6) Buffering and screening provisions shall be superseded by the vision clearance requirements as set forth in Chapter 17.76 SHMC.

(7) When the use to be screened is downhill from the adjoining zone or use, the prescribed heights of required fences, walls, or landscape screening shall be measured from the actual grade of the adjoining property. In this case, fences and walls may exceed the permitted six-foot height at the discretion of the director as a condition of approval. When the grades are so steep so as to make the installation of walls, fences or landscaping to the required height impractical, a detailed landscape/screening plan shall be submitted for approval.

(8) Fences and Walls.

(a) Fences and walls shall be constructed of any materials commonly used in the construction of fences and walls such as wood or brick, or otherwise acceptable by the director;

(b) Such fence or wall construction shall be in compliance with other city regulations; and

(c) Chain link fences with slats shall qualify for screening. However, chain link fences without slats shall require the planting of a continuous evergreen hedge to be considered screening.

(9) Hedges.

(a) An evergreen hedge or other dense evergreen landscaping may satisfy a requirement for a sight-obscuring fence where required subject to the height requirement in SHMC 17.72.090(2)(a) and (b);

(b) Such hedge or other dense landscaping shall be properly maintained and shall be replaced with another hedge, other dense evergreen landscaping, or a fence or wall when it ceases to serve the purpose of obscuring view; and

(c) No hedge shall be grown or maintained at a height greater than that permitted by these regulations for a fence or wall in a vision clearance area as set forth in Chapter 17.76 SHMC. (Ord. 2875 § 1.108.080, 2003)


17.72.090 Setbacks for fences or walls.

(1) No fence or wall shall be constructed which exceeds the standards in subsection (2) of this section except when the approval authority, as a condition of approval, allows that a fence or wall be constructed to a height greater than otherwise permitted in order to mitigate against potential adverse effects. For residential uses, a fence may only exceed the height standards if approved by a variance.

(2) Fences or walls:

(a) May not exceed four feet in height in a required front yard along local or collector streets or six feet in all other yards and, in all other cases, shall meet vision clearance area requirements (Chapter 17.76 SHMC);

(b) Are permitted up to six feet in height in front yards adjacent to any designated arterial or street. For any fence over three feet in height in the required front yard area, permission shall be subject to review of the location of the fence or wall;

(c) All fences or walls shall meet vision clearance area requirements (Chapter 17.76 SHMC);

(d) All fences or walls greater than six feet in height shall be subject to building official approval. (Ord. 3144 § 2 (Att. A), 2011; Ord. 2875 § 1.108.090, 2003)


17.72.100 Height restrictions.

(1) The prescribed heights of required fences, walls, or landscaping shall be measured from the actual adjoining level of finished grade, except that where parking, loading, storage, or similar areas are located above finished grade, the height of fences, walls, or landscaping required to screen such areas or space shall be measured from the level of such improvements.

(2) An earthen berm and fence or wall combination shall not exceed the six-foot height limitation for screening. (Ord. 2875 § 1.108.100, 2003)


17.72.110 Screening – Special provisions.

(1) Screening of Parking and Loading Areas.

(a) Screening of parking for single and duplex attached and detached dwellings is not required.

(b) Screening of parking (larger than three spaces) and loading areas (larger than 400 square feet) is required. The specifications for this screening are as follows:

(i) Landscaped parking areas shall include special design features which effectively screen the parking lot areas from view. These design features may include the use of landscaped berms, decorative walls, and raised planters. Berms, planters, and other forms of vegetative landscaping are permitted for screening that fronts US 30. Walls are prohibited for screening that fronts US 30;

(ii) Landscape planters may be used to define or screen the appearance of off-street parking areas from the public right-of-way; and

(iii) Materials to be installed should achieve a balance between low-lying and vertical shrubbery and trees.

(2) Screening of Service Facilities. Except for single-dwelling units and duplexes, service facilities such as gas meters and air conditioners which would otherwise be visible from a public street, customer or resident parking area, any public facility or any residential area shall be screened from view by placement of a solid wood fence or masonry wall between five and eight feet in height or evergreens already to correct height minimums. All refuse materials shall be contained within the screened area. Rooftop service facilities and equipment shall be screened from view from adjacent streets and adjacent properties in one of the following ways:

(a) A parapet wall of adequate height;

(b) A screen around the equipment that is made of a primary exterior finish material used on other portions of the building; or

(c) Set back such that it is not visible from the public street(s) and adjacent properties.

(3) Screening of Swimming Pools. All swimming pools shall be enclosed as required by the applicable building code as administered by the building official.

(4) Screening of Refuse Containers Required. Except for one- and two-unit dwellings, any refuse container or refuse collection area which would be visible from a public street, parking lot, residential or commercial area, or any public facility such as a school or park shall be screened or enclosed from view by placement of a solid wood fence, masonry wall or evergreen hedge.

(5) Outdoor storage areas shall be landscaped and screened in accordance with SHMC 17.72.080(5)(a) through (c).

(6) The approval authority may, at their discretion, make variations from this rule when topography makes the screening rules unreasonable. (Ord. 3181 § 4 (Att. C), 2015; Ord. 3164 § 3 (Att. B), 2012; Ord. 2875 § 1.108.110, 2003)


17.72.120 Revegetation.

(1) Where natural vegetation has been removed through grading in areas not affected by the landscaping requirements and that are not to be occupied by structures, such areas are to be replanted as set forth in this section to prevent erosion after construction activities are completed.

(2) Methods of Revegetation. Acceptable methods of revegetation include hydromulching or the planting of rye grass, barley, or other seed with equivalent germination rates, and:

(a) Where lawn or turf grass is to be established, lawn grass seed or other appropriate landscape cover is to be sown at not less than four pounds to each 1,000 square feet of land area;

(b) Other revegetation methods offering equivalent protection may be approved by the approval authority;

(c) Plant materials are to be watered at intervals sufficient to ensure survival and growth; and

(d) The use of native plant materials is encouraged to reduce irrigation and maintenance demands. (Ord. 2875 § 1.108.120, 2003)


17.72.130 Buffer matrix.

(1) The buffer matrix (Figure 13) shall be used in calculating widths of buffering and screening to be installed between proposed uses and abutting zoning districts or specified types of streets.

(2) An application for a variance to the standards required in Figure 13 shall be processed in accordance with Chapter 17.108 SHMC.



    BUFFERS Figure 13  

	 	PROPOSED USES

	Existing Abutting Use of Zoning District	Attached Dwelling Units – 1 story	Attached Dwelling Units – 2 stories or more	Mobile Home Parks	Commercial Uses	Industrial Park Use	Light Industrial Use*	Heavy Industrial Use*	Any Parking Lot

	R-5	AR	R-5	AR	4 – 50 spaces	51 or more spaces

	Detached Single-Family R-10, R-7, R-5	10′ S	10′ S	10′ S	10′ S	10′ S	20′ S	20′ S	30′ S	40′ S	10′ S	20′ S

	Attached Dwelling Units 1 story	0′	10′	10′ S	10′ S	10′ S	20′ S	20′ S	30′ S	40′ S	10′ S	20′ S

	Attached Dwelling Units 2 or more stories	10′ S	10′ S	10′ S	10′ S	10′ S	20′ S	20′ S	30′ S	40′ S	10′ S	20′ S

	Mobile Home Parks	10′ S	10′ S	10′ S	10′ S	10′ S	20′ S	20′ S	30′ S	40′ S	10′ S	20′ S

	Arterial Street (except US 30)	10′ S	10′ S	10′ S	10′ S	10′ S	0′	20′ S	0′	20′ S	0′

	US 30	10′ S	10′ S	10′ S	10′ S	10′ S	0′	20′ S	0′	20′ S	5′ S

	Commercial Uses	10′ S	10′ S	10′ S	10′ S	10′ S	0′	20′	0′	20′ S	0′

	Industrial Park	20′ S	20′ S	20′ S	20′ S	20′ S	10′	0′	0′	10′ S	0′

	Light Industrial	25′ S	25′ S	25′ S	25′ S	25′ S	10′	0′	0′	0′	0′

	Heavy Industrial	40′ S	40′ S	40′ S	40′ S	40′ S	20′	20′	0′	0′	0′

	Any Parking Lot with 4 – 50 spaces	10′ S	10′ S	10′ S	10′ S	10′ S	0′	0′	0′	0′	0′

	Any Parking Lot with 51 or more spaces	10′ S	10′ S	10′ S	10′ S	10′ S	0′	0′	0′	0′	0′

“S” indicates screening required

*    May require up to 150 ft. buffer if off-site impacts are significant

(Ord. 3181 § 4 (Att. C), 2015; Ord. 2875 § 1.108.130, 2003)


17.72.140 Interior parking lot landscaping.

(1) All parking areas with more than 20 spaces shall provide landscape islands with trees that provide a canopy effect and break up the parking area into rows of not more than seven contiguous parking spaces.

(2) Landscape islands and planters shall have dimensions of not less than 48 square feet of area and no dimension of less than six feet, to ensure adequate soil, water, and space for healthy plant growth.

(3) All required parking lot landscape areas not otherwise planted with trees must contain a combination of shrubs and groundcover plants so that, within two years of planting, not less than 50 percent of that area is covered with living plants.

(4) The landscaping shall be protected from vehicular damage by some form of wheel guard or curb permanently fixed to the ground. (Ord. 3181 § 4 (Att. C), 2015)


[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



[IMAGE]



Chapter 17.76 VISUAL CLEARANCE AREAS

Sections:

17.76.010    Purpose.

17.76.015    Applicability of provisions.

17.76.020    Visual clearance – Required.

17.76.030    Computation – Nonarterial street and all accessways.

17.76.040    Exceptions.

17.76.050    Computation – Arterial.


17.76.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards which will assure proper sight distances at intersections in order to reduce the hazard from vehicular turning movements. (Ord. 2875 § 1.110.010, 2003)


17.76.015 Applicability of provisions.

(1) The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all development including the construction of new structures, the remodeling of existing structures (see SHMC 17.96.020), and to a change of use which increases the on-site parking or loading requirements or which changes the access requirements.

(2) Where the provisions of Chapter 17.96 SHMC, Site Development Review, do not apply, the director shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny a plan submitted under the provisions of this chapter. No notice is required. The decision may be appealed as provided by SHMC 17.24.310(1).

(3) The applicant shall submit a site plan which includes:

(a) The location and height of all hedges, trees, plantings, fences or wall structures within the vision clearance area as computed in SHMC 17.76.030, 17.76.040, and 17.76.050; and

(b) The location of all access points, parking and circulation areas, loading areas and pedestrian walkways within the vision clearance area as computed in SHMC 17.76.030, 17.76.040, and 17.76.050. (Ord. 2875 § 1.110.015, 2003)


17.76.020 Visual clearance – Required.

(1) A visual clearance area shall be maintained on the corners of all property adjacent to the intersection of two streets, a street and a railroad, or a driveway providing access to a public or private street.

(2) A clear vision area shall contain no vehicle, hedge, planting, fence, wall structure, or temporary or permanent obstruction (except for an occasional utility pole or tree), exceeding three feet in height, measured from the top of the curb, or where no curb exists, from the street centerline grade, except that trees exceeding this height may be located in this area, provided all branches below eight feet are removed.

(3) Where the crest of a hill or vertical curve conditions contribute to the obstruction of clear vision areas at a street or driveway intersection, hedges, plantings, fences, walls, wall structures and temporary or permanent obstructions shall be further reduced in height or eliminated to comply with the intent of the required clear vision area.

(Ord. 2875 § 1.110.020, 2003)
[IMAGE]



17.76.030 Computation – Nonarterial street and all accessways.

A visual clearance area for all street intersections, street and accessway intersections, and street or accessway and railroad track intersections shall be that triangular area formed by the right-of-way or property lines along such lots and a straight line joining the right-of-way or property line at points which are 30 feet distance from the intersection of the right-of-way line and measured along such lines (see figure above). (Ord. 2875 § 1.110.030, 2003)


17.76.040 Exceptions.

Where a right-of-way is greater than what is required, the actual street, railroad, or driveway intersections may be used in lieu of the property lines for computing the visual clearance area. (Ord. 2875 § 1.110.040, 2003)


17.76.050 Computation – Arterial.

On all designated arterial streets the visual clearance area shall not be less than 35 feet on each side of the intersection. (Ord. 2875 § 1.110.050, 2003)


Chapter 17.80 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS

Sections:

17.80.010    Purpose.

17.80.015    Applicability of provisions.

17.80.020    General provisions.

17.80.030    Minimum off-street parking requirements.

17.80.040    Modification to parking requirements.

17.80.050    Parking dimension standards.

17.80.060    On-site vehicle stacking areas required for drive-in use.

17.80.065    Storage related to residential uses and use of recreational vehicles related to residential uses.

17.80.066    Use of recreational vehicles related to nonresidential uses.

17.80.070    Loading/unloading driveways required on site.

17.80.080    Off-street loading spaces.

17.80.090    Off-street loading dimensions.


17.80.010 Purpose.

(1) The purpose of these regulations is to establish parking areas having adequate capacity and which are appropriately located and designed to minimize any hazardous conditions on site and at access points.

(2) The parking requirements are intended to provide sufficient parking in close proximity to the various uses for residents, customers, and employees, and to establish standards which will maintain the traffic-carrying capacity of nearby streets. (Ord. 2875 § 1.114.010, 2003)


17.80.015 Applicability of provisions.

(1) The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all development including the construction of new structures, the remodeling of existing structures (see SHMC 17.96.020) and to a change of use which increases the on-site parking or loading requirements or which changes the access requirements. 

(2) Where the provisions of Chapter 17.96 SHMC, Site Development Review, do not apply, the director shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny a plan submitted under the provisions of this chapter. No notice is required. The decision may be appealed as provided by SHMC 17.24.310(1).

(3) The applicant shall submit a site plan which includes:

(a) The location of the structures on the property and on the adjoining property;

(b) The delineation of individual parking and loading spaces and their dimensions;

(c) The location of the circulation area necessary to serve the spaces;

(d) The location of the access point(s) to streets, to accessways and to properties to be served;

(e) The location of curb cuts;

(f) The location and dimensions of all landscaping, including the type and size of plant material to be used, as well as any other landscape material incorporated into the overall plan;

(g) The proposed grading and drainage plans; and

(h) Specifications as to signs and bumper guards. (Ord. 2875 § 1.114.015, 2003)


17.80.020 General provisions.

(1) Parking Dimensions. The minimum dimensions for parking spaces are:

(a) Eight feet, eight inches wide and 18 feet long for a standard space;

(b) Eight feet wide and 15 feet long for a compact space; and

(c) As required by applicable state of Oregon and federal standards for designated disabled person parking spaces.

(2) Building Permit Conditions. The provision and maintenance of off-street parking and loading spaces are the continuing obligations of the property owner:

(a) No building or other permit shall be issued until plans are presented to the director to show that property is and will remain available for exclusive use as off-street parking and loading space; and

(b) The subsequent use of property for which the building permit is issued shall be conditional upon the unqualified continuance and availability of the amount of parking and loading space required by this code.

(3) Parking Requirements for Unlisted Uses.

(a) Upon application and payment of fees, the director, as provided by SHMC 17.24.090(1), may rule that a use, not specifically listed, is a use similar to a listed use and that the same parking standards shall apply. No notice need be given. The decision may be appealed as provided by SHMC 17.24.310(1). The ruling on parking area requirements shall be based on findings that the following criteria are satisfied:

(i) The use is similar to and of the same general type as a listed use;

(ii) The use has similar intensity, density, and off-site impact as the listed use; and

(iii) The use has similar impacts on the community facilities as the listed use;

(b) This section does not authorize the inclusion of a use in a zoning district where it is not listed, or a use which is specifically listed in another zone or which is of the same general type and is similar to a use specifically listed in another zoning district; and

(c) The director shall maintain a list of approved unlisted use parking requirements which shall have the same effect as an amendment to this chapter.

(4) Existing and New Uses. At the time of erection of a new structure or at the time of enlargement or change in use of an existing structure within any district, off-street parking spaces shall be as provided in accordance with SHMC 17.80.030, and:

(a) In case of enlargement of a building or use of land existing on the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this code, the number of additional parking and loading spaces required shall be based only on floor area or capacity of such enlargement; and

(b) If parking space has been provided in connection with an existing use or is added to an existing use, the parking space shall not be eliminated if the elimination would result in less space than is specified in the standards of this section when applied to the entire use.

(5) Change in Use.

(a) When an existing structure is changed in use from one use to another use as listed in SHMC 17.80.030, and the parking requirements for each use are the same, no additional parking shall be required; and

(b) Where a change in use results in an intensification of use in terms of the number of parking spaces required, additional parking spaces shall be provided in an amount equal to the difference between the number of spaces required for the existing use and the number of spaces required for the more intensive use.

(6) Shared Parking in Commercial Districts.

(a) Owners of two or more uses, structures, or parcels of land may agree to utilize jointly the same parking and loading spaces when the peak hours of operation do not overlap;

(b) Satisfactory legal evidence shall be presented to the director in the form of deeds, leases, or contracts to establish the joint use; and

(c) If a joint use arrangement is subsequently terminated, or if the uses change, the requirements of this code thereafter apply to each separately.

(7) Visitor Parking in Multiple-Dwelling Unit Residential Districts.

(a) Multidwelling units with more than 10 required parking spaces shall provide parking for the use of guests of residents (visitors) of the complex; and

(b) Visitor parking shall consist of 15 percent of the total required parking spaces and shall be centrally located within or evenly distributed throughout the development. Required bicycle parking facilities shall also be centrally located within or evenly distributed throughout the development.

(8) Location of Required Parking.

(a) Off-street parking spaces for single-dwelling unit – detached, duplex dwellings and single-dwelling – attached dwellings shall be located on the same lot with the dwelling; and

(b) Off-street parking lots for uses not listed above shall be located not further than 200 feet from the building or use they are required to serve, measured in a straight line from the building with the following exceptions:

(i) Shared parking areas, as provided by subsection (6) of this section, for commercial uses which require more than 40 parking spaces may provide for the spaces in excess of the required 40 spaces up to a distance of 300 feet from the commercial building or use; and

(ii) Industrial and manufacturing uses which require in excess of 40 spaces may locate the required spaces in excess of the 40 spaces up to a distance of 300 feet from the building.

(9) Mixed Uses. Where several uses occupy a single structure or parcel of land or a combination of uses are included in one business, the total off-street parking spaces and loading area is the sum of the requirements of the several uses, computed separately unless the peak hours of use do not overlap.

(10) Choice of Parking Requirements. When a building or use is planned or constructed in such a manner that a choice of parking requirements could be made, the use which requires the greater number of parking spaces shall govern.

(11) Availability of Parking Spaces. Required parking spaces shall:

(a) Be available for the parking of operable passenger automobiles of residents, customers, patrons, and employees only;

(b) Not be used for storage of vehicles or materials or for the parking of trucks used in conducting the business or use; and

(c) Not be rented, leased, or assigned to any other person or organization.

(12) Parking Lot Landscaping. Parking lots shall be landscaped in accordance with the requirements in Chapter 17.72 SHMC.

(13) Designated Parking for the Handicapped. All parking areas shall be provided with the required numbers and sizes of disabled person parking spaces as specified by applicable state of Oregon and federal standards. All disabled person parking spaces shall be signed and marked on the pavement as required by these standards.

(14) Designated Parking for Compact Vehicles. All parking spaces designated for compact vehicles shall be signed or labeled by painting on the parking space.

(15) Bicycle Parking.

(a) One lockable bicycle parking space shall be provided within a rack for the following:

(i) Four or more dwelling units in one building: one space per dwelling unit;

(ii) Commercial development: 10 percent of vehicular parking spaces;

(iii) Civic uses: 20 percent of vehicular parking spaces; and

(iv) Industrial development: five percent of vehicular parking spaces;

(b) Bicycle parking areas shall be provided at locations within 50 feet of primary entrances to structures. Where possible, bicycle parking facilities shall be placed under cover. Bicycle parking areas shall not be located within parking aisles, landscape areas, or pedestrian ways; and

(c) Residential complexes with less than four dwelling units do not need bicycle racks.

(16) Lighting. Any lights provided to illuminate any public or private parking area or vehicle sales area shall be so arranged as to direct the light away from any adjacent residential district, and shall not create a hazard for drivers in public streets.

(17) Final Building Inspection. Required parking spaces shall be completely improved to city standards and available for use at the time of the final building inspection. 

(18) Plan, Building Permit Prerequisite. A plan drawn to scale, indicating how the off-street parking and loading requirement is to be fulfilled, shall accompany the request for a building permit or site development review permit in accordance with SHMC 17.96.180(11).

(19) Measurement for Required Parking. Unless otherwise specified, where square feet are specified, the area measured shall be gross floor area under the roof measured from the faces of the structure, excluding only space devoted to covered off-street parking or loading.

(20) Employees. Where employees are specified, the employees counted are the persons who work on the premises including proprietors, executives, professional people, production, sales, and distribution employees during the largest shift at peak season.

(21) Fractions. Fractional space requirements shall be counted as a whole space.

(22) On-Street Parking. Parking spaces in a public street or alley shall not be eligible as fulfilling any part of the parking requirement except as otherwise provided in this code.

(23) Preferential Long-Term Carpool/Vanpool Parking. Parking lots providing in excess of 20 long-term parking spaces shall provide preferential long-term carpool and vanpool parking for employees, students, or other regular visitors to the site. At least five percent of total long-term parking spaces shall be reserved for carpool/vanpool use. Preferential parking for carpools/vanpools shall be closer to the main entrances of the building than any other employee or student parking, other than disabled person parking spaces. Preferential carpool/vanpool parking spaces shall be full size parking spaces. Preferential carpool/vanpool spaces shall be clearly designated for use only by carpools or vanpools between 7:00 a.m. and 5:30 p.m. (Ord. 3181 § 4 (Att. C), 2015; Ord. 2875 § 1.114.020, 2003)


17.80.030 Minimum off-street parking requirements.

Note: some use classifications listed below indicate additional bicycle parking requirements beyond the requirements of SHMC 17.80.020(15).

(1) Residential.

(a) Auxiliary dwelling – one space.

(b) Bed and breakfast, boarding house, homestay – one space per bedroom.

(c) Caretaker – two off-street spaces for each dwelling unit.

(d) Duplexes – two off-street spaces for each dwelling unit.

(e) Group care – one space per three residential beds plus one space for each employee on largest shift.

(f) Group residential – one space for each guest room plus one space for each employee on largest shift.

(g) Mobile home park – two off-street spaces for each dwelling unit.

(h) Multiple dwelling (also see SHMC 17.80.020(7)):

(i) Studio – one space for each unit.

(ii) One bedroom – one and one-half spaces for each unit.

(iii) More than one bedroom per unit – two spaces for each.

(i) Single-dwelling units (attached or detached) – two off-street spaces for each dwelling unit.

(2) Civic.

(a) Community parks and recreation – As required by facilities provided.

(b) Cultural exhibits and library – one space per 400 feet of gross floor area; one and one-half bicycle spaces per 1,000 square feet.

(c) Children’s day care – five spaces plus one space per classroom.

(d) Hospitals – one and one-half spaces per bed.

(e) Lodge, fraternal, and civic assembly – one space for every four fixed seats or every eight feet of bench length or one space for every 100 square feet of floor area in the assembly area if there are no fixed seats.

(f) Long-term care facility, nursing home – one space for every four rooms.

(g) Public agency administrative service – one space for every 350 square feet of service gross floor area.

(h) Public safety services – one space for every employee of the largest shift.

(i) Religious assembly – one space for every three fixed seats or every six feet of bench length in the assembly area or every 50 square feet of floor space in the assembly area where there are no permanent seats, whichever is greater.

(j) Schools:

(i) Preschool/kindergarten – five spaces plus one per classroom.

(ii) Elementary, junior high school or equivalent private or parochial school – one and one-half spaces for every employee, plus one space for 100 square feet of floor area in the auditorium or other assembly or one space for each eight seats, whichever is greater; six bicycle spaces per classroom.

(iii) Senior high and equivalent private or parochial school – one and one-half spaces for each employee, plus one space for each six classroom seats, and one space for each 100 square feet of floor area or one space for each eight seats in the auditorium or other assembly room, whichever is greater; two bicycle spaces per classroom.

(iv) Commuter-type college – one space for every full-time equivalent student; four bicycle spaces per classroom.

(v) Resident-type college – one space for every three full-time equivalent students; one bicycle space for every four full-time equivalent students.

(vi) Commercial or business school – one space for every full-time equivalent student; two bicycle spaces per classroom.

(k) Transitional care facility – one space for every four occupants.

(3) Commercial.

(a) Agricultural sales – one space per 400 square feet of gross floor area, but not less than four spaces for each establishment. (Including nurseries and greenhouses.)

(b) Agricultural services – one space per 400 square feet of gross floor area, but not less than four spaces for each establishment.

(c) Amusement enterprises – one space per 300 square feet of gross floor area, plus one space for every two employees, or one space per three seats if theater; one bicycle space for each 20 percent of vehicular parking spaces.

(d) Animal sales and/or services:

(i) Auction – one space per 50 square feet of gross floor area.

(ii) Grooming – one space per 400 square feet of gross floor area.

(iii) Kennels – one space per employee.

(iv) Veterinary – one space per 300 square feet of gross floor area.

(e) Boat and/or marine equipment sales, service, storage, rental or repair – one space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, but not less than four spaces for each establishment.

(f) Boat moorage facility – one-half parking space per slip.

(g) Building maintenance service – one space for each 500 square feet of gross floor area, but not less than three spaces for each establishment.

(h) Bus/train stations/terminals – one space per each employee on the largest shift plus spaces for visitors and long term.

(i) Business equipment sales and service, business support services, communication services – one space per 350 square feet of gross floor area.

(j) Construction sales and services – one space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.



(k) Consumer repair services – one space per 500 square feet of gross floor area.

(l) Convenience sales and personal services – one space per 400 square feet of gross floor area, but not less than four spaces per each establishment.

(m) Eating and/or drinking establishments – one space per 50 square feet of establishment’s dining area plus one space for every two employees.

(n) Entertainment, adult – one space per two seats.

(o) Equipment (small) sales, rentals and repairs – one space per 500 square feet of gross floor area.

(p) Explosives storage – one space for every employee on the largest shift or one space for each 1,500 square feet, whichever is larger.

(q) Financial, insurance and real estate – one space per 350 square feet of gross floor area.

(r) Food and beverage retail sales – one space per 200 square feet of gross floor area, plus one space for every two employees.

(s) Funeral and interment services:

(i) Crematory and undertaking – one space per each four seats or eight feet of bench length or one space per 60 square feet where there are no fixed seats.

(ii) Interring and cemeteries – exempt.

(t) Gasoline stations – one space for each employee on the largest shift.

(u) General retail sales – one space for each 400 square feet of gross floor area, but not less than four spaces for each establishment.

(v) Houseboat – one space per slip/connection facility.

(w) Laundry service – one space per 500 square feet of gross floor area, but not less than three spaces for each establishment.

(x) Medical and dental service – one space per 200 square feet of gross floor area.

(y) Motor vehicle and equipment:

(i) Cleaning – one space per 500 square feet of gross floor area.

(ii) Fleet storage – one space per each employee on the largest shift or one space per 1,500 square feet, whichever is larger.

(iii) Repairs – heavy and light equipment – one space per 500 square feet of gross floor area, but not less than three spaces for each establishment.

(iv) Sales, rental – farm equipment, heavy and light equipment – one space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, but not less than four spaces for each establishment.

(v) Storage – nonoperating vehicles – one space for each employee on largest shift.

(vi) Storage – recreational vehicles and boats – one space for each employee on largest shift.

(vii) Boat, trailer and/or recreational vehicle equipment sales, service and repairs – one space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, but not less than four spaces for each establishment.

(z) Offices – one space for each 350 square feet of services gross floor space.

(aa) Participant sports and recreation:

(i) Indoor – one space per 300 square feet of gross floor area.

(ii) Outdoor – one space per 100 square feet, plus one space for every two employees.

(bb) Personal service facilities – one space per 500 square feet of gross floor area.

(cc) Produce sales – one space per 200 square feet of retail space with a minimum of four spaces per business.

(dd) Research services or laboratories – one space for each employee on the largest shift or one space per 500 square feet, whichever is larger.

(ee) Retail sales – bulky merchandise (e.g., furniture, appliances) – one space for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area but not less than 10 spaces for each establishment.

(ff) Scrap operations and recycling center – one space per each employee, but not less than five spaces for each establishment.

(gg) Shopping centers/plazas – based upon highest possible use.

(hh) Spectator sports and entertainment – one space per six seats or 12 feet of bench length.

(ii) Studios – one space per employee plus one space per 350 square feet for retail sales areas.

(jj) Transient lodging and associated uses – one space for each room plus one space for each two employees on largest shift:

(i) Restaurant/lounge – one space per 100 square feet of seating area.

(ii) Banquet/meeting rooms – one space per 200 square feet of seating area.

(kk) Travel trailer park – one and one-half spaces per trailer pad.

(4) Industrial.

(a) Auction sales, services and repairs – one space for each employee on the largest shift and one space per 1,000 square feet of show area.

(b) Hazardous waste collection/treatment, solid waste/trash transfer station – one space for each employee on the largest shift.

(c) Manufacturing, production, processing and assembling – one space per employee of the largest shift.

(d) Mini warehouse – one space for every 200 square feet of gross office floor area, plus two spaces for a caretaker residence.

(e) Natural mineral resource development – one space for each employee on the largest shift.

(f) Wholesaling, storage, and distribution – one space for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area within warehouse (plus one space per 700 square feet of patron serving area and one space per 200 square feet of office area).

(g) Wrecking yard – one space per employee on largest shift plus one space per 5,000 square feet of storage area. (Ord. 2875 § 1.114.030, 2003)


17.80.040 Modification to parking requirements.

The provisions of this section as to number of spaces may be modified by the approval authority as follows:

(1) Compact Car Spaces. Up to 40 percent of the required parking spaces may be compact spaces.

(2) Group Care Residential Facilities, Group Residential and Residential Homes. The approval authority may, upon request, allow a reduction in the number of required off-street parking spaces in housing developments for elderly or handicapped persons if such reduction is deemed appropriate after analysis of the size and location of the development, resident auto ownership, number of employees, and possible future conversion to other residential uses. Notice of the decision shall be given as provided by SHMC 17.24.120 and the decision may be appealed as provided by SHMC 17.24.310(1).

(3) Conversion of Existing Required Parking for Transit Supportive Facilities.

(a) Applicability. This allowance applies to all uses where a minimum amount of parking is required and where the site is located adjacent to a street with existing or planned transit service.

(b) Up to 10 percent of existing required parking spaces may be converted at a ratio of one parking space for each 100 square feet of transit facility.

(c) Required elements:

(i) A transit facility must be located adjacent to a street with transit service. The facility should be located between the building and front property line, within 20 feet of an existing transit stop.

(ii) A transit facility shall include a covered waiting or sitting area. (Ord. 2875 § 1.114.040, 2003)


17.80.050 Parking dimension standards.

(1) Accessibility. Each parking space shall be accessible from a street or right-of-way, and the access shall be of a width and location as described by SHMC 17.84.070 and 17.84.080.

(2) Table of Standards.

(a) Minimum standards for a standard parking stall’s length and width, aisle width, and maneuvering space shall be determined from the Table of Standards for Parking Spaces, Figure 14, below;

(b) The width of each parking space does not include a stripe which separates each space.

TABLE OF STANDARDS FOR PARKING SPACES Figure 14  

	A	B	C	D	E	F

	Parallel	8′0″	18.0	12.0	22.0	20.0

	20°	8′0″	13.6	11.0	23.4	24.6

	8′6″	14.1	11.0	24.9	25.1

	9′0″	14.6	11.0	26.3	25.6

	9′6″	15.1	11.0	27.8	26.1

	10′0″	15.5	11.0	29.2	26.5

	30°	8′0″	16.0	11.0	16.0	27.0

	8′6″	16.4	11.0	17.0	27.4

	9′0″	16.8	11.0	18.0	27.8

	9′6″	17.3	11.0	19.0	28.3

	10′0″	17.7	11.0	20.0	28.7

	45°	8′0″	18.4	14.0	11.3	32.4

	8′6″	18.7	13.5	12.0	32.2

	9′0″	19.1	13.0	12.7	32.1

	9′6″	19.4	13.0	13.4	32.4

	10′0″	19.8	13.0	14.1	32.8

	60°	8′0″	19.7	19.0	9.2	38.7

	8′6″	20.0	18.5	9.8	38.5

	9′0″	20.3	18.0	10.4	38.3

	9′5″	20.5	18.0	11.0	38.5

	10′0″	20.8	18.0	11.5	38.8

	70°	8′0″	19.8	20.0	8.5	39.8

	8′6″	20.1	19.5	9.0	39.6

	9′0″	20.4	19.0	9.6	39.4

	9′6″	20.6	18.5	10.1	39.1

	10′0″	20.9	18.0	10.6	38.9

	80°	8′0″	19.2	25.0	8.1	44.2

	8′6″	19.3	24.0	8.6	43.3

	9′0″	19.4	24.0	9.1	43.4

	9′6″	19.5	24.0	9.6	43.5

	10′0″	19.6	24.0	10.2	43.6

	90°	8′0″	18.0	26.0	8.0	44.0

	8′6″	18.0	25.0	8.5	43.0

	9′0″	18.0	24.0	9.0	42.0

	9′6″	18.0	24.0	9.5	42.0

	10′0″	18.0	24.0	10.0	42.0

	Compacts:

	45°	7′6″	16.0	11.0	10.5	27.0

	60°	7′6″	16.7	14.0	8.6	30.7

	75°	7′6″	16.8	17.4	7.8	32.2

	90°	7′6″	15.0	20.0	7.5	35.0

PARKING DIAGRAM
[IMAGE]


The above table provides the minimum dimensions of public or private parking areas, based on the diagram, where:

“A” equals the parking angle, 

“B” equals the clear stall width, 

“C” equals the minimum stall depth, 

“D” equals the minimum clear aisle width, 

“E” equals the stall distance at bay side, and 

“F” equals the minimum clear bay width. 

All parking facilities shall meet these minimum standards.

(3) Aisle Width. Aisles accommodating two-direction traffic, or allowing access from both ends shall be a minimum of 24 feet in width.

(4) Angle Parking. Angle parking is permitted in accordance with Figure 14.

(5) Structured Parking.

(a) Vehicle height clearance for structured parking must be at least seven and one-half feet for the entry level (to accommodate vans and vanpool parking) and six and three-fourths feet for all other levels;

(b) A warning bell or other signal must be provided for exits from parking structures that cross public sidewalks where a standard vision clearance area cannot be provided; and

(c) Required bicycle parking for uses served by a parking structure must provide for covered bicycle parking unless the structure will be more than 100 feet from the primary entrance to the building.

(6) Service Drive.

(a) Excluding single-dwelling units and duplex residences, except as provided by Chapter 17.84 SHMC and SHMC 17.152.030(16), groups of more than two parking spaces shall be served by a service drive so that no backing movements or other maneuvering within a street or other public right-of-way would be required; and

(b) Service drives shall be designed and constructed to facilitate the flow of traffic, provide maximum safety of traffic access and egress, and maximum safety of pedestrians and vehicular traffic on the site.

(7) Street Access. Each parking or loading space shall be accessible from a street and the access shall be of a width and location as described in this code.

(8) Parking Space Configuration. Parking space configuration, stall, and access aisle size shall be in accordance with the minimum standard.

(9) Parking Space Markings.

(a) Except for single-dwelling units and duplexes, any area intended to be used to meet the off-street parking requirements as contained in this chapter shall have all parking spaces clearly marked; and

(b) All interior drives and access aisles shall be clearly marked and signed to show direction of flow and maintain vehicular and pedestrian safety.

(10) Parking and Load Area Surface Requirements.

(a) Except for uses as authorized in subsections (10)(b) and (c) of this section, all areas used for the parking or storage or maneuvering of any vehicle, boat, or trailer shall be improved with asphalt or concrete surfaces or other similar type materials approved by the city.

(b) Nonresidential parking areas to be used primarily for nonpublic uses such as employee parking, business vehicles, and construction equipment may be gravel-surfaced when authorized by the approval authority at the time the site development approval is given. The director may require that the property owner enter into an agreement to pave the parking area: (1) within a specified period of time after establishment of the parking area; or (2) if there is a change in the types or weights of vehicles utilizing the parking area; or (3) if there is evidence of adverse effects upon adjacent roadways, watercourses, or properties. Such an agreement shall be executed as a condition of approval of the plan to establish the gravel parking area. Gravel-surfaced parking areas may only be permitted consistent with the following:

(i) Gravel parking areas shall not be permitted within 20 feet of any residentially zoned area;

(ii) Gravel parking areas shall not be allowed within 25 feet of any improved public right-of-way; 

(iii) A paved driveway of at least 25 feet in length shall connect a gravel parking area with any public street providing access to the gravel area; and

(iv) Gravel parking areas shall not be allowed within 50 feet of any significant wetland or riparian corridor.

(c) Parking areas to be used in conjunction with a temporary use may be gravel when authorized by the approval authority at the time the permit is approved. The approval authority shall consider the following in determining whether or not the gravel parking is warranted:

(i) The request for consideration to allow a parking area in conjunction with the temporary use shall be made in writing concurrently with the temporary use application;

(ii) The applicant shall provide documentation that the type of temporary use requested will not be financially viable if the parking space surface area requirement is imposed; and

(iii) Approval of the gravel parking area will not create adverse conditions affecting safe ingress and egress when combined with other uses of the property.

(d) Any area where harmful soil contamination could reasonably be expected shall be protected with appropriate surface cover and collection devices.

(11) Access Drives.

(a) Access drives from the street to off-street parking or loading areas shall be designed and constructed to facilitate the flow of traffic and provide maximum safety for pedestrian and vehicular traffic on the site;

(b) The number and size of access drives shall be in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 17.84 SHMC, Access, Egress, and Circulation;

(c) Access drives shall be clearly and permanently marked and defined through use of rails, fences, walls, or other barriers or markers on frontage not occupied by service drives;

(d) Access drives shall have a minimum vision clearance as provided in Chapter 17.76 SHMC, Visual Clearance Areas;

(e) Access drives shall normally be improved with an asphalt or concrete surface or other similar type material approved by the city; and

(f) Where more public harm would occur than good, the director can waive some hard surface requirements on access drives.

(12) Wheel Stops. Parking spaces along the boundaries of a parking lot or adjacent to interior landscaped areas or sidewalks shall be provided with a wheel stop at least four inches high located three feet back from the front of the parking stall. The front three feet of the parking stall may be concrete, asphalt or low-lying landscape material that does not exceed the height of the wheel stop. This area cannot be calculated to meet landscaping or sidewalk requirements.

(13) Drainage. Hard surface off-street parking and loading areas shall be drained in accordance with specifications approved by the city engineer to ensure that ponding does not occur:

(a) Except for single-dwelling units and duplexes, off-street parking and loading facilities shall be designed to avoid flow of water across public sidewalks.

(b) In most cases oil/water separators will be required as part of a parking lot drainage system.

(14) Lighting. Artificial lighting on all off-street parking facilities shall be designed to direct all light away from surrounding residences and so as not to create a hazard to the public use of any road or street.

(15) Signs. Signs which are placed on parking lots shall be as prescribed in Chapter 17.88 SHMC, Signs.

(16) Maintenance of Parking Areas. All parking lots shall be kept clean and in good repair at all times. Breaks in paved surfaces shall be repaired promptly and broken or splintered wheel stops shall be replaced so that their function will not be impaired.

(17) Grade Separation Protection. Where a parking area or other vehicle area has a drop-off grade separation, the property owner shall install a wall, railing, or other barrier which will prevent a slow-moving vehicle or driverless vehicle from escaping such area and which will prevent pedestrians from walking over drop-off edges. (Ord. 2875 § 1.114.050, 2003)


17.80.060 On-site vehicle stacking areas required for drive-in use.

(1) All uses providing drive-in services as defined by this code shall provide on the same site an area for inbound vehicles as follows:

	Use	Reservoir Requirement

	Automated teller machines	50 feet/service terminal

	Drive-in banks	150 feet/service terminal

	Drive-in restaurants (espresso, fast food)	200 feet

	Drive-in cleaners, repair services, pharmacies, etc.	50 feet

	Drive-in theaters	200 feet

	Drive-up telephones	50 feet

	Gasoline service	75 feet between curb cut and nearest pump

	Mechanical car washes	75 feet/washing unit

	Parking facilities:

Attendant parking

Free flow entry

Manual ticket dispensing

Ticket dispense entry	 

100 feet

25 feet/entry driveway

100 feet/entry driveway

50 feet/entry driveway

(2) The approval authority may, upon request, allow a reduction in the amount of vehicle stacking area if such a reduction is deemed appropriate after analysis of the size and location of the development, limited services available, etc.

(3) Stacking lanes must be designed so that they do not interfere with parking and vehicle, pedestrian and bicycle circulation. Stacking lanes for uses selling food must provide at least one clearly marked parking space per service window for the use of vehicles waiting for an order to be filled. (Ord. 2875 § 1.114.060, 2003)


17.80.065 Storage related to residential uses and use of recreational vehicles related to residential uses.

Boats, trailers, campers, camper bodies, travel trailers, recreation vehicles, or commercial vehicles in excess of three-fourths-ton capacity may be stored on a property in a residential zone or other property with a lawful residential use subject to the following:

(1) No such unit shall be parked in a visual clearance area of a corner lot or in the visual clearance area of a driveway which would obstruct vision from an adjacent driveway or street;

(2) No such unit, regardless of whether or not it is within a building, shall be used for any living purposes except that one camper, house trailer or recreational vehicle may be used for sleeping purposes only by friends, relatives, or visitors on land entirely owned by or leased to the host person for a period not to exceed 14 days in one calendar year; provided, that such unit shall not be connected to any utility, other than temporary electricity hookups; and provided, that the host person shall receive no compensation for such occupancy or use.

(a) This provision does not apply to lawful land uses that specially allow occupancy of a recreational vehicle, such as travel trailer parks per the Development Code or per ORS Chapter 197;

(3) Any such unit visible from a public right-of-way shall have current state license plates or registration and must be kept in mobile condition; and

(4) The property shall have a lawful principal use. (Ord. 3197 § 2 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 2875 § 1.114.065, 2003)


17.80.066 Use of recreational vehicles related to nonresidential uses.

Except where specifically allowed by the Development Code (e.g., travel trailer parks) and per ORS Chapter 197, use of recreational vehicles for any living purposes is prohibited on property with nonresidential zoning or without a lawful residential use. Parking or storage is possible given compliance with the St. Helens Municipal Code. (Ord. 3197 § 2 (Att. A), 2015)


17.80.070 Loading/unloading driveways required on site.

A driveway designed for continuous forward flow of passenger vehicles for the purpose of loading and unloading passengers shall be located on the site of any school or other meeting place which is designed to accommodate more than 25 people at one time. (Ord. 2875 § 1.114.070, 2003)


17.80.080 Off-street loading spaces.

Buildings or structures to be built or altered which receive and distribute material or merchandise by truck shall provide and maintain off-street loading and maneuvering space as follows:

(1) Every commercial or industrial use having floor area of 10,000 square feet or more shall have at least one off-street loading space on site; and

(2) If loading dock is proposed, it must meet the standards in SHMC 17.80.090, Off-street loading dimensions. (Ord. 2875 § 1.114.080, 2003)


17.80.090 Off-street loading dimensions.

(1) Each loading berth shall be approved by the city engineer as to design and location.

(2) Each loading space shall have sufficient area for turning and maneuvering of vehicles on the site, and:

(a) At a minimum, the maneuvering length shall not be less than twice the overall length of the longest vehicle using the facility site.

(3) Entrances and exits for the loading areas shall be provided at locations approved by the city engineer in accordance with Chapter 17.84 SHMC.

(4) Screening for off-street loading facilities is required and shall be the same as screening for parking lots in accordance with Chapter 17.72 SHMC. (Ord. 2875 § 1.114.090, 2003)


Chapter 17.84 ACCESS, EGRESS, AND CIRCULATION

Sections:

17.84.010    Purpose.

17.84.020    Applicability and general provisions.

17.84.025    Applicability of provisions.

17.84.030    Joint access and reciprocal access easements.

17.84.040    Public street access.

17.84.050    Required walkway location.

17.84.060    Inadequate or hazardous access.

17.84.070    Minimum requirements – Residential use.

17.84.080    Minimum requirements – Commercial and industrial use.

17.84.090    Width and location of curb cuts.

17.84.100    One-way vehicular access points.

17.84.110    Director’s authority to restrict access.

17.84.120    Variances to access standards.

17.84.130    Administration and approval process.

17.84.140    Expiration of approval – Standards for extension of time.

17.84.150    Approval standards.

17.84.160    Application submission requirements.


17.84.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards and regulations for safe and efficient vehicle access and egress on a site and for general circulation within the site. (Ord. 2875 § 1.116.010, 2003)


17.84.020 Applicability and general provisions.

(1) The requirements and standards of this chapter shall not apply where they conflict with the subdivision rules and standards of this code.

(2) The provisions and maintenance of access and egress stipulated in this code are continuing requirements for the use of any structure or parcel of real property in the city.

(3) No building or other permit shall be issued until scaled plans are presented and approved as provided by this chapter that show how access, egress, and circulation requirements are to be fulfilled.

(4) Should the owner or occupant of a lot or building change or enlarge the use to which the lot or building is put, thereby increasing access and egress requirements, it is unlawful and is a violation of this code to begin or maintain such altered use until the provisions of this chapter have been met if required or until the appropriate approval authority has approved the change. (Ord. 2875 § 1.116.020, 2003)


17.84.025 Applicability of provisions.

(1) The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all development including the construction of new structures, the remodeling of existing structures (see SHMC 17.96.020), and to a change of use which increases the on-site parking or loading requirements or which changes the access requirements.

(2) Where the provisions of Chapter 17.96 SHMC, Site Development Review, do not apply, the director shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny a plan submitted under the provisions of this chapter. No notice is required. The decision may be appealed as provided by Chapter 17.24 SHMC.

(3) The applicant shall submit a site plan which includes:

(a) The location of the structures on the property and on the adjoining property;

(b) The location of parking and loading areas and their dimensions;

(c) The location of the circulation area necessary to serve the spaces;

(d) The location of the access point(s) on the site and on the adjoining properties and on both sides of abutting streets within 200 feet of the subject site;

(e) The location of curb cuts on adjoining properties and on the subject site;

(f) The location and dimensions of all landscaping, including the type and size of plant material to be used, as well as any other landscape material incorporated into the overall plan;

(g) The proposed grading and drainage plans; and

(h) Specifications as to signs. (Ord. 2875 § 1.116.025, 2003)


17.84.030 Joint access and reciprocal access easements.

Owners of two or more uses, structures, or parcels of land may agree to utilize jointly the same access and egress when the combined access and egress of both uses, structures, or parcels of land satisfies the combined requirements as designated in this code, provided:

(1) Satisfactory legal evidence shall be presented in the form of deeds, easements, leases, or contracts to establish the joint use; and

(2) Copies of the deeds, easements, leases, or contracts are placed on permanent file with the city. (Ord. 3150 § 3 (Att. B), 2011; Ord. 2875 § 1.116.030, 2003)


17.84.040 Public street access.

(1) All vehicular access and egress as required in SHMC 17.84.070 and 17.84.080 shall connect directly with a public or private street approved by the city for public use and shall be maintained at the required standards on a continuous basis.

(2) Vehicular access to structures shall be provided to residential uses and shall be brought to within 50 feet of the ground floor entrance or the ground floor landing of a stairway, ramp, or elevator leading to the dwelling units.

(3) Vehicular access shall be provided to commercial or industrial uses, and shall be located to within 50 feet of the primary ground floor entrances. 

(4) Access to State Streets, Highways, and Interchanges. Access to a transportation facility under the jurisdiction of the Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT) shall be subject to the requirements of OAR 181.555 and OAR 734-051. ODOT’s current access spacing requirements for Highway 30 reflect the functional classification of Highway 30 as both a statewide highway and freight route. Table 17.84.040-1 illustrates the access spacing standards for public and private approaches along Highway 30 within St. Helens.

Table 17.84.040-1: Highway 30 Access Spacing Standards for Private and Public Approaches1

	Posted Speed (miles per hour)	Minimum Space Required *(feet)

	≤ 25	520

	30 and 35	720

	40 and 45	990

	50	1,100

	≥ 55	1,320

1    These access management spacing standards do not apply to approaches in existence prior to April 1, 2000, except as provided in OAR 734-051-0115(1)(c) and 734-051-0125(1)(c).

*    Measurement of the approach road spacing is from center to center on the same side of the roadway.

(5) Spacing Standards for Access to City Streets. The following are the minimum spacing requirements for access points and intersections for streets under the jurisdiction of the city of St. Helens.

Table 17.84.040-2: Access Spacing Standards on City Streets 

	Functional Classification	Public Street

(street-to-street) (feet)	Private Access Drive

(street-to-drive or drive-to drive) (feet)

	Local Street	150	501

	Collector	300	100

	Minor Arterial	350 or block length	200 or mid-block

	Major Arterial2	350 or block length	350 or block length

	1 This applies to street-to-drive spacing only. There is no minimum spacing standard for access points (drive-to-drive) on local streets.

	2 Access standards identified in the Oregon Highway Plan supersede this table on all state highways.

(6) Measuring Distance between Access Points. The distance between access points shall be measured from the centerline of the proposed driveway or roadway to the centerline of the nearest adjacent roadway or driveway.

(7) Development Fronting onto an Arterial Street.

(a) New residential land divisions fronting onto an arterial street shall be required to provide secondary (local or collector) streets for access to individual lots. When secondary streets cannot be constructed due to topographic or other physical constraints, access may be provided by consolidating driveways for clusters of two or more lots (e.g., includes flag lots and mid-block lanes).

(b) Nonresidential projects proposed on arterials shall include a frontage or service road and shall take access from the frontage or service road rather than the arterial. Frontage or service road design shall conform to applicable jurisdictional design standards. This access requirement may be met through the use of interconnecting parking lots that abut the arterial provided the necessary easements and agreements are obtained.

(8) Number of Access Points. For single-family (detached and attached) and duplex housing types, one street access point is permitted per lot, except that two access points may be permitted for duplexes on corner lots (i.e., no more than one access per street), subject to the access spacing standards in subsection (5) of this section. The number of street access points for multiple dwelling unit residential, commercial, industrial, and public/institutional developments shall be minimized to protect the function, safety and operation of the street(s) and sidewalk(s) for all users. Shared access may be required, in conformance with subsection (9) of this section, in order to maintain the required access spacing, and minimize the number of access points.

(9) Shared Driveways. The number of driveway and private street intersections with public streets shall be minimized by the use of shared driveways with adjoining lots where feasible. The city shall require shared driveways as a condition of land division or site development review, as applicable, for traffic safety and access management purposes in accordance with the following standards:

(a) Shared driveways and frontage streets may be required to consolidate access onto a collector or arterial street. When shared driveways or frontage streets are required, they shall be stubbed to adjacent developable parcels to indicate future extension. “Stub” means that a driveway or street temporarily ends at the property line, but may be extended in the future as the adjacent parcel develops. “Developable” means that a parcel is either vacant or it is likely to receive additional development (i.e., due to infill or redevelopment potential).

(b) Reciprocal access easements (i.e., for the benefit of affected properties) shall be recorded for all shared driveways, including pathways, at the time of final plat approval or as a condition of site development approval.

(c) Exception. Shared driveways are not required when existing development patterns or physical constraints (e.g., topography, parcel configuration, and similar conditions) prevent extending the street/driveway in the future. (Ord. 3181 § 4 (Att. C), 2015; Ord. 3150 § 3 (Att. B), 2011; Ord. 2875 § 1.116.040, 2003)


17.84.050 Required walkway location.

(1) Walkways shall extend from the ground floor entrances or from the ground floor landing of stairs, ramps, or elevators of all commercial, institutional, and industrial uses, to the streets which provide the required access and egress. Walkways shall provide convenient connections between buildings in multibuilding commercial, institutional, and industrial complexes. Walkways also shall provide access to existing and planned transit stops adjacent to the development site. Unless impractical, walkways should be constructed between a new development and neighboring developments.

(2) Within all attached housing and multifamily developments, each residential dwelling shall be connected by walkway to the vehicular parking area, and common open space and recreation facilities. 

(3) Where a site for proposed commercial, institutional, or multifamily development is located within at least one-quarter mile of an existing or planned transit stop, the proposed pedestrian circulation system must include a safe and direct pedestrian walkway from building entrances to the transit stop or to a public right-of-way that provides access to the transit stop.

(4) In parking lots one acre or larger, pedestrian walkways shall connect from buildings to sidewalks in the adjacent rights-of-way, and shall be provided at least every 150 feet between rows of parking.

(5) Wherever required walkways cross vehicle access driveways or parking lots, such crossings shall be designed and located for pedestrian safety. Required walkways shall be physically separated from motor vehicle traffic and parking by either a minimum six-inch vertical separation (curbed) or a minimum three-foot horizontal separation, except that pedestrian crossings of traffic aisles are permitted for distances no greater than 36 feet if appropriate landscaping, pavement markings, or contrasting pavement materials are used. Walkways shall be a minimum of four feet in width, exclusive of vehicle overhangs and obstructions such as mailboxes, benches, bicycle racks, and sign posts, and shall be in compliance with ADA standards.

(6) Required walkways shall be paved with hard-surfaced materials such as concrete, asphalt, stone, brick, etc. Walkways shall be required to be lighted and/or signed as needed for safety purposes. Soft-surfaced public use pathways may be provided only if such pathways are provided in addition to required pathways. (Ord. 3181 § 4 (Att. C), 2015; Ord. 3150 § 3 (Att. B), 2011; Ord. 3144 § 2 (Att. A), 2011; Ord. 2875 § 1.116.050, 2003)


17.84.060 Inadequate or hazardous access.

(1) Applications for building permits shall be referred to the commission for review when, in the opinion of the director, the access proposed:

(a) Would cause or increase existing hazardous traffic conditions; or

(b) Would provide inadequate access for emergency vehicles; or

(c) Would in any other way cause hazardous conditions to exist which would constitute a clear and present danger to the public health, safety, and general welfare.

(2) Direct individual access to minor arterial streets from single detached or attached dwelling units and duplexes shall be discouraged. Direct access to major arterial streets shall be considered only if there is no practical alternative way to access the site.

(3) In no case shall the design of the service drive or drives require or facilitate the backward movement or other maneuvering of a vehicle within a street, other than an alley or local street. (Ord. 2875 § 1.116.060, 2003)


17.84.070 Minimum requirements – Residential use.

(1) Vehicular access and egress for single-dwelling units, duplexes or attached single-dwelling units on individual lots, residential use, shall comply with the following:

RESIDENTIAL DWELLING USE Figure 15  

	Number Dwelling Units/Lot	Minimum Number of Driveways Required	Minimum/Maximum Access Width	Minimum Pavement Width

	1 or 2	1	15'/24'	10'

	3 to 6	1	24'/30'	20'

(2) Private residential access drives shall be provided and maintained in accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Fire Code.

(3) Access drives in excess of 150 feet in length shall be provided with approved provisions for the turning around of fire apparatus in accordance with the engineering standards of SHMC Title 18 and/or as approved by the fire marshal.

(4) Vehicle turnouts (providing a minimum total driveway width of 24 feet for a distance of at least 30 feet) may be required so as to reduce the need for excessive vehicular backing motions in situations where two vehicles traveling in opposite directions meet on driveways in excess of 200 feet in length.

(5) Where permitted, minimum width for driveway approaches to arterials or collector streets shall be no less than 20 feet so as to avoid traffic turning from the street having to wait for traffic exiting the site.

(6) Vehicular access and egress for multiple-dwelling unit uses shall comply with the following:

MULTIDWELLING UNIT USE Figure 16  

	Dwelling Units	Minimum Number of Driveways Required	Minimum/Maximum Access Required	Minimum Pavement Sidewalks, Etc.

	3 to 19	1	24'/30'	24' if two-way,

15' if one-way; curbs and 5' walkway required

	20 to 49	1 or 2	24'/30'	24' if two-way,

15' if one-way; curbs and 5' walkway required

	50 to 100	2	24'/30'	24' curbs and 5' walkway required

	over 100	2 plus 1 additional driveway to a public street for every 200 units or portion thereof in excess of 100 units	 	 

(Ord. 3150 § 3 (Att. B), 2011; Ord. 3144 § 2 (Att. A), 2011; Ord. 2875 § 1.116.070, 2003)


17.84.080 Minimum requirements – Commercial and industrial use.

(1) Vehicle access, egress and circulation for commercial and industrial use shall comply with the following:

COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL USE Figure 17  

	Required Parking Spaces	Minimum Number of Driveways Required	Minimum/Maximum Access Width	Minimum Pavement

	0 to 100	1	30'/40'	24' curbs required

	over 100	2	30'/40'	24' curbs required

	over 100	1	40'/50'	40' curbs required

(2) Additional requirements for truck traffic or traffic control may be placed as conditions of site development review or conditional use permit. (Ord. 3150 § 3 (Att. B), 2011; Ord. 2875 § 1.116.080, 2003)


17.84.090 Width and location of curb cuts.

Curb cuts shall be in accordance with SHMC 17.152.030(14). (Ord. 2875 § 1.116.090, 2003)


17.84.100 One-way vehicular access points.

Where a proposed parking facility indicates only one-way traffic flow on the site, it shall be accommodated by a specific driveway serving the facility; the entrance drive shall be situated closest to oncoming traffic and the exit drive shall be situated farthest from oncoming traffic. (Ord. 2875 § 1.116.100, 2003)


17.84.110 Director’s authority to restrict access.

(1) In order to provide for increased traffic movement on congested streets and to eliminate turning movement problems, the director may restrict the location of driveways on streets and require the location of driveways be placed on adjacent streets, upon the finding that the proposed access would:

(a) Cause or increase existing hazardous traffic conditions; or

(b) Provide inadequate access for emergency vehicles; or

(c) Cause hazardous conditions to exist which would constitute a clear and present danger to the public health, safety, and general welfare.

(2) In order to eliminate the need to use public streets for movements between commercial or industrial properties, parking areas shall be designed to connect with parking areas on adjacent properties unless not feasible. The director shall require access easements between properties where necessary to provide for parking area connections.

(3) In order to facilitate pedestrian and bicycle traffic, access and parking area plans shall provide efficient sidewalk and/or pathway connections, as feasible, between neighboring developments or land uses.

(4) A decision by the director may be appealed to the commission as provided by SHMC 17.24.310(1), Determination of appropriate reviewing body. (Ord. 2875 § 1.116.110, 2003)


17.84.120 Variances to access standards.

In all zoning districts where access and egress drives cannot be readily designed to conform to code standards within a particular parcel, access with an adjoining property shall be considered. If access in conjunction with another parcel cannot reasonably be achieved, the commission may grant a variance to the access requirements of this chapter based on the standards set forth in SHMC 17.84.150. This does not apply to highway access. (Ord. 3189 § 2 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 3150 § 3 (Att. B), 2011; Ord. 2875 § 1.116.120, 2003)


17.84.130 Administration and approval process.

(1) The applicant for an access variance shall be the recorded owner of the affected property or an agent authorized in writing by the owner.

(2) A preapplication conference with city staff is required. 

(3) Due to possible changes in state statutes, or regional or local policy, information given by staff to the applicant during the preapplication conference is valid for not more than six months:

(a) Another preapplication conference is required if an application is submitted six months after the preapplication conference; and

(b) Failure of the director to provide any of the information required by this chapter shall not constitute a waiver of the standards, criteria, or requirements of the applications.

(4) The commission shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny any application for an access variance. The commission shall apply the standards set forth in SHMC 17.84.150 when reviewing an application for an access variance.

(5) The decision of the commission may be appealed in accordance with SHMC 17.24.310(1). 

(6) The director shall mail notice of the decision to the persons who are entitled to notice in accordance with SHMC 17.24.120. (Ord. 3189 § 2 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 2875 § 1.116.130, 2003)


17.84.140 Expiration of approval – Standards for extension of time.

(1) An access variance approval by the commission shall lapse if: 

(a) Substantial construction of the approved plan has not begun within a one-and-one-half-year period; or

(b) Construction of the site is a departure from the approved plan.

(2) The director shall, upon written request by the applicant and payment of the required fee, grant an extension of the approval period not to exceed one year; provided, that:

(a) No changes are made on the original access variance plan as approved by the director;

(b) The applicant can show positive steps have been taken to initiate construction of the site within the one-year extension period; and

(c) There have been no substantial changes in the facts or applicable policies and ordinance provisions on which the approval was based.

(3) The decision of the director may be appealed as provided by SHMC 17.24.310(1). No notice of the director’s decision need be given. (Ord. 3189 § 2 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 2875 § 1.116.140, 2003)


17.84.150 Approval standards.

The commission may approve, approve with conditions, or deny a request for an access variance based on findings that: 

(1) It is not possible to share access;

(2) There are no other alternative access points on the street in question or from another street;

(3) The access separation requirements cannot be met;

(4) There are unique or special conditions that make strict application of the standards impractical;

(5) No engineering or construction solutions can be applied to mitigate the condition;

(6) The request is the minimum variance required to provide adequate access;

(7) The approved access or access approved with conditions will result in a safe access and will not result in the degradation of operational and safety integrity of the transportation system; 

(8) The visual clearance requirements of Chapter 17.76 SHMC will be met; and

(9) No variance shall be granted where such hardship is self-created. (Ord. 3189 § 2 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 3150 § 3 (Att. B), 2011; Ord. 2875 § 1.116.150, 2003)


17.84.160 Application submission requirements.

(1) All applications shall be made on forms provided by the director and shall be accompanied by:

(a) Copies of site plan(s) (number to be determined at the preapplication conference), and necessary data or narrative which explains how the access variance proposal conforms to the standards:

(i) The site plan(s) drawings shall be drawn on sheets preferably not exceeding 18 inches by 24 inches; and

(ii) The scale shall be an engineering scale.

(b) The required fee.

(2) The proposed access variance site plan shall include the following information:

(a) The section, township, range, and tax lot number;

(b) The relationship of the lot to the road system;

(c) The location of access points on adjoining lots and on the lots across the street;

(d) The location and setback of structures and parking areas on the lot and on the adjoining lots;

(e) The location of the proposed access;

(f) The sight distances from the proposed access point; and

(g) Other information as may be deemed necessary by the director to evaluate the request. (Ord. 2875 § 1.116.160, 2003)


Chapter 17.88 SIGNS

Sections:

17.88.010    Purpose.

17.88.015    Definitions.

17.88.020    General requirements.

17.88.025    Exempt signs.

17.88.030    Prohibited signs.

17.88.035    Nonconforming signs.

17.88.040    Exemptions from requirement for permit.

17.88.045    Temporary signs.

17.88.050    Sign districts – General.

17.88.055    Residential sign district.

17.88.060    Commercial/industrial sign district.

17.88.070    Architectural design review.

17.88.080    Measurements.

17.88.085    Projecting signs.

17.88.090    Wall signs.

17.88.095    Freestanding signs.

17.88.100    Awning signs.

17.88.105    Electronic message signs.

17.88.110    Comprehensive sign plan.

17.88.120    Construction and maintenance standards.

17.88.125    Illumination – General restrictions.

17.88.130    Sign permit application.

17.88.135    Adjustments.

17.88.140    Appeal of decision on sign permit or sign removal.

17.88.145    Inspections.

17.88.155    Removal of signs – General.

17.88.160    Removal of unsafe signs.

17.88.165    Removal of abandoned signs.

17.88.170    Removal of signs erected without a permit.

Prior legislation: Ord. 2875.


17.88.010 Purpose.

The purposes of this chapter are to protect the health, safety, property and welfare of the public, to provide a neat, clean, orderly and attractive appearance of the community, to improve the effectiveness of signs, to provide for safe construction, location, erection and maintenance of signs, to prevent proliferation of signs and sign clutter, to minimize adverse visual safety factors to travelers on public highways and streets and on private areas open to public travel, and to achieve this purpose consistent with state and federal constitutional limits on the regulation of speech. To achieve these purposes it is necessary to regulate the design, quality of materials, construction, location, electrification, illumination, and maintenance of signs that are visible from public property, public rights-of-way and private areas open to public travel. (Ord. 3091 § 2, 2008)


17.88.015 Definitions.

For the purposes of this chapter, unless the context indicates otherwise: words in the present tense include the future; the singular number includes the plural and the plural number includes the singular; undefined words have their ordinary accepted meaning; and the following words and phrases mean:

“Abandoned sign” means a sign or sign structure where:

(a) The sign is no longer used by the person who constructed the sign. Discontinuance of sign use may be shown by cessation of use of the property where the sign is located. “Discontinuance of use” will mean for a period of more than six months or whenever electricity use is discontinued for more than three months, whichever is first.

(b) The sign has been damaged, and repairs and restoration are not started within 90 days of the date the sign was damaged, or are not diligently pursued once started.

“A-frame sign” means a double-faced sign typically composed of two boards, being hinged at the top such that it will remain upright when placed on the ground, also known as “A-board sign” or “sandwich board sign.” For the purpose of this chapter, A-frame signs are either temporary signs or portable signs.

“Alter” means to make a change to a sign or sign structure, including, but not limited to, changes in area, height, projection, illumination, shape, materials, placement and location on a site. Altering a sign does not include ordinary maintenance or repair, repainting an existing sign surface, including changes of message or image, or exchanging the display panels of a sign.

“Athletic scoreboard” means a sign erected next to an athletic field by the owner or operator of the field and which is visible to spectators.

“Automobile service station” means a retail place of business engaged in the sale of motor fuels.

“Awning” means a shelter projecting from and supported by the exterior wall of a building constructed of rigid or nonrigid materials on a supporting framework.

“Balloon sign” means a sign consisting of a membrane that relies on internal gaseous pressure or a semi-rigid framework for maintaining its form.

“Banner” means a sign made of fabric or other nonrigid material with no enclosing framework.

“Bench sign” means a sign on an outdoor bench.

“Blanketing” means blocking a pedestrian’s or motorist’s view of a projecting sign by another projecting sign.

“Boundaries of a site” means the area inside the legal lot lines of a site, not including any property in a public right-of-way.

“Building elevation area” means the area of a single side of a building measured in square feet and calculated by multiplying the length of the side of the building by the height of the building to the roofline. If the roofline height varies along the side of the building, the average of the lowest and highest roofline height on that side shall be used in the calculation.

“Building frontage, primary” means the ground floor lineal length of a building wall that faces a street, driveway, parking lot, courtyard or plaza and has an entrance or exit open to the general public.

“Building frontage, secondary” means the ground floor lineal length of a building wall that faces a street, driveway, parking lot, courtyard or plaza and does not have an entrance or exit open to the general public.

“Building official” means the building official or his or her designee.

“Bulletin board” means a permanent sign providing information in a horizontal linear format, that can be changed either manually through placement of letters or symbols on tracks mounted on a panel, or electronically, through use of an array of lights in a dot matrix configuration, from which characters can be formed. If electronic, then the time intervals between messages cannot be less than five seconds.

“Canopy” means a permanent roofed structure which may be freestanding or attached to a building, but which is not a completely enclosed structure or awning.

“Clearance” means the distance between the average grade below a sign to the lowermost portion of the sign.

“Community event” means an activity or event identified as such by the city council.

“Electronic message sign” means a permanent sign providing information in both a horizontal and vertical format (as opposed to linear) sign copy, on which copy is created through use of a pattern of lights in a dot matrix configuration, which may be changed intermittently. Video signs are not included in this definition. Time intervals between messages or copy changes cannot be less than five seconds.

“Filing” means depositing a document in the United States mail, postage prepaid and accurately addressed to the city, or leaving a copy with the city recorder at City Hall during work hours. For purposes of this chapter, a document is filed on the date it is received at City Hall.

“Flag” means a rectangular piece of fabric of distinctive design that is displayed hanging free from a staff, halyard or building to which it is attached. A flag is often used to display the symbol of the United States, a nation, state, local government, business, organization or a person.

“Freestanding sign” means a sign that is not attached to a building and is erected on a frame connected to the ground. Ground-mounted, monument and pole signs are specific types of freestanding signs. A freestanding sign does not include a portable sign.

Grade. For freestanding signs, “grade” is the average level of the ground measured 10 feet from either end of the base of the sign, parallel to the sign face(s). For signs mounted on buildings, the grade is the average level of the sidewalk, alley or ground below the mounted sign measured five feet from either end of the sign face(s).

“Ground-mounted sign” means a freestanding sign with a minimum of 12 inches of vertical solid base directly and continuously connected to at least 50 percent of the sign face width or is borne by two or more supports which are a minimum of 12 inches but less than eight feet above grade.

“Handheld sign” means a hand-carried sign of six square feet or less in area, worn or carried by a person when being displayed.

“Height” means the vertical distance measured from grade to the highest attached component of a sign including the supporting structure.

“Historical or landmark marker” means a sign constructed in close proximity to a historic place, object, building, or other landmark recognized by an official historical resources entity, where the sign does not exceed 20 square feet in size.

“Historical sign” means a sign designated as a historic or cultural resource under city, state or federal law.

“Illuminated sign” means a sign illuminated by an internal light source or an external light source primarily designed to illuminate the sign. The illumination is “external” when the light source is separate from the sign and is directed to shine upon the sign and “internal” when the light source emanates from the sign. External illumination is “direct” when the source of light is directly seen by the public, such as a floodlight, and “indirect” when the source of light is not directly seen by the public, such as cove lighting.

“Interior sign” means a sign erected and maintained inside of a building, including, but not limited to, a sign attached to or painted on the inside of windows. This definition does not include text, pictures, graphics, or similar representations in display windows.

“Maintenance” means normal care or servicing needed to keep a sign functional or perpetuate its use, such as cleaning, replacing or repairing a part made unusable by ordinary wear, and changing light bulbs.

“Marquee” means any hood, canopy, awning or permanent construction which projects from a wall of a building, usually above an entrance.

“Menu board” means a sign placed at the beginning of a drive-up service lane of a food service establishment that includes a two-way speaker system for taking food orders.

“Monument sign” means a sign that has a solid supporting base equal or greater than the width of the sign face, generally made of stone, masonry, or concrete, with no separations between the sign and base.

“Name plate” means a permanent wall sign located on the front facade of a residential structure.

“Neon sign” means a sign internally illuminated by a light source consisting of neon or other gas contained in a tube, except for fluorescent lights.

“Nonconforming sign” means a sign that was lawful when it was constructed but does not currently meet the requirements of this code.

“Numeric information sign” means a sign only displaying current numeric measurements such as time, date, temperature, or stock indices.

“Owner” means the person owning title to real property on which a sign is located, or the contract purchaser of the real property as shown on the last available complete assessment roll in the office of county assessor. “Owner” also includes the owner of a sign who has a continuing lease of the real property on which the sign is located.

“Pennant” means a sign device made from a strip of flexible material intended to wave in the wind.

“Pole sign” means a sign that is a freestanding sign connected to the ground by one or more supports with the lower edge of the sign device separated vertically from the ground by a distance of nine feet or greater as measured from grade.

“Portable sign” means a sign which is not permanently affixed to a building, structure, or the ground and designed to be moved from place to place.

“Projecting sign” means a building-mounted sign that projects beyond the building more than 12 inches and is not located on a canopy, awning, or marquee.

“Public sign” means a sign constructed or placed within the public right-of-way by or with the approval of the governmental agency having authority over, control of, or ownership of the right-of-way or a sign constructed or placed by a public utility on or adjacent to a pole, pipe, or distribution facility of the utility and within the public right-of-way.

“Repair” means mending or replacing broken or worn parts with comparable materials.

“Roof elevation area” means the area of a single plane of a roof, measured in square feet and calculated by multiplying the difference between the height of the ridge and the height of the eave by the distance between opposing rakes.

“Roof line” means the top edge of a roof or a building parapet, whichever is higher, excluding any cupolas, chimneys or other minor projections.

“Roof sign” means a sign erected upon, against, or over the roof of any building or structure.

“Seasonal decorations” means every type of decoration displayed during and around a federally recognized holiday or on a seasonal basis, whether illuminated or not and whether attached to utility poles, buildings or any other structure.

“Setback” means the horizontal distance from the property line to the sign, measured at the closest points of the sign to the property line.

“Sign” means any writing, video projection, pictorial representation, illustration, decoration (including any material used to differentiate sign copy from its background), emblem, symbol, design, trademark, banner, flag, pennant, captive balloon, streamer, spinner, ribbon, sculpture, statue, or any other figure or character that:

(a) Is a structure or any part thereof (including the roof or wall of a building); or

(b) Is written, printed, projected, painted, constructed, transmitted or otherwise placed or displayed upon or designed into a structure or an outdoor screen or monitor, or a board, plate, canopy, awning, marquee, or a vehicle, or upon any material object or device whatsoever; and

(c) By reason of its form, color, wording, symbol, design, or illumination, attracts or is designed to attract attention and communicate a message. Graphics, murals and artwork that do not communicate informational messages, apart from any aesthetic or artistic message, are not signs. It is a disputable presumption that a graphic, mural or artwork that depicts or relates to the use of a site or structure on which it is displayed is intended to communicate an informational message about the site or structure.

“Sign area” means the area of the sign measured within lines drawn between the outermost points of a sign, but excluding essential sign structure, foundations, or supports.

“Sign copy” means the message or image conveyed by a sign.

“Sign face” means the sum of the surfaces of a sign face as seen from one plane or elevation included within the outer dimensions of the sign board, frame or cabinet.

“Sign height” means the average level of the grade below the sign to the topmost point of the sign including the supporting sign structure, foundations, and supports.

“Site” means the area, tract, parcel, or lot of land owned by or under the lawful control of an owner. Abutting platted lots under the same ownership shall be considered one site.

“Street frontage” means the length or width of a site, measured along a line separating the site from a street or public right-of-way.

“Supporting structure” means a structure specifically intended for supporting or containing a sign.

“Suspended sign” means a sign which is attached to the underside of a canopy or awning, and is supported by the canopy or awning.

“Temporary sign” means a sign that is not permanently attached to a building, structure, or the ground and that is intended to remain in use for no more than a short time.

“Tri-vision sign” means a sign that contains display surfaces composed of a series of three-sided rotating slats arranged side by side, either horizontally or vertically, that are rotated by an electro-mechanical process, capable of displaying a total of no more than three separate and distinct messages, one message at a time; provided, that the rotation from one message to another message is no more frequent than every eight seconds and the actual rotation process is accomplished in four seconds or less.

“Vehicle sign” means a nonilluminated sign permanently or temporarily placed on or attached to the exterior of a motor vehicle, trailer, railroad car, or light rail car that is used in the regular course of business for purposes other than the display of signs.

“Video sign” means a sign providing information in both a horizontal and vertical format (as opposed to linear), through use of pixel and sub-pixel technology having the capacity to create continuously changing sign copy in a full spectrum of colors and light intensities.

“Vision clearance area” means a triangular area on a lot at the intersection of two streets or a street and a railroad, alley, or driveway as defined and measured in this code.

“Wall sign” means a sign that is attached to and extends no more than 12 inches from a wall, or is painted on a wall of a building.

“Window sign” means a sign attached to, placed upon, or painted on a window or door of a building that is viewable from the outside of the building. (Ord. 3164 § 3 (Att. B), 2012; Ord. 3091 § 2, 2008)


17.88.020 General requirements.

(1) Except as provided in SHMC 17.88.025, no person shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use or maintain any sign, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this code.

(2) Except as provided in SHMC 17.88.025, no person shall erect, construct or alter a sign, or permit the same to be done, unless a sign permit has been issued by the city. A sign permit for the construction and continued use of a sign is subject to the terms and conditions stated in the permit and this code.

(3) An application for sign permit approval is also subject to the procedures set forth in SHMC 17.88.130.

(4) No owner shall erect or construct a sign on a site that contains unlawful signs.

(5) This chapter shall not be construed to permit the erection or maintenance of any sign at any place or in any manner unlawful under any other city code provision or other applicable law. In any case where a part of this chapter conflicts with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance or code, the provision which establishes a stricter standard for the protection of the public health and safety shall prevail.

(6) This chapter is not intended to and does not restrict speech on the basis of its content, viewpoint or message. Any classification of signs in this chapter that permits speech by reason of the type of sign, identity of the sign user or otherwise shall permit any type of speech on the sign. No part of this chapter shall be construed to favor commercial speech over noncommercial speech. To the extent any provision of this chapter is ambiguous, the term shall be interpreted to not regulate on the basis of speech content, and the interpretation resulting in the least restriction on the content of the sign message shall prevail.

(7) If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is declared invalid for any reason by a court having jurisdiction under state or federal law, the remaining portions of this chapter shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 3091 § 2, 2008)


17.88.025 Exempt signs.

Except for signs prohibited by this chapter, the following signs are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:

(1) All signs which are placed inside a structure or building, and which are either not visible through windows or building openings, or are not intended to be visible from outside of the structure or building.

(2) Signs required by law, administrative order or judicial order and erected by public employees performing official duties. (Ord. 3091 § 2, 2008)


17.88.030 Prohibited signs.

Except for nonconforming signs, the following signs are unlawful and are nuisances:

(1) Abandoned signs.

(2) Any sign constructed, maintained or altered in a manner not in compliance with this chapter.

(3) Any nonpublic sign constructed or maintained which, by reason of its size, location, movement, coloring or manner of illumination, may be confused with or construed as a traffic control device or which hides from view any traffic control device that impedes the intended purpose of the device.

(4) Any sign constructed in such a manner or at such a location that it will obstruct access to any fire escape or other means of ingress or egress from a building or an exit corridor, exit hallway or exit doorway. No sign or supporting structure shall cover, wholly or partially, any window or doorway in any manner that it will substantially limit access to the building in case of fire.

(5) Any sign located in a manner which could impede traffic on any street, alley, sidewalk, bikeway or other pedestrian or vehicular travel way.

(6) Any sign equipped with moving, rotating or otherwise animated parts, except for athletic scoreboards.

(7) Any sign that is wholly or partially illuminated by a flashing or intermittent light, lights, lamps, bulbs, or tubes. Rotary beacon lights, zip lights, strobe lights, or similar devices shall not be erected or maintained, or attached to or incorporated in any sign.

(8) Any sign attached to a tree or a plant, a fence or a utility pole, except as otherwise allowed by this chapter.

(9) Any sign within or over any public right-of-way, or located on private property less than two feet from any area subject to vehicular travel, except for:

(a) Public signs.

(b) Temporary signs specifically allowed within the public right-of-way under SHMC 17.88.045.

(10) Temporary signs, including banners, pennants, wind signs, and flags, except as otherwise authorized by SHMC 17.88.040 or 17.88.045. (Ord. 3091 § 2, 2008)


17.88.035 Nonconforming signs.

(1) Nonconforming signs may continue to exist, subject to the following provisions:

(a) No additions or enlargements may be made to a nonconforming sign except those additions or enlargements that are required by law.

(b) A sign that is moved, replaced, or structurally altered shall be brought into conformance with this chapter, except that:

(i) Nonconforming signs may be repaired and maintained and may have the sign copy changed. A sign may be removed from its sign structure for repair or maintenance if a permit is obtained under this chapter.

(ii) Nonconforming signs may be structurally altered when the alteration is necessary for structural safety.

(iii) Nonconforming signs may be reconstructed if required to be moved for construction or repair of public works or public utilities and the sign reconstruction is completed within 90 days after the completion of the public works or public utility construction or repair.

(c) A nonconforming sign that is damaged (such as, but not limited to, wind, accident, and lightning) shall not be repaired if the estimated expense to repair the sign exceeds 60 percent of the replacement cost of the sign as of the day before the sign was damaged. A damaged nonconforming sign that cannot be repaired shall be removed within 90 days of the date the sign was damaged. As used herein, “nonconforming sign” includes the sign structure, foundation and supports.

(d) Whenever a nonconforming sign is damaged and the estimated cost to repair the sign is 60 percent or less of its replacement value as of the day before the sign was damaged, it may be repaired and restored to the condition it was in before it was damaged and may continue to be used as a nonconforming sign; provided, that such repairs and restoration are started within 90 days of the date the sign was damaged and are diligently pursued thereafter.

(e) Whenever repairs and restoration of a damaged nonconforming sign are not started within 90 days of the date the sign was damaged or are not diligently pursued once started, the sign shall be deemed abandoned.

(f) Abandoned signs shall not be permitted as nonconforming signs.

(g) No nonconforming sign shall be permitted to remain unless properly repaired and maintained as provided in this chapter. A sign maintained in violation of this provision shall be removed as provided in this chapter. Any nonconforming sign that is determined by the building official to be an unsafe sign shall be removed as provided by this chapter. Any nonconforming sign determined by the planning director to be an abandoned sign shall be removed as provided by this chapter.

(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the maintenance of any sign, or regular manual changes of sign copy on a sign. (Ord. 3091 § 2, 2008)


17.88.040 Exemptions from requirement for permit.

The following signs are allowed in all sign districts without a permit. Use of these signs does not affect the amount or type of signage otherwise allowed by this chapter. The painting, repainting, cleaning, maintenance and repair of an existing sign shall not require a permit, unless a substantial structural alteration is made. The changing of a sign copy or message shall not require a permit. All signs listed in this section are subject to all other applicable requirements of this code.

(1) Signs (including name plates, and dates of erection of buildings) on multifamily residential, commercial, industrial, or institutional buildings when the sign is cut into the surface or the facade of a building, or when it is constructed of stone, masonry, bronze or other noncombustible material and projects no more than two inches from a building, so long as the cumulative sign face(s) are eight square feet or less in area.

(2) One indirectly illuminated or nonilluminated sign not exceeding one and one-half square feet in area placed on any nonmultifamily residential lot. This type of sign is typically used as a name plate.

(3) Flags. 

(a) Residential freestanding poles shall be limited to one per property and shall require a building permit if:

(i) The pole will be greater than 20 feet in height; or

(ii) The pole is located such that it could fall off site (i.e., the setback is less than the height of the pole).

(b) Nonresidential freestanding poles shall require a building permit regardless of height, and shall require the applicable land use permit(s) if greater than 30 feet in height.

(4) Vehicle signs.

(5) Signs displayed upon a bus or light rail vehicle owned by a public transit district.

(6) Historical sign or historical or landmark markers (as determined by city ordinance).

(7) Seasonal decorations on private property.

(8) Handheld signs.

(9) Any public notice required by federal, state or local law, regulation or ordinance, or a sign within the public right-of-way that is erected by a governmental agency, utility or contractor doing authorized work within the right-of-way.

(10) A warning sign that does not exceed eight square feet in area and six feet in height, is not erected in a vision clearance area, and is erected on property where there is a danger to the public or to which public access is prohibited.

(11) Nonilluminated interior signs in nonresidential sign districts designed primarily to be viewed from a sidewalk or street, provided the sign does not obscure more than 25 percent of any individual window.

(12) Illuminated interior signs in nonresidential sign districts designed primarily to be viewed from a sidewalk or street, provided the sign face is less than four square feet in area.

(13) One suspended sign for each principal use erected on property which is not considered public right-of-way, under an attached first floor awning or canopy upon a building with direct exterior pedestrian access, provided the sign does not exceed six square feet in area and has a minimum of eight feet of clearance.

(14) An exterior sign erected next to an entrance, exit, rest room, office door, or telephone, provided the sign is no more than four square feet in area. This type of sign is typically used to identify and locate a property feature.

(15) Signs located within a sports stadium or athletic field or other outdoor assembly area which are intended for viewing by persons within the facility. The signs shall be placed so as to be oriented towards the interior of the field and the viewing stands.

(16) Signs incorporated into vending machines or motor fuel pumps.

(17) Temporary signs as allowed in this chapter.

(18) Public signs.

(19) Use of banner signs in residential sign districts per SHMC 17.88.055(1)(f)(i) and (ii) and in commercial/industrial sign districts per SHMC 17.88.060(1)(g)(i) may be allowed without a permit and does not contribute to the maximum time banner signs are allowed within the following time periods:

(a) Presidents’ Day (February): 14 days prior to one day after;

(b) Easter (April): 14 days prior to one day after;

(c) Memorial Day (May): 14 days prior to one day after;

(d) July 4th (July): 14 days prior to one day after;

(e) Labor Day (September): 14 days prior to one day after;

(f) November: all of November; and

(g) December: all of December to January 1st. (Ord. 3164 § 3 (Att. B), 2012; Ord. 3144 § 2 (Att. A), 2011; Ord. 3091 § 2, 2008)


17.88.045 Temporary signs.

(1) Temporary signs may be erected and maintained in the city only in compliance with the regulations in this chapter, and with the following specific provisions:

(a) Except as approved in connection with a community event, no temporary sign shall be internally illuminated or be illuminated by an external light source primarily intended for the illumination of the temporary sign.

(b) Temporary signs shall be kept neat, clean and in good repair. Signs which are faded, torn, damaged or otherwise unsightly or in a state of disrepair shall be immediately repaired or removed. A temporary sign shall be attached to the site or constructed in a manner that both prevents the sign from being easily moved or blown from its location and allows for the easy removal of the sign.

(c) Except as provided in this code, temporary signs shall not be attached to trees, shrubbery, utility poles or traffic control signs or devices. Temporary signs shall not obscure or obstruct signs on adjacent premises.

(d) No temporary sign shall be erected or maintained which, by reason of its size, location or construction, constitutes a hazard to the public.

(2) In any residential sign district pursuant to SHMC 17.88.050, the following temporary signs shall be allowed on a lot without issuance of a permit and shall not affect the amount or type of signage otherwise allowed by this chapter. This signage shall not be restricted by content, but is usually and customarily used to advertise real estate sales, political or ideological positions, garage sales, home construction or remodeling and similar activities. Signage shall be allowed for each lot as follows:

(a) Signs not exceeding 32 square feet in area or eight feet in height during the period from 120 days before a public election or the time the election is called, whichever is earlier, to five days after the public election.

(b) One temporary sign not exceeding six square feet in area and four feet in height which is erected for a maximum of eight days in any calendar month and is removed by sunset on any day it is erected.

(c) A post-style sign not exceeding six square feet in area and five feet in height, or a hanging-style sign not exceeding six square feet in area and six feet in height, during the time of sale, lease or rental of the property; provided, that the sign is removed within 15 days of the sale, lease or rental of the property, and a sign not exceeding six square feet in area during the time of construction or remodeling of the property, provided the sign is removed within seven days of the completion of any construction or remodeling. An additional sign of the same size may be erected if the property borders a second street and the signs are not visible simultaneously. On lots of more than two acres the sign area may be increased to 32 square feet. In no case shall the sign or signs be erected for more than 12 months.

(d) On property which has received subdivision or development approval from the city, from that approval until issuance of a building permit for the last lot to be sold or completion of the development project, one temporary sign not exceeding 32 square feet in area and eight feet in height on properties less than four acres in size or two temporary signs not exceeding 64 square feet in area each and eight feet in height on properties greater than four acres in size.

(3) In any commercial/industrial sign district pursuant to SHMC 17.88.050, the following temporary signs shall be allowed on a lot without issuance of a permit and shall not affect the amount or type of signage otherwise allowed by this chapter. This signage shall not be restricted by content, but is usually and customarily used to advertise real estate sales, political or ideological positions, construction or remodeling, special events and similar activities. Signage shall be allowed for each lot as follows:

(a) Signs not exceeding 32 square feet in area and eight feet in height, during the period from 120 days before a public election or the time the election is called, whichever is earlier, to five days after the public election.

(b) A sign not exceeding 32 square feet in area and eight feet in height during the time of sale, lease or rental of the property; provided, that the sign is placed on the property for sale, lease, or rental and removed within 15 days of the sale, lease or rental of the property, or a sign not exceeding 32 square feet in area and eight feet in height during the time of construction and remodeling of the property, provided the sign is placed on the property where construction and remodeling is taking place and removed within seven days of the completion of any construction or remodeling. An additional sign of the same size may be erected if the property borders a second street and the signs are not visible simultaneously. In no case shall the sign or signs be erected for more than 12 months.

(c) A sign not exceeding 32 square feet in area during the period of a charitable fundraising event being conducted on the property where the sign is erected by a charitable or nonprofit organization. This sign shall not be placed more than seven days prior to the event and must be removed within two days following the event.

(4) Temporary signs for community events (authorized by a temporary use permit per Chapter 17.116 SHMC or acknowledged by the city council) shall be allowed without the issuance of permits and shall not affect the amount or type of signage otherwise allowed by this chapter; provided, that said signs comply with the following:

(a) Signs shall only be placed on property where the community event is taking place, including rights-of-way subject to street closure for the purpose of the community event, except additional signs may be placed in rights-of-way for the exclusive purpose of identifying the community event and/or directing people to the community event provided such signage complies with subsections (5)(a)(ii)(A), (C), (D), (E) and (G) of this section; and

(b) Signs shall be allowed two weeks before and for the duration of the community event only. Signs shall be removed no more than 72 hours after the event.

(5) No temporary signs or banners shall be allowed in the public right-of-way or on public property, except for those listed in this subsection or pursuant to subsection (4) of this section.

(a) The following temporary signs shall be permitted in the right-of-way without issuance of a permit and shall not affect the amount or type of signage otherwise allowed by this chapter. No temporary sign in the right-of-way shall interrupt the normal flow of vehicle, pedestrian or bicycle traffic and shall provide a minimum of five feet of clear passage for pedestrians on a sidewalk where a sidewalk exists. No temporary sign shall extend into a vision clearance area. Temporary signs allowed in the right-of-way shall include:

(i) Signs owned or erected by a governmental entity.

(ii) Portable signs (such as A-frame signs) along the street frontage(s) of uses in commercial zones or adjacent to legally established commercial uses in other zoning districts which comply with the following standards:

(A) If a sidewalk and/or curb exists, temporary sign(s) shall be placed behind the sidewalk or curb.

(B) Any temporary sign is present only during the business hours of the responsible enterprise.

(C) Any temporary sign placed elsewhere than directly adjacent to the primary use shall be placed only with the consent of the property owner of the adjacent property. 

(D) No sign can interfere with ADA requirements or normal pedestrian or vehicle use of a right-of-way.

(E) Any lights incorporated with the temporary sign shall be prohibited. 

(F) Only one sign shall be allowed per principal use.

(G) A-frame signs shall not exceed six square feet in area and four feet in height. 

(iii) Portable signs limited to a maximum of six square feet in area and three feet in height, displayed only on weekends and holidays, placed at street intersections in relative close proximity to a property for sale or lease during the time of that display. One single sign for each property or development shall be permitted at each intersection and shall be positioned as to be no closer than two feet from areas subject to vehicular travel.

(iv) Bench signs so long as the bench sign copy does not exceed 15 square feet and the bench sign is approved by the owner.

(b) Temporary banners or seasonal decorations which extend over a street or are attached to utility or streetlight poles shall be permitted in the right-of-way upon issuance of a permit in accordance with the procedures set out in this chapter and shall comply with the following standards:

(i) Banners or decorations which extend over a street shall not exceed 36 square feet per face with the total sign area not to exceed 72 square feet, except that banners which are attached to only a single utility or streetlight pole shall not exceed six square feet per face with a total sign area not to exceed 12 square feet.

(ii) Temporary banners or decorations shall be permitted only if the applicant is conducting an event or activity in the city of St. Helens that has been identified as a community event by the St. Helens city council or for purposes of identifying a geographic area or district of the city. Applications for geographic identification banners shall be submitted by an organized neighborhood association, or shall be accompanied by a petition indicating the consent of at least 51 percent of the property owners or retail establishments in the geographic area delineated on the banner application.

(iii) Applicants requesting permits for temporary banners or decorations in city of St. Helens rights-of-way shall obtain all permits and approvals as required prior to submittal of an application for a sign permit. Applicants requesting temporary banners placed over rights-of-way controlled by other agencies other than the city of St. Helens shall obtain written consent from the appropriate agency regarding the proposed banner(s) prior to submittal of an application for a sign permit. The consent shall identify any restrictions desired by the owner or the agency in control of the right-of-way.

(iv) Except for a banner(s) identifying a geographic area or district of the city, banner(s) shall be installed no earlier than 20 days before the onset of the applicant’s event or activity and shall be removed within two days of completion of the applicant’s event or activity giving rise to the permit. (Ord. 3164 § 3 (Att. B), 2012; Ord. 3144 § 2 (Att. A), 2011; Ord. 3091 § 2, 2008)


17.88.050 Sign districts – General.

(1) The following sign districts are created and applied to designated land. No permit shall be issued for any sign unless specifically allowed as an allowed sign under the terms of the applicable sign district or otherwise allowed as a nonconforming sign under this chapter or exempted under this chapter. Any particular limitation in a sign district regulation shall not be construed to exclude the applicability of other restrictions imposed under this chapter.

(2) The sign districts shall be as follows:

(a) The residential sign district includes all land within the R-10, R-7, R-5, AR, and MHR zoning districts, and pursuant to subsections (2)(c) and (d) of this section.

(b) The commercial/industrial sign district includes all land within the HC, GC, MC, HI, and LI zoning districts, and pursuant to subsections (2)(c) and (d) of this section.

(c) For mixed use zoning districts such as the MU, HBD and RD zoning districts, the following shall apply:

(i) The residential sign district shall include those properties where residential use is greater than 50 percent by gross property area and the commercial/industrial sign district shall include those properties where residential use is equal to or less than 50 percent by gross property area; or

(ii) For properties with multistory and multi-use buildings, sign districts shall include a vertical element such that each story of said building shall be based on its use as determined by subsection (2)(c)(i) of this section for any sign placed on the building, and the grounds (i.e., area of property with no building) of said property shall be based on the use as determined by subsection (2)(c)(i) of this section of the property at street level.

(d) Signs in other zones not otherwise mentioned in subsection (2)(a), (b), or (c) of this section shall be treated under the same rules as the abutting sign district closest to the sign.

(3) Property within a rezoned area shall be governed by the provisions of the sign code applicable to the new zoning district upon the effective date of the ordinance amending the zoning map. Completed applications for sign permits made before the effective date of the zone change will be considered under the provisions of this code applicable to the zoning district existing at the time the application was completed. All signs which are not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter applicable to the newly established zoning district shall be considered nonconforming signs. (Ord. 3180 § 1 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 3144 § 2 (Att. A), 2011; Ord. 3091 § 2, 2008)


17.88.055 Residential sign district.

In addition to the temporary and permanent signage allowed without permits, the following signage is allowed subject to the requirements of this chapter:

(1) Permitted Sign Types, Number and Area. Signs within the residential sign district are limited as follows and require issuance of permits under SHMC 17.88.130:

(a) Monument and Ground-Mounted Signs.

(i) In multidwelling developments, one double-faced monument sign, or not more than two single-faced monument signs on either side of each vehicular entrance, shall be permitted. Sign area shall not exceed 16 square feet for each sign face.

(ii) In subdivisions, not more than two single-faced monument signs for a subdivision or planned unit development having 20 or more lots may be permitted on either side of each public right-of-way or private street tract entrance. Sign area shall not exceed 16 square feet for each sign face.

(iii) For churches, schools, public/semi-public facilities, and privately owned community centers, one single- or double-faced monument sign shall be permitted for each such facility. Where such a facility has multiple street frontages, this signage may be permitted on each frontage. Sign area shall not exceed 16 square feet for each sign face.

(iv) For conforming commercial uses in residential districts, one single- or double-faced monument sign shall be permitted on the primary frontage of the development. In lieu of one monument sign, one single- or double-faced ground-mounted sign shall be permitted on the primary frontage of developments which contain five or more principal uses in one structure. Where a development has multiple street frontages, this signage may be permitted on each building frontage that abuts a TSP designated arterial or collector street. Sign area shall not exceed 30 square feet for each sign face.

(b) Bulletin Boards.

(i) For schools, churches, public and semi-public facilities, and privately owned community centers, one single- or double-faced bulletin board may be incorporated into an approved monument sign. If a monument sign will incorporate a bulletin board, sign area may be up to a maximum of 24 square feet for each sign face and the bulletin board portion of the sign may make up a maximum of two-thirds of the total sign face. 

(ii) For conforming commercial uses in residential districts, one single- or double-faced bulletin board per site may be incorporated into an approved monument or ground-mounted sign. The bulletin board portion of the sign may make up a maximum of two-thirds of the total sign face.

(c) Wall Signs.

(i) For conforming commercial uses permitted in residential districts, one wall sign for each tenant occupancy shall be permitted. Sign area for all wall signs shall not exceed eight percent of the building elevation area, with a maximum individual sign face area of 50 square feet on primary frontages. Sign area for all wall signs shall not exceed six percent of the building elevation area on secondary frontages, with a maximum individual sign face area of 25 square feet.

(ii) For churches, schools, and public/semi-public facilities, one wall sign for each building frontage shall be permitted. Sign area for all wall signs shall not exceed eight percent of the building elevation area with a maximum individual sign face area of 50 square feet on primary frontages, and six percent of the building elevation area on secondary frontages, with a maximum sign face area of 25 square feet.

(iii) For conforming commercial uses in residential districts, total sign face area for all primary building-mounted wall signs shall not exceed 12 percent of the building elevation area with a maximum individual sign face area of 100 square feet. Where the use has multiple frontages, the signage on secondary frontages shall not exceed eight percent of the building elevation area with a maximum sign face area of 50 square feet. No more than two wall signs shall be permitted on the primary building frontage. Only one wall sign shall be permitted on the secondary frontage.

(d) Awning Signs.

(i) For conforming commercial uses permitted in residential districts, one awning sign for each building frontage shall be permitted. Total sign area including wall signs shall not exceed 12 percent of the building elevation area, with a maximum sign face area of 50 square feet on primary frontages, and eight percent of the building elevation area on secondary frontages, with a maximum sign face area of 25 square feet.

(ii) For churches, schools, and public/semi-public facilities, one awning sign for each building frontage shall be permitted. Total sign area including wall signs shall not exceed 12 percent of the building elevation area, with a maximum sign face area of 50 square feet on primary frontages, and eight percent of the building elevation area on secondary frontages, with a maximum sign face area of 25 square feet.

(iii) For conforming commercial uses in residential districts, total sign face area for primary building-mounted wall signs and awning signs shall not exceed 12 percent of the building elevation area with a maximum sign face area of 100 square feet. Where the use has multiple frontages, the signage on secondary frontages shall not exceed eight percent of the building elevation area, with a maximum sign face area of 50 square feet.

(e) Suspended Signs. For each business in residential districts, one suspended sign over public right-of-way shall be permitted under an attached first floor awning or canopy with direct exterior pedestrian access. Sign area shall not exceed three square feet per face with the total sign area not to exceed six square feet.

(f) Banner Signs.

(i) For multidwelling residential developments, one banner sign shall be permitted for each development. The banner sign shall be limited to a display period of a maximum of 30 continuous days twice for each calendar year. Sign area shall not exceed 50 square feet.

(ii) For conforming commercial uses in residential districts, one banner sign shall be permitted for each principal use. The banner sign shall be limited to a display period of a maximum of 30 continuous days twice during the calendar year. Sign area shall not exceed 50 square feet.

(iii) For temporary uses, banner signs shall be permitted for each authorized temporary use. The banner sign shall be allowed for the same duration as the permitted temporary use. Maximum sign area shall not exceed 50 square feet for the sum of all banner signs.

(2) Maximum Sign Height. Monument signs shall be no more than six feet in height. Ground-mounted signs shall be no more than 12 feet in height.

(3) Illumination.

(a) For athletic scoreboards, bulletin boards, and wall signs permitted in the residential zoning districts, any illumination of signs shall be indirect.

(b) The illumination of signs within the residential sign district shall comply with the standards contained in this chapter. (Ord. 3164 § 3 (Att. B), 2012; Ord. 3144 § 2 (Att. A), 2011; Ord. 3091 § 2, 2008)


17.88.060 Commercial/industrial sign district.

In addition to the temporary and permanent signage allowed without permits, the following signage is allowed subject to the requirements of this chapter:

(1) Permitted Sign Types, Number, and Area. Signs within the commercial/industrial sign district are limited as follows and require the issuance of permits under SHMC 17.88.130.

(a) Monument or Ground-Mounted Signs.

(i) For principal uses, one single- or double-faced monument or ground-mounted sign shall be permitted for each lot along the primary street frontage. Where a use has multiple street frontages, this signage may be permitted along each building frontage that abuts a TSP designated arterial or collector street. Sign area shall not exceed 40 square feet for each sign face.

(ii) For churches, schools, and public/semi-public facilities, one single- or double-faced monument sign shall be permitted for each such facility. Where such a facility has multiple street frontages, this signage may be permitted on each frontage. Sign area shall not exceed 40 square feet for each sign face.

(b) Pole Signs.

(i) For principal uses, one freestanding single- or double-faced pole sign shall be permitted on lots that have a minimum of 40 feet of street frontage and no pole sign can be closer together than 80 feet in addition to other limitations. Sign area shall not exceed 100 square feet for each sign face. Any shopping plaza cannot exceed 150 square feet per face and any shopping center cannot exceed 200 square feet per face and no sign can exceed twice per face size.

(ii) Notwithstanding subsection (1)(b)(i) of this section, pole signs shall not be allowed in the RD zoning district.

(c) Wall Signs. For a principal use, the total sign face area for all building-mounted wall signs, including multiple signs for multiple tenants, shall not exceed eight percent of the building elevation area on the primary frontage, with a maximum individual sign face area of 120 square feet. Where the use has multiple building frontages, the total signage area on secondary building frontages shall not exceed six percent of the building elevation area, with a maximum individual sign face area of 60 square feet. However, if the building elevation area on a frontage exceeds 5,000 square feet, the maximum individual sign area may increase to 199 square feet.

(d) Awning Signs. For principal uses, the total sign face area for awning signs and wall signs shall not exceed 12 percent of the building elevation area on the primary frontage, with a maximum sign face area of 120 square feet. Where the use has multiple frontages, the signage on secondary building frontages shall not exceed eight percent of the building elevation area, with a maximum sign face area of 60 square feet.

(e) Numeric Information Signs. For principal uses, one single- or double-faced time, numeric information sign with a maximum of six square feet shall be permitted.

(f) Bulletin Boards.

(i) Schools, Churches, and Public and Semi-Public Facilities. One single- or double-faced bulletin board may be incorporated into an approved freestanding sign. The bulletin board portion of the sign may make up a maximum of two-thirds of the total sign face.

(ii) Theater Marquees. One single-faced bulletin board, or one double-faced bulletin board constructed so that the two faces connect at one end with an angle of 45 degrees or more, may be incorporated into a theater marquee. Maximum sign area for the bulletin board shall not exceed 12 percent of the building elevation area on the primary frontage, with a maximum sign face area of 120 square feet. The total combined area of theater marquee bulletin boards, awning signs and wall signs shall not exceed the maximum percentage of building elevation area permitted for the building elevation.

(g) Banner and Balloon Signs.

(i) Principal Use. One banner sign or one balloon sign shall be permitted for each principal use and shall be limited to a display period of a maximum of 30 continuous days with no more than two periods per calendar year. Maximum banner area shall not exceed 50 square feet. The largest dimension of a balloon sign shall not exceed 20 feet and such sign shall be adequately tethered so as to: not extend into the airspace above any public right-of-way or any other property, not constitute a safety hazard, or be in conflict with any other provision of this chapter. 

(ii) Temporary Use. Banner signs shall be permitted for an authorized temporary use and shall be allowed for the same duration as the permitted temporary use. Maximum sign area shall not exceed 50 square feet for the sum of all banner signs.

(h) Electronic Message Signs.

(i) For principal uses, one single- or double-faced electronic message sign per site may be incorporated into an approved freestanding sign. Sign area of the electronic message portion of the sign shall not exceed two-thirds of the total sign face.

(ii) For major or minor business complexes, one single- or double-faced electronic message sign per complex may be incorporated into a freestanding sign approved under the comprehensive sign plan provisions contained in SHMC 17.88.110. Sign area of the electronic message portion of the sign shall not exceed two-thirds of the total sign face.

(i) Illuminated Interior Signs. For principal uses, one or more illuminated interior signs may be installed into the windows facing a public street or sidewalk. Sign area of individual illuminated interior signs shall not exceed four square feet; and the cumulative area of two or more illuminated interior signs installed in windows on the same building elevation shall not exceed 15 percent of the overall window area on that elevation.

(j) Projecting Signs. For principal uses, one or more projecting signs shall be permitted per use. Maximum sign area shall not exceed 20 square feet per face with the total sign area not to exceed 40 square feet. Total sign area for wall and projecting signs shall not exceed 12 percent of the building elevation area on the primary frontage. Where the use has multiple frontages, total sign area for wall and projecting signs shall not exceed nine percent of the building elevation area on the secondary frontage.

(k) Roof Signs.

(i) For a principal use, the planning director may approve one roof sign, in lieu of other building-mounted signs, only upon finding that there are no other reasonable means of signing the business or use, due to extraordinary circumstances related to the physical location or structure of the building, distance from nearby streets, proximity of surrounding buildings or vegetation, or other factors over which the applicant has no control.

(ii) Approval of a roof sign shall be subject to the following standards:

(A) The sign is installed on a gabled, hipped, mansard, or otherwise sloped roof;

(B) Sign area for the roof sign shall not exceed eight percent of the roof elevation area, with a maximum area of 120 square feet;

(C) The highest point of the roof sign shall not exceed the height of the ridge of the roof; and

(D) Issuance of a building permit and final approval of the installed sign by the building department.

(l) Video Signs.

(i) Use pursuant to SHMC 17.88.105.

(ii) Messages shall follow the requirements of SHMC 17.88.105 except animation or pictures (copy) shall remain static for a minimum of 12 seconds.

(2) Maximum Sign Height.

(a) Monument signs shall be no more than six feet in height.

(b) Ground-mounted signs shall be no more than 12 feet in height.

(c) Pole signs permitted in the commercial/industrial sign district shall not exceed 24 feet in height, except such signs located along Milton Way between Port Avenue and Milton Creek shall not exceed 45 feet in height.

(3) Illumination. Illumination of signs within the commercial/industrial sign district shall meet the standards contained in this chapter. (Ord. 3215 § 4 (Att. D), 2017; Ord. 3203 § 2 (Att. A), 2016; Ord. 3180 § 1 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 3164 § 3 (Att. B), 2012; Ord. 3144 § 2 (Att. A), 2011; Ord. 3091 § 2, 2008)


17.88.070 Architectural design review.

Signs within portions of the RD zoning district are subject to SHMC 17.32.172(7) and 17.32.173(5)(b). (Ord. 3215 § 4 (Att. D), 2017; Ord. 3180 § 1 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 3164 § 3 (Att. B), 2012)


17.88.080 Measurements.

The following shall be used in measuring a sign to determine compliance with this chapter:

(1) Sign Area.

(a) Sign area shall be measured within lines drawn between the outermost dimensions of the frame or cabinet surrounding the display area containing the sign copy. When signs are not framed or on a base material and are inscribed, painted, printed, projected or otherwise placed upon or attached to a building, canopy, awning or part thereof, the sign area is the smallest possible space enclosing the sign copy that can be constructed with straight lines at 90-degree angles. Where a sign is of a three-dimensional, round, or irregular solid shape, the largest cross-section shall be used in a flat projection for the purpose of determining sign area.

(b) The area of all signs in existence at the time of enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter, whether conforming or nonconforming, shall be counted in establishing the permitted sign area.

(c) When signs are constructed in multiple separate pieces containing sign copy, sign face area is determined by a perimeter drawn in straight lines, as small as possible, around all pieces, in accordance with subsection (1)(a) of this section.

(2) Height. Height is measured from the average level of the grade below the sign to the topmost point of the sign including the supporting structure.

(3) Clearance. Clearance is measured from the average grade below the sign to the lowermost point of the sign.

(4) Spacing.

(a) For the purpose of applying spacing requirements to signs, distances shall be measured parallel to the centerline of the adjacent street or highway.

(b) The sign or sign location under consideration shall be included as one sign.

(c) A back-to-back sign is counted as a single sign for the purpose of spacing distances. (Ord. 3091 § 2, 2008)


17.88.085 Projecting signs.

An otherwise authorized sign shall be permitted to project over publicly owned and/or controlled property if the sign meets all of the following requirements:

(1) The sign is attached to the face of a building where the building face is located within five feet of the property line abutting a street.

(2) No external cross braces, guy wires, trusses, or similar bracing systems are used in constructing the sign.

(3) The sign extends no more than eight feet from the building face.

(4) The sign does not project above the roof line or parapet wall, whichever is higher.

(5) Projecting signs shall conform to all provisions of this section which are designed to eliminate blanketing and to provide safe minimum clearance along public sidewalks and streets. The sign must have a minimum of eight feet of clearance. The outer edge of the projecting sign must be set back a minimum of two feet from the curb line.

(6) Spacing between an earlier erected and any later erected projecting sign shall be a minimum of 20 feet. (Ord. 3091 § 2, 2008)


17.88.090 Wall signs.

(1) A wall sign shall not project more than 12 inches from the wall to which it is attached. A wall sign located on an alley frontage shall not project more than 12 inches from the wall to which it is attached and shall have 15 feet of clearance.

(2) A wall sign shall not project above the roof line, or top of the parapet wall, whichever is higher.

(3) No external braces, guy wires, “A” frames, or similar bracing systems shall be used in constructing a wall sign.

(4) The height of a wall sign attached to the end or face of a marquee shall not exceed 30 inches. The lower edge of this sign shall not extend below the marquee.

(5) Wall signs on mansard roofs of 30 degrees or less may be installed vertically if solid background is used. (Ord. 3091 § 2, 2008)


17.88.095 Freestanding signs.

(1) No part of a freestanding sign shall be erected or maintained within three feet of a street front property line, or within five feet of a side lot line, unless the application for the permit has been reviewed by the fire marshal and the fire marshal has determined that the location of the sign does not interfere with adequate fire access to any property.

(2) No part of a freestanding sign shall project or extend into any public right-of-way.

(3) Except as provided in this section, no freestanding sign shall project or extend into any vision clearance area. One or two sign poles supporting a freestanding sign may be located within the vision clearance area if they are necessary for the support of the sign, and if no other portion of the sign is located within the vision clearance area between two feet and 10 feet overgrade.

(4) A freestanding sign shall be directly supported by poles or foundation supports in or upon the ground. No external cross braces, guy wires, “T” frames, “A” frames, trusses, or similar bracing systems shall be used to buttress, balance, or support a freestanding sign.

(5) Only one freestanding sign is allowed for each street frontage, unless multiple signs are approved through a comprehensive sign plan.

(6) A minimum of 14 feet of clearance is required in areas accessible to vehicles. The lowest point of these signs may be less than 14 feet above grade in areas not accessible to vehicles when the signs are protected from physical damage by the installation of bumper poles or other ground protections.

(7) Freestanding signs permitted in a commercial/industrial sign district shall not be located closer than 50 linear feet from the property line of any residential zoned property as measured along the street frontage. (Ord. 3091 § 2, 2008)


17.88.100 Awning signs.

(1) Awning signs are permitted only as an integral part of the awning to which they are attached or applied.

(2) The awning supporting structure shall maintain a clearance of eight feet.

(3) An awning shall not extend to within two feet from the curb. An awning shall not project above the roofline.

(4) The awning sign shall extend no more than eight feet from the building face. (Ord. 3091 § 2, 2008)


17.88.105 Electronic message signs.

Electronic message signs permitted under this chapter shall comply with the following standards:

(1) The rate of change for sign copy from one message to another message shall be no more frequent than every eight seconds and the actual copy change shall be accomplished in four seconds or less. Once changed, the copy shall remain static until the next change.

(2) Displays may travel horizontally or scroll vertically onto electronic message signs, but must hold in a static position after completing the travel or scroll.

(3) Electronic message signs requiring more than four seconds to change from one copy to another shall be turned off during the change interval.

(4) Sign copy shall not appear to flash, undulate, or pulse, or portray explosions, fireworks, flashes of lights, or blinking or chasing lights. Copy shall not appear to move toward or away from the viewer, expand or contract, bounce, rotate, spin, twist, or otherwise portray graphics or animation as it moves onto, is displayed on, or leaves the sign face.

(5) No electronic message sign lamp may be illuminated to a degree of brightness that is greater than necessary for adequate visibility. In no case may the brightness exceed 8,000 nits or equivalent candelas during daylight hours, or 1,000 nits or equivalent candelas between dusk and dawn. Signs found to be too bright shall be adjusted or removed as directed by the planning director. (Ord. 3091 § 2, 2008)


17.88.110 Comprehensive sign plan.

A comprehensive sign plan provides a means for defining common sign regulations for multitenant projects by providing incentives in the design and display of multiple signs. A comprehensive sign plan shall be required for all shopping plazas or centers. An application for a comprehensive sign plan approval shall be filed at the time permits for permanent signs on the property are sought. If a sign is for a development that requires development review under the St. Helens Community Development Code, then the sign shall be reviewed as part of the development review process prior to approval of a sign permit. The plan shall be reviewed under the procedures set out in SHMC 17.88.130. A decision on the plan application is subject to review under the procedures set out in SHMC 17.88.140.

(1) An application for a comprehensive sign plan shall include information on the following:

(a) The location of all wall, projecting, monument, and freestanding signs.

(b) A description of the signs including construction materials, color scheme, unifying design elements, and any proposed lighting.

(c) An itemization of sign sizes including height and area at all identified sign locations.

(d) The location of any area designated for temporary signs, and documentation of the means by which such signs may be illuminated if approved.

(2) A comprehensive sign plan shall comply with the following standards:

(a) The signs and the signs together with the architectural style of structures in the business complex shall share common design elements. The content of any sign message shall not be considered in determining whether common design elements are present.

(b) The comprehensive sign plan shall accommodate future revisions that may be required because of changes in principal uses or tenants; and

(c) The comprehensive sign plan shall comply with the standards of this chapter, including any special allowances for sign area, number, location, and height provided for in this section.

(3) Wall signs in a comprehensive sign plan shall meet the following requirement:

(a) The allowed sign area shall be the amount authorized in the relevant sign district.

(4) Freestanding signs and monument signs in shopping plazas shall meet the following requirements:

(a) One freestanding sign shall be permitted for the entire complex. The maximum height of such sign shall be 20 feet (except where otherwise allowed in this chapter). The maximum area of this sign shall be 100 square feet for a single-faced sign and 200 square feet for a double-faced sign (except where otherwise allowed in this chapter).

(b) One monument sign shall be permitted on each pad site or lot located within the complex. The sign shall not exceed six feet in height and 32 square feet in area for a single-faced sign and 64 square feet in area for a double-faced sign.

(5) Freestanding signs and monument signs in shopping centers shall meet the following requirements:

(a) One freestanding sign shall be permitted for the entire complex. The maximum height of this sign shall be 26 feet (except where otherwise allowed in this chapter). The maximum area of this sign shall be 130 square feet for a single-faced sign and 260 square feet for a double-faced sign (except where otherwise allowed in this chapter).

(b) Where a complex has multiple street frontages, one freestanding sign shall be permitted on each street frontage classified as an arterial or collector in the transportation system plan and having a minimum of 100 feet of frontage. There shall be at least 100 lineal feet of separation, measured along each side of the right-of-way, between the two freestanding signs.

(c) One monument sign shall be permitted on each pad site or lot located within the complex. The sign shall not exceed six feet in height and 32 square feet in area for a single-faced sign and 64 square feet in area for a double-faced sign.

(6) Monument signs in industrial parks shall meet the following requirements:

(a) One double-faced sign located at the primary vehicular entrance or a maximum of two single-faced signs on either side of the primary vehicular entrance shall be permitted. The sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in area for a single-faced sign and 64 square feet for a double-faced sign. The sign may either be constructed as a monument sign with a maximum six-foot height, or incorporated into a decorative wall.

(b) One monument sign shall be permitted on each lot located within the industrial and research business complex. The sign shall not exceed four feet in height and 16 square feet in area for a single-faced sign and 32 square feet in area for a double-faced sign. (Ord. 3091 § 2, 2008)


17.88.120 Construction and maintenance standards.

(1) All permanent signs shall be constructed and erected in accordance with the requirements of the applicable building code as administered by the building official.

(2) All illuminated signs must be installed by a state-licensed sign contractor, subject to the requirements of the State Electrical Code. All electrically illuminated signs shall be listed, labeled, and tested by a testing agency recognized by the state of Oregon.

(3) Building and electrical permits shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Prior to obtaining building and electrical permits, the applicant shall obtain a sign permit or demonstrate an exception from the permit requirements of this chapter.

(4) All signs, together with all of their supports, braces, guys, and anchors, shall be kept in good repair and be maintained in a safe condition. All signs and the site upon which they are located shall be maintained in a neat, clean, and attractive condition. Signs shall be kept free from excessive rust, corrosion, peeling paint or other surface deterioration. The display surfaces of all signs shall be kept neatly painted or posted.

(5) No person required to obtain a sign permit under this chapter shall scatter, daub, or leave any paint, paste, glue, or other substances used for painting or affixing advertising matter or scatter or throw or permit to be scattered or thrown any bills, waste matter, paper, cloth, or materials of whatsoever kind removed from signs on any public street, sidewalk, or private property.

(6) No sign shall be erected or maintained in such a manner that any portion of its surface or supports will interfere in any way with the free use of any fire escape, exit, or standpipe. No signs shall be erected or maintained so as to obstruct any building opening to such an extent that light or ventilation is reduced below minimums required by any applicable law or provisions of this code. (Ord. 3164 § 3 (Att. B), 2012; Ord. 3091 § 2, 2008)


17.88.125 Illumination – General restrictions.

(1) No sign, light, lamp, bulb, tube, or device shall be used or displayed in violation of this section.

(2) Regardless of the maximum wattages or milliamphere rating capacities allowable under this chapter, no light source shall create an unduly distracting or hazardous condition to a motorist, pedestrian or the general public. Lighted signs shall be placed, shielded or deflected so as not to shine into residential dwelling units or structures, or impair the road vision of the driver of any vehicle.

(3) External light sources for a sign shall be directed and shielded to limit direct illumination of any object other than the sign.

(4) Except as may be approved under a comprehensive sign plan, temporary signs shall not be illuminated.

(5) The illumination of signs shall comply with the following standards:

(a) No exposed reflective type bulb, PAR spot or incandescent lamp, which incandescent lamp exceeds 25 watts, shall be exposed to direct view from a public street or highway, but may be used for indirect light illumination of the display surface of a sign.

(b) When neon tubing is employed on the exterior or interior of a sign, the capacity of such tubing shall not exceed 300 milliamperes rating for white tubing or 100 milliamperes rating for any colored tubing.

(c) When fluorescent tubes are used for interior illumination of a sign such illumination shall not exceed:

(i) Within residential sign districts, illumination equivalent to 425 milliampere rating tubing behind a sign face with tubes spaced at least seven inches, center to center.

(ii) Within commercial or industrial sign districts, illumination equivalent to 800 milliampere rating tubing behind a sign face spaced at least nine inches, center to center. (Ord. 3091 § 2, 2008)


17.88.130 Sign permit application.

(1) Except as provided in this chapter, a permit is required to erect, construct, repair or alter a sign. If a sign is for a new development that requires development review under the St. Helens Community Development Code, then the sign shall be reviewed as part of the development review process prior to approval of a sign permit.

(2) An application for a sign permit shall be made on a form prescribed by the planning director and shall be filed with the city. The application shall be filed by the owner of the sign or a representative of the sign’s owner. A separate sign permit application is required for each sign, unless a combined application for all signs in a proposed development is proposed. The application shall include information required by the planning director and the following:

(a) A sketch of the site, drawn to scale, showing the approximate location of existing structures, existing signs, and the proposed sign.

(b) Building frontage elevations drawn to scale, showing the sign’s relative location and placement.

(c) An illustration of the proposed sign, drawn to scale, showing the design, elevations, sign face dimensions and area, materials and engineering data which demonstrates its structural stability. The illustration of the proposed sign need not show the sign message, but shall show the size, style, and design of the lettering, numbers, and graphics conveying any message. The content of any message shall not be considered in the evaluation of a sign permit application.

(d) The names and addresses of the applicant, the owner of the property on which the sign is to be located, the manufacturer of the sign and the person installing the sign, and the construction contractor’s board number of the installer. The owner of the property on which the sign is to be located shall sign the sign permit application.

(e) A fee in the amount set by council resolution. When a person begins construction of a sign requiring a sign permit before the permit is approved, the permit fee shall be doubled.

(3) When deemed necessary by the building official, building or electrical permits shall be obtained as a part of the sign permit process. When required by St. Helens Community Development Code or building code, the approval of the fire marshal shall be obtained.

(4) The planning director shall grant or deny the sign permit application based upon the information submitted with the application and other information obtained by the city.

(5) A sign permit application shall be approved if:

(a) The application complies with all of the applicable provisions of this chapter, and any other objective requirement imposed by law. No standard shall be applied to deny a permit if the operation of that standard violates a constitutional right of the applicant. If, as part of the application, an applicant identifies a particular standard alleged to have unconstitutional effect, and provides reasons for that contention, the planning director shall seek the opinion of the city attorney on the contention. If the city attorney concludes that the operation of the standard violates a constitutional right of the applicant, the planning director shall not apply the standard in reviewing the application.

(b) The applicable permit fee has been paid.

(6) An approved sign shall be constructed and installed within six months of the final approval of the permit, including resolution of any appeal. The sign permit shall be void if installation is not completed within this period or if the sign does not conform to the approved permit. Sign permits mistakenly issued in violation of this chapter or other provisions of this code are void. The planning director may grant a reasonable extension of time for the installation deadline upon a showing of reasonable grounds for delay.

(7) If sign does not conform to the building code after inspection, the sign will be subject to removal per this chapter.

(8) The planning director may revoke a sign permit if the director finds that there was a material and misleading false statement of fact in the permit application. (Ord. 3091 § 2, 2008)


17.88.135 Adjustments.

(1) Adjustments to the standards of this chapter are possible pursuant to Chapter 17.108 SHMC, except adjustments shall be reviewed by the planning commission. 

(2) The approval criteria per Chapter 17.108 SHMC shall apply, in addition to the following:

(a) Any reference to “zoning district” shall be substituted with “sign districts” per SHMC 17.88.050;

(b) The requested adjustment shall not result from actions of the applicant, owner(s) or previous owner(s), or from personal circumstances of the applicant, owner(s) or previous owner(s), such as physical condition, age or financial situation; and

(c) Approval of the adjustment will not adversely affect the function or appearance of the development and use of the subject property and surrounding properties; and will not impose limitations on other properties and signage in the area including signage that would be allowed on adjacent properties.

(3) The planning commission shall conduct a public hearing on the request for adjustment. The commission shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the adjustment, based upon the evidence at the hearing. The commission may impose such conditions as are deemed necessary to mitigate any adverse impacts which may result from approving the adjustment. The hearing shall be conducted under the procedures used by the commission for a quasi-judicial land use hearing. (Ord. 3164 § 3 (Att. B), 2012; Ord. 3091 § 2, 2008)


17.88.140 Appeal of decision on sign permit or sign removal.

(1) An applicant may appeal the denial of an application for a sign permit, conditions of approval of the allowance of a permit or revocation of the permit. A sign owner may appeal an order of the planning director directing the removal of a sign. An appeal may be initiated by submitting at City Hall a form prescribed by the planning director within 14 days of the date of mailing the decision of the planning director. The form shall specify the basis for the appeal. Except as provided herein, the appeal shall be to the planning commission.

(2) The city recorder shall give written notice of the hearing by mail to owners as required of all quasi-judicial land use decisions and per this code.

(3) The appeal authority shall conduct a public hearing on the appeal. The authority shall grant or deny the permit or uphold or change the decision of the planning director based upon the evidence at the hearing and the record of its administrative proceedings. The hearing shall be conducted under the procedures stated in this code.

(4) The authority shall issue its decision in writing explaining the reasons why the permit was granted or denied or the decision of the planning director or building official was upheld or changed. The decision shall be mailed to the address of the applicant on the application by regular mail.

(5) In considering the appellant’s contentions, the authority shall exercise only the following review criteria:

(a) Determining whether the planning director failed to follow applicable procedures in taking action on the permit or the sign in ways that prejudiced the rights of the appellant.

(b) Determining whether the planning director properly applied the provisions of this chapter.

(c) Modifying the decision of the planning director only to the minimum extent necessary to be consistent with the requirements of this chapter or of other laws.

(d) Attaching such conditions to granting all or a portion of any appeal as necessary to achieve the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 3091 § 2, 2008)


17.88.145 Inspections.

(1) If a building permit is required, the building official shall perform a sign inspection upon notification by the permittee that the construction is ready for inspection. Failure of the permittee to notify the building official of the progress of construction for inspection purposes shall result in the revocation of the sign permit. A final inspection of a sign shall be made upon completion of all construction work and prior to its illumination.

(2) All signs may be inspected or reinspected at the discretion of the building official. The building official may inspect footings for monument, ground-mounted or freestanding signs. The building official may enter at reasonable times upon the premises of any person licensed under the provisions of this chapter for the purpose of inspection of signs under construction. (Ord. 3091 § 2, 2008)


17.88.155 Removal of signs – General.

(1) The planning director may remove or may order the removal of any sign erected or maintained in violation of the provisions of this chapter or other applicable provisions of this code. Signs installed in violation of any prior sign code or applicable laws and regulations, and which are in violation of this chapter, shall be removed, replaced or altered in order to conform to the requirements of this chapter. An order to remove a sign shall be in writing and mailed to the owner of the sign or the owner of the building, structure or premises on which the sign is located.

(2) The order shall inform the owner that the sign violates the regulations in this chapter and must be brought into compliance or be removed within 30 days of the date of the order. The planning director may order immediate removal of a sign under this chapter. The order shall also inform the sign owner of the reasons why the planning director concludes the sign violates the regulations in this chapter and shall inform the owner of appeal rights under SHMC 17.88.140.

(3) If the owner fails to immediately remove an unsafe or abandoned sign or otherwise fails to file an appeal or remove a sign within 30 days of the date of the planning director’s order, or within the time provided in the decision rendered following an appeal, the planning director may cause the sign to be removed. The removal shall be at the expense of the owner of the sign or the owner of the building, structure, or premises on which the sign is located.

(4) These costs and expenses, including, but not limited to, the notification, efforts to secure compliance, painting out of a sign, sign removal, storage, or transportation, shall be a lien against land or premises on which the sign is located, and may be collected or foreclosed in the same manner as liens that are entered in the liens docket of the city of St. Helens.

(5) Instead of removing a sign, the planning director may file charges against the sign owner in St. Helens municipal court. Each day following the 30-day period in which the sign owner is not in compliance with this chapter constitutes a separate violation. (Ord. 3091 § 2, 2008)


17.88.160 Removal of unsafe signs.

If the planning director finds that any sign is in violation of the applicable provision of this code and that, by reason of its condition, it presents an immediate and serious danger to the public, the planning director may, without prior written notice, order the immediate removal or repair of the sign within a specified period. The planning director may remove or authorize others to remove the sign in the event that the person responsible for such sign cannot be found or if that person, after notification, refuses to repair or remove it. The owner of the sign and the owner of the building, structure, or premises on which the sign is located, are jointly and severably liable for the cost of removing such sign as provided for the removal of unlawful signs in this chapter. (Ord. 3091 § 2, 2008)


17.88.165 Removal of abandoned signs.

(1) An owner of a sign, including any painted sign, shall remove the sign when it is abandoned.

(2) Abandoned signs shall be reversed or painted over within 30 days, or the entire sign and sign structure removed within 90 days of the date the owner or tenant no longer uses the sign or within 90 days of the date the sign was damaged.

(3) Abandoned signs may be removed and costs may be collected as provided in SHMC 17.88.155 for removal of unlawful signs.

(4) A sign need not be removed under this section when a successor tenant, or business or property owner, agrees to maintain the sign, as provided in this chapter, by filing a letter of intent with the planning director no later than 30 days after receiving notice to do so from the city. (Ord. 3091 § 2, 2008)


17.88.170 Removal of signs erected without a permit.

The planning director may remove or order the removal, without prior written notice, of any sign erected without a sign permit required by this chapter. Removal costs may be collected as provided in SHMC 17.88.155 for removal of unlawful signs. (Ord. 3091 § 2, 2008)


Chapter 17.92 MIXED SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLABLES STORAGE IN NEW MULTI-UNIT RESIDENTIAL AND NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS

Sections:

17.92.010    Purpose.

17.92.020    Applicability.

17.92.030    Definitions.

17.92.040    Materials accepted.

17.92.050    Methods of demonstrating compliance.

17.92.060    Location, design and access standards for storage areas.


17.92.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that certain new construction incorporates functional and adequate space for on-site storage and efficient collection of mixed solid waste and source-separated recyclables prior to pick-up and removal by haulers. (Ord. 2875 § 1.124.010, 2003)


17.92.020 Applicability.

The mixed solid waste and source-separated recyclables storage standards shall apply to new multi-unit residential buildings containing five or more units and nonresidential construction that are subject to full site plan or design review, and are located within urban zones that allow, outright or by condition, for such uses. (Ord. 2875 § 1.124.020, 2003)


17.92.030 Definitions.

The following definitions apply to standards dealing with solid waste and recyclables storage areas and not to other chapters of this code:

(1) “Mixed solid waste” means solid waste that contains recoverable or recyclable materials, and materials that are not capable of being recycled or recovered for further use.

(2) “Source-separated recyclables” means, at a minimum, recyclable materials designated “principal recyclable materials” by the State Environmental Quality Commission under ORS 459A.025, with the exception of yard debris. Currently these materials include newspaper, ferrous and nonferrous scrap metal, used motor oil, corrugated cardboard, aluminum, container glass, office paper, and tin cans (OAR 340-090-0070). 

(3) “Storage area” means the space necessary to store mixed solid waste and source-separated recyclables that accumulate between collection days.

(4) “Multi-unit residential building” means a structure that contains six or more dwelling units that share common walls or floors/ceilings with one or more units.

(5) “Nonresidential building” means a structure that is used for any nonresidential function, including but not limited to office, retail, wholesale/warehouse/industrial, educational, and institutional uses.

(6) “Solid waste coordinator” means the director of Columbia County land development services or his/her designee. (Ord. 3186 § 22, 2015; Ord. 2875 § 1.124.030, 2003)


17.92.040 Materials accepted.

The storage area must be able to accept at least all “principle recyclable materials” designated by the Oregon Environmental Quality Commission and other source-separated recyclables the local government identifies by regulation. (Ord. 2875 § 1.124.040, 2003)


17.92.050 Methods of demonstrating compliance.

(1) An applicant shall choose one of the following four methods to demonstrate compliance:

(a) Minimum standards;

(b) Waste assessment;

(c) Comprehensive recycling plan; or

(d) Franchised hauler review and sign-off.

(2) The following provisions apply to all four methods of demonstrating compliance:

(a) SHMC 17.92.060 (location, design and access standards), except as provided in subsection (7) of this section;

(b) The floor area of an interior or exterior storage area required by this code shall be excluded from the calculation of lot coverage and from the calculation of building floor area for purposes of determining minimum storage requirements.

(3) Minimum Standards Method.

(a) Description of Method. This method specifies a minimum storage area requirement based on the size and general use category of the new construction.

(b) Typical Application of Method. This method is most appropriate when the specific use of a new building is not known. It provides specific dimensions for the minimum size of storage areas by general use category.

(c) Application Requirements and Review Procedure. The size and location of the storage 

area(s) shall be indicated on the site plan of any construction subject to this code. Through the site plan review process, compliance with the general and specific requirements set forth below is verified.

(4) General Requirements.

(a) The storage area requirement is based on the predominant use(s) of the building (e.g., residential, office, retail, wholesale/warehouse/manufacturing, educational/institutional, or other). If a building has more than one of the uses listed herein and that use occupies 20 percent or less of the floor area of the building, the floor area occupied by that use shall be counted toward the floor area of the predominant use(s). If a building has more than one of the uses listed herein and that use occupies more than 20 percent of the floor area of the building, then the storage area requirement for the whole building shall be the sum of the requirement for the area of each use;

(b) Storage areas for multiple uses on a single site may be combined and shared; and

(c) The specific requirements are based on an assumed storage height of four feet for solid waste/recyclables. Vertical storage higher than four feet but no higher than seven feet may be used to accommodate the same volume of storage in a reduced floor space (potential reduction of 43 percent of specific requirements). Where vertical or stacked storage is proposed, the site plan shall include drawings to illustrate the layout of the storage area and dimensions of containers.

(5) Specific Requirements.

(a) Multi-unit residential buildings containing six to 10 units shall provide a minimum storage area of 50 square feet. Buildings containing more than 10 residential units shall provide an additional five square feet per unit for each unit above 10;

(b) Nonresidential buildings shall provide a minimum storage area of 10 square feet, plus:

(i) Office: four square feet/1,000 square feet gross floor area (GFA).

(ii) Retail: 10 square feet/1,000 square feet GFA.

(iii) Wholesale / warehouse / manufacturing: six square feet/1,000 square feet GFA.

(iv) Educational and institutional: four square feet/1,000 square feet GFA.

(v) Other: four square feet/1,000 square feet GFA.

(6) Waste Assessment Method.

(a) Description of Method. The waste assessment method tailors the storage area size to a waste assessment and management program for the specific users of a new building.

(b) Typical Application of Method. This method is most appropriate when the specific use of a building is known and the type and volume of mixed solid waste to be generated can be estimated.

(c) Application Requirements and Review Procedures.

(i) A preconference with the solid waste coordinator/plan check staff is required if the waste assessment method is proposed. The applicant shall obtain a waste assessment form from the local jurisdiction;

(ii) The form shall be used to estimate the volumes of source-separated recyclables/mixed solid waste generated. From this information, the applicant can design a specific management, storage and collection system. Techniques such as a compactor or cardboard baler may be implemented to minimize the square footage of the site which must be set aside for a storage area; and

(iii) The waste assessment form shall be completed and submitted with site plans required by the local jurisdiction. The plans must identify the size and location of interior or exterior storage area(s), specialized equipment, collection schedule, etc., required to accommodate the volumes projected in the waste assessment. The solid waste coordinator shall review and approve the waste assessment as part of the site plan or development review process.

(d) Specific Requirement. The application shall demonstrate that the mixed solid waste and recyclables volumes expected to be generated can be stored in less space than is required by the minimum standards method.

(7) Comprehensive Recycling Plan Method.

(a) Description of Method. The comprehensive recycling plan method is most appropriate when an applicant has independently developed a comprehensive recycling plan that addresses materials collection and storage for the proposed use.

(b) Typical Application of Method. This method can be used when a comprehensive recycling plan has been developed for a specific facility. It is most suited to large nonresidential uses such as hospitals, schools and industrial facilities. The comprehensive recycling plan method can be used for new construction or expansion that is subject to full site plan review.

(c) Application Requirements and Review Procedure. The comprehensive recycling plan shall be submitted to the solid waste coordinator at the same time site plans are submitted for site plan review. The applicant shall submit plans and text that show how mixed solid waste and recyclables generated by the proposed development will be served under a comprehensive recycling plan. The location, design and access standards set forth in SHMC 17.92.060 are applicable to new storage areas only.

(8) Franchised Hauler Review Method.

(a) The franchised hauler review method is only available in jurisdictions with franchise collection service areas because there is certainty as to what hauler will actually provide service to the proposed development, once it is constructed.

(b) Description of Method. This method provides for coordinated review of the proposed site plan by the franchised hauler serving the subject property.

(c) Typical Application of Method. This method is to be used when there are unique conditions associated with the site, use or waste stream that make compliance with any of the other three methods infeasible. The objective of this method is to match a specific hauler program (types of equipment, frequency of collection, etc.) to the unique characteristic(s) of the site or development.

The following constitute unique conditions:

(i) Use of either of the three other methods of compliance would interfere with the use of the proposed development by reducing the productive space of the proposed development, or make it impossible to comply with the minimum off-street parking requirements of the underlying zone;

(ii) The site is of an irregular shape or possesses steep slopes that do not allow for access by collection vehicles typically used by the franchised hauler to serve uses similar in size and scope to the proposed use; and

(iii) The proposed use will generate unique wastes that can be stacked, folded or easily consolidated without the need for specialized equipment, such as a compactor, and can therefore be stored in less space than is required by subsection (3) of this section.

(d) Application Requirements and Review Procedure. The applicant shall work with the franchised hauler to develop a plan for storage and collection of source-separated recyclables and mixed solid waste expected to be generated from the new building. A narrative describing how the proposed site meets one or more of the unique site conditions described above plus site and building plans showing the size and location of storage area(s) required to accommodate anticipated volumes shall be submitted for site plan review. Additionally, a letter from the franchised hauler shall be submitted at the same time that describes the level of service to be provided by the hauler, including any special equipment and collection frequency, which will keep the storage area from exceeding its capacity. (Ord. 2875 § 1.124.050, 2003)


17.92.060 Location, design and access standards for storage areas.

(1) The following location, design and access standards for storage areas are applicable to all four methods of compliance:

(a) Minimum standards;

(b) Waste assessment;

(c) Comprehensive recycling plan; and

(d) Franchised hauler review.

(2) Location Standards.

(a) To encourage its use, the storage area for source-separated recyclables shall be collocated with the storage area for residual mixed solid waste;

(b) Indoor and outdoor storage areas shall comply with Uniform Building and Fire Code requirements;

(c) Storage area space requirements can be satisfied with a single location or multiple locations, and can combine both interior and exterior locations;

(d) Exterior storage areas can be located within interior side yard or rear yard areas. Exterior storage areas shall not be located within a required front yard setback or in a yard adjacent to a public or private street;

(e) Exterior storage areas shall be located in central and visible locations on a site to enhance security for users;

(f) Exterior storage areas can be located in a parking area, if the proposed use provides at least the minimum number of parking spaces required for the use after deducting the area used for storage. Storage areas shall be appropriately screened according to the provisions in subsection (3) of this section, Design Standards; and

(g) The storage area shall be accessible for collection vehicles and located so that the storage area will not obstruct pedestrian or vehicle traffic movement on the site or on public streets adjacent to the site.

(3) Design Standards.

(a) The dimensions of the storage area shall accommodate containers consistent with current methods of local collection;

(b) Storage containers shall meet Uniform Fire Code standards and be made and covered with waterproof materials or situated in a covered area;

(c) Exterior storage areas shall be enclosed by a sight-obscuring fence, wall, or hedge at least six feet in height. Gate openings which allow access to users and haulers shall be provided. Gate openings for haulers shall be a minimum of 10 feet wide and shall be capable of being secured in a closed and open position; and

(d) Storage area(s) and containers shall be clearly labeled to indicate the type of materials accepted.

(4) Access Standards.

(a) Access to storage areas can be limited for security reasons. However, the storage area shall be accessible to users at convenient times of the day, and to collection service personnel on the day and approximate time they are scheduled to provide collection service;

(b) Storage areas shall be designed to be easily accessible to collection trucks and equipment, considering paving, grade and vehicle access. A minimum of 10 feet horizontal clearance and eight feet of vertical clearance is required if the storage area is covered; and

(c) Storage areas shall be accessible to collection vehicles without requiring backing out of a driveway onto a public street. If only a single access point is available to the storage area, adequate turning radius shall be provided to allow collection vehicles to safely exit the site in a forward motion. (Ord. 2875 § 1.124.060, 2003)


Chapter 17.96 SITE DEVELOPMENT REVIEW

Sections:

17.96.010    Purpose.

17.96.020    Applicability of provisions.

17.96.030    Administration and approval process.

17.96.040    Expiration of approval – Standards for extension of time.

17.96.050    Phased development.

17.96.060    Bonding and assurances.

17.96.070    Major modification to approved plans or existing development.

17.96.080    Minor modification to approved plans or existing development.

17.96.090    Application submission requirements.

17.96.100    Additional information required and waiver of requirements.

17.96.110    Site conditions.

17.96.120    The site development plan.

17.96.130    Grading plan.

17.96.140    Architectural drawings.

17.96.150    Landscape plan.

17.96.160    Sign drawings.

17.96.180    Approval standards.


17.96.010 Purpose.

(1) The purpose and intent of site development review is to promote the general welfare by directing attention to site planning, and giving regard to the natural environment and the elements of creative design to assist in conserving and enhancing the appearance of the city.

(2) It is in the public interest and necessary for the promotion of the health, safety and welfare, convenience, comfort and prosperity of the citizens of the city of St. Helens:

(a) To implement the city of St. Helens comprehensive plan and other approval standards in this code;

(b) To preserve and enhance the natural beauties of the land and of the manmade environment, and enjoyment thereof;

(c) To maintain and improve the qualities of and relationships between individual buildings, structures and the physical developments which best contribute to the amenities and attractiveness of an area or neighborhood;

(d) To protect and ensure the adequacy and usefulness of public and private developments as they relate to each other and to the neighborhood or area; and

(e) To ensure that each individual development provides for a quality environment for the citizens utilizing that development as well as the community as a whole.

(3) In order to prevent the erosion of natural beauty, the lessening of environmental amenities, the dissipation of both usefulness and function, and to encourage additional landscaping, it is necessary:

(a) To stimulate harmonious design for individual buildings, groups of buildings and structures, and other physical developments;

(b) To encourage the innovative use of materials, methods, and techniques and flexibility in building placement; and

(c) To integrate the functions, appearances and locations of buildings and improvements so as to best achieve a balance between private interests and preferences, and the public interest and welfare. (Ord. 2875 § 1.128.010, 2003)


17.96.020 Applicability of provisions.

Site development review shall be applicable to all new developments and major modification of existing developments, as provided in SHMC 17.96.070, except it shall not apply to:

(1) Single-dwelling units;

(2) Manufactured homes on individual lots;

(3) A duplex, which is not being reviewed as part of any other development;

(4) Minor modifications as provided in SHMC 17.96.080;

(5) Any proposed development which has a valid conditional use approved through the conditional use permit application process;

(6) Home child care;

(7) Home occupations;

(8) Temporary use;

(9) Fuel tank; or

(10) Accessory structures. (Ord. 3232 § 2 (Att. A), 2018; Ord. 2875 § 1.128.020, 2003)


17.96.030 Administration and approval process.

(1) The applicant for a site development review proposal shall be the recorded owner of the property or an agent authorized in writing by the owner.

(2) A preapplication conference with city staff is required. (See SHMC 17.24.040.)

(3) Due to possible changes in state statutes, or regional or local policy, information given by staff to the applicant during the preapplication conference is valid for no more than six months:

(a) Another preapplication conference is required if any site development application is submitted six months after the preapplication conference; and

(b) Failure of the director to provide any of the information required by this section shall not constitute a waiver of the standards, criteria or requirements applicable to the applications.

(4) The director shall approve, approve with conditions or deny any application for site development review as provided by SHMC 17.24.090. The director shall apply the standards set forth in SHMC 17.96.180 when reviewing an application for site development review. The planning commission will review the director’s tentative decision before it becomes final.

(5) The decision of the director may be appealed in accordance with SHMC 17.24.310(1).

(6) The director shall mail notice of any site development review proposal decision to the persons who may have the right to request a hearing before the commission in accordance with SHMC 17.24.120. (Ord. 2875 § 1.128.030, 2003)


17.96.040 Expiration of approval – Standards for extension of time.

(1) Site development review approval by the director shall be effective for a period of one year from the date of approval.

(2) The site development review approval by the director shall lapse if:

(a) Substantial construction of the approved plan has not begun within a one-year period; or

(b) Construction on the site is a departure from the approved plan.

(3) The director shall, upon written request by the applicant and payment of the required fee, grant an extension of the approval period not to exceed six months; provided, that:

(a) No changes are made on the original site development review plan as approved by the director;

(b) The applicant can show intent of initiating construction on the site within the extension period; and

(c) There have been no changes to the applicable comprehensive plan policies and ordinance provisions on which the approval was based.

(4) Notice of the decision shall be provided to the applicant. The director’s decision may be appealed by the applicant as provided by SHMC 17.24.310(1). (Ord. 2875 § 1.128.040, 2003)


17.96.050 Phased development.

(1) The director may approve a time schedule for developing a site in phases over a period of time of one year, but in no case shall the total time period for all phases be greater than three years without reapplying for site development review.

(2) The criteria for approving a phased site development review proposal is that all of the following are satisfied:

(a) The public facilities are constructed in conjunction with or prior to each phase;

(b) The development and occupancy of any phase is not dependent on the use of temporary public facilities:

(i) A “temporary public facility” is any facility not constructed to the applicable city or district standard;

(c) The phased development shall not result in requiring the city or other property owners to construct public facilities that were required by approved development proposal; and

(d) The director’s decision may be appealed as provided by SHMC 17.24.310(1). No notice need be given of the director’s decision. (Ord. 2875 § 1.128.050, 2003)


17.96.060 Bonding and assurances.

(1) On all projects where public improvements are required the director shall:

(a) Require a bond in an amount not greater than 110 percent of engineer estimates for public improvements or other adequate assurances as a condition of approval of the site development plan in order to ensure the completed project is in conformance with the approved plan; and

(b) Approve and release such bonds.

(2) The bond shall be released when the director finds the completed project conforms to the approved site development plan and all conditions of approval are satisfied.

(3) Landscaping shall be installed prior to issuance of occupancy permits, unless security equal to the cost of the landscaping as determined by the director is filed with the city recorder assuring such installation within six months after occupancy:

(a) Security may consist of a faithful performance bond payable to the city, cash, certified check or such other assurance of completion approved by the city attorney; and

(b) If the installation of the landscaping is not completed within the six-month period, the security may be used by the city to complete the installation.

(4) The applicant shall ensure that all occupants of the completed project, whether permanent or temporary, shall apply for and receive a city of St. Helens business license prior to initiating business. (Ord. 2875 § 1.128.060, 2003)


17.96.070 Major modification to approved plans or existing development.

(1) An applicant may request approval of a modification to an approved plan or existing development by:

(a) Providing the director with three copies of the proposed modified site development plan; and

(b) A narrative which indicates the rationale for the proposed modification addressing the changes listed in subsection (2) of this section.

(2) The director shall determine that a major modification(s) will result if one or more of the following changes are proposed. There will be:

(a) An increase in dwelling unit density, or lot coverage for residential development;

(b) A change in the ratio or number of different types of dwelling units;

(c) A change that requires additional on-site parking in accordance with Chapter 17.80 SHMC;

(d) A change in the type of commercial or industrial structures as defined by the applicable building code as administered by the building official;

(e) An increase in the height of the building(s) by more than 10 percent from that approved in a previous site development review or land use decision;

(f) A change in the type and location of accessways and parking areas where off-site traffic would be affected;

(g) An increase in vehicular traffic to and from the site and the increase can be expected to exceed 20 vehicles per day;

(h) An increase in the floor area proposed for a nonresidential use by more than 10 percent excluding expansions under 5,000 square feet;

(i) A reduction in the area reserved for common open space and/or usable open space which reduces the open space area below the minimum required by this code or reduces the open space area by more than 10 percent;

(j) A reduction of project amenities below the minimum established by this code or by more than 10 percent where specified in the site plan:

(i) Recreational facilities;

(ii) Screening; and/or

(iii) Landscaping provisions; and

(k) A modification to the conditions imposed at the time of site development review approval which are not the subject of subsection (2)(a) through (j) of this section.

(3) Upon determining that the proposed modification to the site development plan is a major modification, the applicant shall submit a new application in accordance with SHMC 17.96.030 and 17.96.090 for site development review prior to any issuance of building permits.

(4) The director’s decision on classification of site design process may be appealed as provided by SHMC 17.24.310(1). Notice of the director’s decision need not be given. (Ord. 3164 § 3 (Att. B), 2012; Ord. 2875 § 1.128.070, 2003)


17.96.080 Minor modification to approved plans or existing development.

(1) Any modification which is not within the description of a major modification as provided in SHMC 17.96.070 shall be considered a minor modification.

(2) An applicant may request approval of a minor modification:

(a) Providing the director with three copies of the proposed modified site development plan; and

(b) A narrative which indicates the rationale for the proposed modification addressing the changes listed in SHMC 17.96.070(2).

(3) A minor modification shall be approved, approved with conditions or denied following the director’s review based on the finding that:

(a) No code provisions will be violated; and

(b) The modification is not a major modification.

(4) The director’s decision may be appealed as provided by SHMC 17.24.310(1). (Ord. 2875 § 1.128.080, 2003)


17.96.090 Application submission requirements.

(1) All applications shall be made on forms provided by the director and shall be accompanied by:

(a) Copies of the site development plan(s) (number to be determined at the preapplication conference) and necessary data or narrative which explains how the development conforms to the standards, and:

(i) The site development plan(s) and required drawings shall be drawn on sheets preferably not exceeding 18 inches by 24 inches;

(ii) The scale for a site development plan shall be an engineering scale; and

(iii) All drawings of structure elevations shall be a standard architectural scale, being one-fourth-inch or one-eighth-inch; and

(b) The required fee.

(2) The required information may be combined on one map.

(3) The site development plan, data, and narrative shall include the following:

(a) An existing site conditions analysis, SHMC 17.96.110;

(b) A site plan, SHMC 17.96.120;

(c) A grading plan, SHMC 17.96.130;

(d) A landscape plan, SHMC 17.96.150;

(e) Architectural elevations of all structures, SHMC 17.96.140;

(f) A sign plan, SHMC 17.96.160; and

(g) A copy of all existing and proposed restrictions or covenants. (Ord. 2875 § 1.128.090, 2003)


17.96.100 Additional information required and waiver of requirements.

(1) The director may require information in addition to that required by this chapter in accordance with SHMC 17.24.080(1).

(2) The director may waive a specific requirement for information in accordance with SHMC 17.24.080(2) and (3). (Ord. 2875 § 1.128.100, 2003)


17.96.110 Site conditions.

The site analysis drawings shall include:

(1) A vicinity map showing streets and access points, pedestrian and bicycle pathways, transit stops and utility locations;

(2) The site size and its dimensions;

(3) Contour lines at two-foot contour intervals for grades zero to 10 percent and five-foot intervals for grades over 10 percent;

(4) The location of drainage patterns and drainage courses;

(5) The location of sensitive lands;

(6) The location of site features including:

(a) Rock outcroppings; and

(b) Trees with six inches caliper or greater measured four feet from ground level;

(7) The location of existing structures on the site and proposed use of those structures; and

(8) The location and type of noise sources on the site or on adjoining property such as traffic ways, mechanical equipment, or noise-producing land uses if requested by the director. (Ord. 2875 § 1.128.110, 2003)


17.96.120 The site development plan.

The proposed site development plan shall be at the same scale as the site analysis and shall include the following information:

(1) The proposed site and surrounding properties;

(2) Contour line intervals (see SHMC 17.96.110(3));

(3) The location, dimensions and names of all:

(a) Existing and platted streets and other public ways and easements on the site and on adjoining properties; and

(b) Proposed streets or other public ways and easements on the site;

(4) The location and dimensions of:

(a) Entrances and exits on the site;

(b) Parking and circulation areas;

(c) Loading and services areas;

(d) Pedestrian and bicycle circulation;

(e) Outdoor common areas; and

(f) Above ground utilities;

(5) The location, dimensions, and setback distances of all:

(a) Existing structures, improvements and utilities which are located on adjacent property within 25 feet of the site and are permanent in nature; and

(b) Proposed structures, improvements and utilities on the site;

(6) The location of areas to be landscaped;

(7) The location and type of outdoor lighting, considering crime prevention techniques;

(8) The location of mailboxes;

(9) The location of proposed utility lines; and

(10) The location of all structures and their orientation. (Ord. 2875 § 1.128.120, 2003)


17.96.130 Grading plan.

The site development plan shall include a grading plan at the same scale as the site analysis drawings and shall contain the following information:

(1) Requirements in SHMC 17.96.110 and 17.96.120;

(2) The location and extent to which grading will take place indicating general contour lines, slope ratios and slope stabilization proposals; and

(3) A statement from a registered engineer supported by factual data substantiating:

(a) The validity of the slope stabilization proposals; and

(b) That all problems will be mitigated and how they will be mitigated. (Ord. 2875 § 1.128.130, 2003)


17.96.140 Architectural drawings.

The site development plan proposal shall include:

(1) Floor plans indicating the square footage of all structures proposed for use on site; and

(2) Typical elevation drawings of each structure. (Ord. 2875 § 1.128.140, 2003)


17.96.150 Landscape plan.

(1) The landscape plan shall be drawn at the same scale as the site analysis plan, or a larger scale if necessary, and shall indicate:

(a) Location of underground irrigation system sprinkler heads where applicable;

(b) Location and height of fences, buffers, and screenings;

(c) Location of terraces, decks, shelters, play areas, and common open spaces; and

(d) Location, type, size, and species of existing and proposed plant materials.

(2) The landscape plan shall include a narrative which addresses:

(a) Soil conditions; and

(b) Erosion control measures that will be used. (Ord. 2875 § 1.128.150, 2003)


17.96.160 Sign drawings.

Sign drawings shall be submitted in accordance with Chapter 17.88 SHMC. (Ord. 2875 § 1.128.160, 2003)


17.96.180 Approval standards.

The director shall make a finding with respect to each of the following criteria when approving, approving with conditions, or denying an application:

(1) Provisions of the following chapters:

(a) Chapter 17.44 SHMC, Sensitive Lands;

(b) Chapter 17.60 SHMC, Manufactured/Mobile Home Regulations;

(c) Chapter 17.56 SHMC, Density Computations;

(d) Chapter 17.124 SHMC, Accessory Structures;

(e) Chapter 17.64 SHMC, Additional Yard Setback Requirements and Exceptions;

(f) Chapter 17.68 SHMC, Building Height Limitations – Exceptions;

(g) Chapter 17.72 SHMC, Landscaping and Screening;

(h) Chapter 17.76 SHMC, Visual Clearance Areas;

(i) Chapter 17.80 SHMC, Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements;

(j) Chapter 17.84 SHMC, Access, Egress, and Circulation;

(k) Chapter 17.88 SHMC, Signs;

(l) Chapter 17.132 SHMC, Tree Removal; 

(m) Chapter 17.152 SHMC, Street and Utility Improvement Standards; and

(n) Chapter 17.156 SHMC, Transportation Impact Analysis;

(2) Relationship to the Natural and Physical Environment.

(a) Buildings shall be:

(i) Located to preserve existing trees, topography, and natural drainage in accordance with other sections of this code;

(ii) Located in areas not subject to ground slumping or sliding;

(iii) Located to provide adequate distance between adjoining buildings for adequate light, air circulation, and fire fighting; and

(iv) Oriented with consideration for sun and wind; and

(b) Trees having a six-inch DBH (as defined by Chapter 17.132 SHMC) or greater shall be preserved or replaced by new plantings of equal character;

(3) Exterior Elevations. Along the vertical face of single-dwelling units – attached and multiple-dwelling unit structures, offsets shall occur at a minimum of every 30 feet by providing any two of the following:

(a) Recesses (decks, patios, entrances, floor area, etc.) of a minimum depth of eight feet;

(b) Extensions (decks, patios, entrances, floor area, etc.) of a minimum depth of eight feet, and maximum length of an overhang shall be 25 feet; and

(c) Offsets or breaks in roof elevations of three or more feet in height;

(4) Buffering, Screening, and Compatibility between Adjoining Uses (See Figure 13, Chapter 17.72 SHMC).

(a) Buffering shall be provided between different types of land uses (for example, between single-dwelling units and multiple-dwelling units residential, and residential and commercial), and the following factors shall be considered in determining the adequacy of the type and extent of the buffer:

(i) The purpose of the buffer, for example to decrease noise levels, absorb air pollution, filter dust, or to provide a visual barrier;

(ii) The size of the buffer required to achieve the purpose in terms of width and height;

(iii) The direction(s) from which buffering is needed;

(iv) The required density of the buffering; and

(v) Whether the viewer is stationary or mobile;

(b) On-site screening from view from adjoining properties of such things as service areas, storage areas, parking lots, and mechanical devices on rooftops (e.g., air cooling and heating systems) shall be provided and the following factors will be considered in determining the adequacy of the type and extent of the screening:

(i) What needs to be screened;

(ii) The direction from which it is needed;

(iii) How dense the screen needs to be;

(iv) Whether the viewer is stationary or mobile; and

(v) Whether the screening needs to be year-round;

(5) Privacy and Noise.

(a) Structures which include residential dwelling units shall provide private outdoor areas for each ground floor unit which is screened from view by adjoining units as provided in subsection (6)(a) of this section;

(b) The buildings shall be oriented in a manner which protects private spaces on adjoining properties from view and noise;

(c) Residential buildings should be located on the portion of the site having the lowest noise levels; and

(d) On-site uses which create noise, lights, or glare shall be buffered from adjoining residential uses (see subsection (4) of this section);

(6) Private Outdoor Area – Residential Use.

(a) Private open space such as a patio or balcony shall be provided and shall be designed for the exclusive use of individual units and shall be at least 48 square feet in size with a minimum width dimension of four feet, and:

(i) Balconies used for entrances or exits shall not be considered as open space except where such exits or entrances are for the sole use of the unit; and

(ii) Required open space may include roofed or enclosed structures such as a recreation center or covered picnic area;

(b) Wherever possible, private outdoor open spaces should be oriented toward the sun; and

(c) Private outdoor spaces shall be screened or designed to provide privacy for the users of the space;

(7) Shared Outdoor Recreation Areas – Residential Use.

(a) In addition to the requirements of subsections (5) and (6) of this section, usable outdoor recreation space shall be provided in residential developments for the shared or common use of all the residents in the following amounts:

(i) Studio up to and including two-bedroom units, 200 square feet per unit; and

(ii) Three- or more bedroom units, 300 square feet per unit;

(b) The required recreation space may be provided as follows:

(i) It may be all outdoor space; or

(ii) It may be part outdoor space and part indoor space; for example, an outdoor tennis court and indoor recreation room;

(iii) It may be all public or common space; or

(iv) It may be part common space and part private; for example, it could be an outdoor tennis court, indoor recreation room and balconies on each unit; and

(v) Where balconies are added to units, the balconies shall not be less than 48 square feet;

(c) Shared outdoor recreation space shall be readily observable for reasons of crime prevention and safety;

(8) Demarcation of Public, Semipublic, and Private Spaces – Crime Prevention.

(a) The structures and site improvements shall be designed so that public areas such as streets or public gathering places, semipublic areas and private outdoor areas are clearly defined in order to establish persons having a right to be in the space, in order to provide for crime prevention and to establish maintenance responsibility; and

(b) These areas may be defined by:

(i) A deck, patio, low wall, hedge, or draping vine;

(ii) A trellis or arbor;

(iii) A change in level;

(iv) A change in the texture of the path material;

(v) Sign; or

(vi) Landscaping;

(9) Crime Prevention and Safety.

(a) Windows shall be located so that areas vulnerable to crime can be surveyed by the occupants;

(b) Interior laundry and service areas shall be located in a way that they can be observed by others;

(c) Mail boxes shall be located in lighted areas having vehicular or pedestrian traffic;

(d) The exterior lighting levels shall be selected and the angles shall be oriented towards areas vulnerable to crime; and

(e) Light fixtures shall be provided in areas having heavy pedestrian or vehicular traffic and in potentially dangerous areas such as parking lots, stairs, ramps, and abrupt grade changes:

(i) Fixtures shall be placed at a height so that light patterns overlap at a height of seven feet, which is sufficient to illuminate a person;

(10) Access and Circulation.

(a) The number of allowed access points for a development shall be as provided in SHMC 17.84.070;

(b) All circulation patterns within a development shall be designed to accommodate emergency vehicles; and

(c) Provisions shall be made for pedestrianways and bicycleways if such facilities are shown on an adopted plan;

(11) Distance between Multiple-Family Residential Structure and Other.

(a) To provide privacy, light, air, and access to the multiple and attached residential dwellings within a development, the following separations shall apply:

(i) Buildings with windowed walls facing buildings with windowed walls shall have a 25-foot separation;

(ii) Buildings with windowed walls facing buildings with a blank wall shall have a 15-foot separation;

(iii) Buildings with opposing blank walls shall have a 10-foot separation;

(iv) Building separation shall also apply to buildings having projections such as balconies, bay windows, and room projections; and

(v) Buildings with courtyards shall maintain separation of opposing walls as listed in subsections (11)(a)(i), (ii) and (iii) of this section for walls in separate buildings;

(b) Where buildings exceed a horizontal dimension of 60 feet or exceed 30 feet in height, the minimum wall separation shall be one foot for each 15 feet of building length over 50 feet and two feet for each 10 feet of building height over 30 feet;

(c) Driveways, parking lots, and common or public walkways shall maintain the following separation for dwelling units within eight feet of the ground level:

(i) Driveways and parking lots shall be separated from windowed walls by at least eight feet; walkways running parallel to the face of the structures shall be separated by at least five feet; and

(ii) Driveways and parking lots shall be separated from living room windows by at least 10 feet; walkways running parallel to the face of the structure shall be separated by at least seven feet;

(12) Parking. All parking and loading areas shall be designed in accordance with the requirements set forth in SHMC 17.80.050 and 17.80.090; Chapter 17.76 SHMC, Visual Clearance Areas; and Chapter 17.84 SHMC, Access, Egress, and Circulation;

(13) Landscaping.

(a) All landscaping shall be designed in accordance with the requirements set forth in Chapter 17.72 SHMC; and

(b) For residential use, in addition to the open space and recreation area requirements of subsections (6) and (7) of this section, a minimum of 15 percent of the gross area including parking, loading and service areas shall be landscaped;

(14) Drainage. All drainage plans shall be designed in accordance with the criteria in the most current adopted St. Helens master drainage plan;

(15) Provision for the Handicapped. All facilities for the handicapped shall be designed in accordance with the requirements pursuant to applicable federal, state and local law;

(16) Signs. All sign placement and construction shall be designed in accordance with requirements set forth in Chapter 17.88 SHMC;

(17) All of the provisions and regulations of the underlying zone shall apply unless modified by other sections of this code (e.g., the planned development, Chapter 17.148 SHMC; or a variance granted under Chapter 17.108 SHMC; etc.). (Ord. 3150 § 3 (Att. B), 2011; Ord. 3144 § 2 (Att. A), 2011; Ord. 2875 § 1.128.180, 2003)


Chapter 17.100 CONDITIONAL USE

Sections:

17.100.010    Purpose.

17.100.020    Administration and approval process.

17.100.030    Expiration of approval – Standards for extension of time.

17.100.035    Phased development or existing development.

17.100.040    Approval standards and conditions.

17.100.050    Major modification to approved plans or existing development.

17.100.060    Minor modification to approved plans or existing development.

17.100.070    Application submission requirements.

17.100.080    Site conditions.

17.100.090    The site plan.

17.100.100    Grading plan.

17.100.110    Architectural drawings.

17.100.120    Landscape plan.

17.100.130    Sign drawings.

17.100.140    Additional information required and waiver of requirements.

17.100.150    Additional requirements for conditional use types.


17.100.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards and procedures under which conditional use may be permitted, enlarged or altered if the site is appropriate and if other conditions can be met. (Ord. 2875 § 1.140.010, 2003)


17.100.020 Administration and approval process.

(1) The applicant of a conditional use proposal shall be the recorded owner of the property or an agent authorized in writing by the owner.

(2) A preapplication conference with city staff is required. (See SHMC 17.24.040.)

(3) Due to possible changes in state statutes, or regional or local policy, information given by staff to the applicant during the preapplication conference is valid for no more than six months:

(a) Another preapplication conference is required if any development application for this site is submitted six months or later after the preapplication conference; and

(b) Failure of the director to provide any of the information required by this section shall not constitute a waiver of the standards, criteria or requirements of the applications.

(4) The director shall mail notice of any conditional use proposal to the persons who are entitled to notice in accordance with SHMC 17.24.130.

(5) Action on the application shall be in accordance with SHMC 17.24.090(3). (Ord. 2875 § 1.140.020, 2003)


17.100.030 Expiration of approval – Standards for extension of time.

(1) Approval of a conditional use by the planning commission shall be void if:

(a) Substantial construction of the approved plan has not begun within a one-and-one-half-year period; or

(b) Construction on the site is a departure from the approved plan.

(c) If project is not completed (certificate of occupancy/compliance) within three years, then reapplication is required.

(2) The director shall, upon written request by the applicant and payment of the required fee, grant an extension of the approval period not to exceed one year; provided, that:

(a) No changes are made on the original conditional use plan as approved by the planning commission;

(b) The applicant can show intent of initiating construction on the site within the one-year extension period; and

(c) There have been no changes to the applicable comprehensive plan policies and ordinance provisions on which the approval was based.

(3) Notice of the decision shall be provided to the applicant. The director’s decision may be appealed by the applicant as provided by SHMC 17.24.310. (Ord. 2875 § 1.140.030, 2003)


17.100.035 Phased development or existing development.

(1) The planning commission shall approve a time schedule for developing a site in phases over a period of time of one year, but in no case shall the total time period for all phases be greater than three years without reapplying for conditional use review.

(2) The criteria for approving a phased conditional use review proposal is that all of the following are satisfied:

(a) The public facilities shall be constructed in conjunction with or prior to each phase;

(b) The development and occupancy of any phase shall not be dependent on the use of temporary public facilities:

(i) A “temporary public facility” is any facility not constructed to the applicable city or district standard;

(c) The phased development shall not result in requiring the city or other property owners to construct public facilities that were required by approved development proposal; and

(d) The planning commission’s decision may be appealed as provided by SHMC 17.24.310(2). No notice need be given of the planning commission’s decision. (Ord. 2875 § 1.140.035, 2003)


17.100.040 Approval standards and conditions.

(1) The planning commission shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for a conditional use or to enlarge or alter a conditional use based on findings of fact with respect to each of the following criteria:

(a) The site size and dimensions provide adequate area for the needs of the proposed use;

(b) The characteristics of the site are suitable for the proposed use considering size, shape, location, topography, and natural features;

(c) All required public facilities have adequate capacity to serve the proposal;

(d) The applicable requirements of the zoning district are met except as modified by this chapter;

(e) The supplementary requirements set forth in Chapter 17.88 SHMC, Signs; and Chapter 17.96 SHMC, Site Development Review, if applicable, are met; and

(f) The use will comply with the applicable policies of the comprehensive plan.

(2) An enlargement or alteration of an existing conditional use shall be subject to the development review provisions set forth in Chapter 17.96 SHMC.

(3) The planning commission may impose conditions on its approval of a conditional use, which it finds are necessary to ensure the use is compatible with other use in the vicinity. These conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:

(a) Limiting the hours, days, place, and manner of operation;

(b) Requiring design features which minimize environmental impacts such as noise, vibration, air pollution, glare, odor, and dust;

(c) Requiring additional setback areas, lot area, or lot depth or width;

(d) Limiting the building height, size or lot coverage, or location on the site;

(e) Designating the size, number, location, and design of vehicle access points;

(f) Requiring street right-of-way to be dedicated and the street to be improved;

(g) Requiring landscaping, screening, drainage and surfacing of parking and loading areas;

(h) Limiting the number, size, location, height, and lighting of signs;

(i) Limiting or setting standards for the location and intensity of outdoor lighting;

(j) Requiring berming, screening or landscaping and the establishment of standards for their installation and maintenance;

(k) Requiring and designating the size, height, location, and materials for fences; and

(l) Requiring the protection and preservation of existing trees, soils, vegetation, watercourses, habitat areas, and drainage areas. (Ord. 2875 § 1.140.040, 2003)


17.100.050 Major modification to approved plans or existing development.

(1) An applicant may request approval of modification to an approved plan by:

(a) Providing the director with five copies of the proposed modified conditional use plan; and

(b) A narrative addressing the proposed changes as listed in subsection (2) of this section.

(2) The director shall determine that a major modification(s) will result if one or more of the changes listed below have been proposed:

(a) A change in land use;

(b) An increase in dwelling unit density;

(c) A 10 percent change in the ratio of the different types of dwelling units to the number of units;

(d) A change in the type of commercial or industrial structures;

(e) A change in the type and location of accessways and parking areas where off-site traffic would be affected;

(f) An increase in the floor area proposed for nonresidential use by more than 10 percent where previously specified;

(g) A reduction of more than 10 percent of the area reserved for common open space and/or usable open space;

(h) A reduction of specified setback requirements by more than 20 percent;

(i) An elimination of project amenities by more than 10 percent where previously specified provided such as:

(i) Recreational facilities;

(ii) Screening; or

(iii) Landscaping provisions; and

(j) A 10 percent increase in the approved density.

(3) Upon the director determining that the proposed modification to the conditional use plan is a major modification, the applicant shall submit a new application in accordance with SHMC 17.100.070 for conditional use approval.

(4) Notice of the decision shall be provided to the applicant. The director’s decision may be appealed by the applicant as provided by SHMC 17.24.310(1). (Ord. 2875 § 1.140.050, 2003)


17.100.060 Minor modification to approved plans or existing development.

(1) Any modification which is not within the description of a major modification as provided in SHMC 17.100.050 shall be considered a minor modification.

(2) An applicant may request approval of a minor modification:

(a) Providing the director with three copies of the proposed modified conditional use plan; and

(b) A narrative which indicates the rationale for the proposed modification addressing the changes listed in SHMC 17.100.050(2).

(3) A minor modification shall be approved, approved with conditions or denied following the director’s review based on the findings that:

(a) No code provisions will be violated; and

(b) The modification is not a major modification.

(4) Notice of the director’s decision shall be given as provided by SHMC 17.24.120. The decision may be appealed as provided by SHMC 17.24.310(1). (Ord. 2875 § 1.140.060, 2003)


17.100.070 Application submission requirements.

(1) All applications shall be made on forms provided by the director and shall be accompanied by:

(a) Copies (number to be determined at the preapplication conference) of the site development plan(s) and necessary data or narrative which explains how the development conforms to the standards:

(i) Conditional use site plan(s) shall be drawn on sheets preferably not exceeding 18 inches by 24 inches;

(ii) The scale for a site plan shall be an engineering scale; and

(iii) All drawings of structure elevations shall be a standard architectural scale, being one-fourth-inch or one-eighth-inch; and

(b) The required fee.

(2) The required information may be combined and does not have to be placed on separate maps.

(3) The conditional use plan, data, and narrative shall include the following:

(a) Existing site conditions, SHMC 17.100.080;

(b) A site plan, SHMC 17.100.090;

(c) A grading plan, SHMC 17.100.100;

(d) A landscape plan, SHMC 17.100.120;

(e) Architectural elevations of all structures, SHMC 17.100.110;

(f) A sign plan, SHMC 17.100.130; and

(g) A copy of all existing and proposed restrictions or covenants. (Ord. 2875 § 1.140.070, 2003)


17.100.080 Site conditions.

The site analysis drawings shall include:

(1) A vicinity map showing streets and access points, pedestrian and bicycle pathways, transit stops, and utility locations;

(2) The site size and its dimensions;

(3) Contour lines at two-foot intervals for grades zero to 10 percent and less and five-foot intervals for grades over 10 percent;

(4) The general location of drainage patterns;

(5) The general location of natural hazard areas including:

(a) Floodplain areas (100-year floodplain and flooding);

(b) Slopes in excess of 25 percent;

(c) Unstable ground (areas subject to slumping, earth slides or movement);

(d) Areas having a high seasonal water table within zero to 24 inches of the surface for three or more weeks of the year;

(e) Areas having a severe soil erosion potential; and

(f) Areas having severe weak foundation soils;

(6) The general location of natural resource areas as shown on the comprehensive plan map inventory data;

(7) The general location of site features including:

(a) Rock outcroppings; and

(b) Trees with six-inch caliper or greater measuring four feet from ground level;

(8) The location of existing structures on the site and proposed use of those structures; and

(9) The location and type of noise sources on the site or on adjoining property such as traffic ways, mechanical equipment, or noise-producing land uses. (Ord. 2875 § 1.140.080, 2003)


17.100.090 The site plan.

The proposed conditional use plan shall be at the same scale as the site conditions and shall include the following information:

(1) The proposed site and surrounding properties;

(2) Contour intervals (see SHMC 17.100.080(3));

(3) The location, dimensions and names of all:

(a) Existing streets; and

(b) Proposed streets;

(4) The location and dimensions of:

(a) Entrances and exits on the site;

(b) Parking and circulation areas;

(c) Loading and services areas, if applicable;

(d) Pedestrian and bicycle circulation, if applicable;

(e) Outdoor common areas, if applicable; and

(f) Above ground utilities;

(5) The location, dimensions, and setback distances of all:

(a) Existing structures, improvements, and utilities which are:

(i) Located within 25 feet of the site and are on adjoining property; and

(ii) To remain on site;

(b) Proposed structures, improvements, and utilities on the site;

(6) The location of areas to be landscaped;

(7) The location of proposed utility lines;

(8) The location of mailboxes;

(9) The location of all structures and their orientation; and

(10) The location and type of outdoor lighting considering crime prevention techniques. (Ord. 2875 § 1.140.090, 2003)


17.100.100 Grading plan.

The site development plan shall include a grading plan at the same scale as the site analysis drawings and shall contain the following information:

(1) Requirements in SHMC 17.100.080 and 17.100.090;

(2) The location and extent to which grading will take place, indicating general contour lines, slope ratios, and slope stabilization proposals; and

(3) A statement from a registered engineer supported by factual data substantiating:

(a) The validity of the slope stabilization proposals; and

(b) That all problems will be mitigated and how they will be mitigated. (Ord. 2875 § 1.140.100, 2003)


17.100.110 Architectural drawings.

The conditional use plan proposal shall include:

(1) The square footage of all structures proposed for use on site; and

(2) Preliminary elevation drawings of each structure. (Ord. 2875 § 1.140.110, 2003)


17.100.120 Landscape plan.

(1) The conditional use plan proposal shall include:

(a) The general location of fences, buffers, and screenings;

(b) The general location of play areas and common open spaces;

(c) The general location of existing and proposed plant materials; and

(d) Location of underground sprinkler heads where applicable.

(2) The landscape plan shall include a narrative which addresses:

(a) Soil conditions; and

(b) Erosion control measures that will be used. (Ord. 2875 § 1.140.120, 2003)


17.100.130 Sign drawings.

Drawings indicating sign location shall be submitted in accordance with Chapter 17.88 SHMC. (Ord. 2875 § 1.140.130, 2003)


17.100.140 Additional information required and waiver of requirements.

(1) The director may require information in addition to that required by this chapter in accordance with SHMC 17.24.080(1).

(2) The director may waive a specific requirement for information in accordance with SHMC 17.24.080(2). (Ord. 2875 § 1.140.140, 2003)


17.100.150 Additional requirements for conditional use types.

(1) A conditional use proposal shall comply with the standards of the zoning district in which it is located and the applicable provisions of this code, or as otherwise provided in standards that follow.

(2) A conditional use permit shall not grant variances to the regulations otherwise prescribed by this code. A variance application may be filed in conjunction with the conditional use application and both applications may be heard at the same hearing.

(3) The additional dimensional requirements and approval standards for conditional use are as follows:

(a) Adult Entertainment. An establishment used primarily for the presentation of motion pictures, live persons, or videotapes having as a dominant theme material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

(i) No adult entertainment establishment shall be permitted to locate within 1,000 feet of any:

(A) Residential district;

(B) Public or private nursery, preschool, elementary, junior, middle, or high school;

(C) Day care center, nursery school, convalescent home, home for the aged, resident care facility, or hospital;

(D) Public library;

(E) Public park; or

(F) Religious institution;

(ii) Distance shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, objects or roads, from the closest point of the structure or portion of structure containing the use, to the closest portion of the residential district or property line upon which a use specified in subsection (3)(a)(i) of this section is listed and currently exists;

(iii) Any sign shall comply with the sign requirements, Chapter 17.88 SHMC;

(iv) Hours of operation shall be limited to 10:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m.;

(v) All windows less than seven feet from the ground shall be covered or screened in such a manner that the sales area and inventory are not visible from the sidewalk adjacent to the use;

(vi) Doors and windows shall at all times be closed except for normal ingress and egress; except for emergency exits, the doors shall be doubled, chambered or air lock concept;

(vii) No amplified or mechanically reproduced sounds shall emanate from the confines of the structure or portion of the structure in which the adult business is operated; and

(viii) All adult entertainment establishments shall comply with all applicable state laws;

(b) Automobile and Equipment: Sales/Rental (Farms, Heavy and Light Equipment).

(i) Setbacks. A minimum of five feet of the perimeter setback shall be used for landscaping and screening purposes (see Chapter 17.72 SHMC);

(c) Automotive and Equipment: Body Repairs, Light Equipment.

(i) Setbacks.

(A) A minimum of five feet of the perimeter setback shall surround all outdoor parking and storage areas (see Chapter 17.72 SHMC);

(B) Buffer screening shall be provided along the perimeter of all outdoor parking and storage areas as required in SHMC 17.72.080; and

(C) All repair work shall be performed indoors;

(d) Bed and Breakfast, Homestay, Boarding House. Extra parking per Chapter 17.80 SHMC;

(e) Caretaker Residence.

(i) Must have at least 20 feet of yard around the residence;

(ii) The residence can only be occupied by the caretaker and the caretaker’s family;

(iii) The caretaker must be an employee and/or under a contract to perform “caretaker” duties (e.g., security);

(iv) The yard must be at least 50 percent landscaped; and

(v) The maximum height of the caretaker residence shall be 35 feet;

(f) Community Recreation and Parks.

(i) Setbacks. All building setbacks shall be a minimum of 30 feet from any property line;

(ii) Off-street parking requirements, as necessary (see Chapter 17.80 SHMC);

(g) Drive-Up Service (See SHMC 17.80.060 for Additional Requirements).

(i) Minimum Setbacks. Where access to the drive-up service is not separated from abutting properties or public right-of-way by parking, structures, or landscaping, visual screening shall be provided to screen headlights from abutting property and right-of-way;

(ii) Drive-In Service Reservoir Requirement. All uses providing drive-in service as defined by this code shall provide on the same site a reservoir for inbound vehicles as follows:

	Use	Reservoir Requirement

	Drive-in banks	5 spaces/service terminal

	Drive-in restaurants	10 spaces/service window

	Drive-in theaters	10% of the theater capacity

	Gasoline service	3 spaces/pump station

	Mechanical car washes	3 spaces/washing unit

(iii) Reservoir Parking. Restaurants providing drive-up window service shall provide at least two designated parking spaces immediately beyond the service window, or provide other satisfactory methods, to allow customers requiring excessive waiting time to receive their food while parked;

(iv) Hours of Operation. Hours of operation shall be limited for the drive-in window when the property with the drive-in window facility abuts a residential use. In this case, hours of the drive-in window shall be limited to 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.;

(v) Walk-Up Service. Financial and other commercial establishments providing drive-up window facilities which do not provide for walk-in customer service (i.e., not allowing transactions within the structure) shall provide for safe, convenient, and readily accessible exterior walk-up window service, such as an automatic teller machine, at any time during regular business hours. Additionally, at a minimum, two parking spaces shall be provided allowing convenient access to the walk-up service window;

(vi) Emergency Exit. The design of the vehicle stacking area serving the drive-up window shall allow customers to leave the stacking line in their vehicle in the event of an emergency;

(vii) Pedestrian Access. On-site parking for walk-in customers shall be designed so that pedestrians do not have to cross drive-up window stacking lines to any public entrances into the building;

(viii) Obstruction of Rights-of-Way. Establishments having drive-up window facilities shall have sufficient stacking area to ensure that public rights-of-way are not obstructed; and

(ix) Sound Systems. Communications sound systems shall not exceed a measurement of 50 decibels at the adjoining property line(s) at any time;

(h) Hospitals, Nursing Homes, Etc. The yard must be at least 25 percent landscaped;

(i) Industrial Park.

(i) The minimum lot size is 40,000 square feet;

(ii) Minimum of provisions for three or more businesses; and

(iii) At least 30 percent of the businesses must be in the list of light industrial permitted uses;

(j) Neighborhood Store/Plaza.

(i) The maximum gross floor area is 2,500 square feet;

(ii) The types of uses are limited to food sales, coffee or deli shops, and personal services (barber/beauty shop);

(iii) The exterior must be generally the same as immediate neighbors;

(iv) No buffer or extra setback is required but screening and landscaping are required per Chapter 17.72 SHMC. The minimum landscaping shall be 25 percent of the lot area;

(v) On-site parking is required;

(vi) Signs are limited to those allowed in residential zones; and 

(vii) The location must abut a minor arterial;

(k) Religious Assembly.

(i) Setbacks.

(A) The front yard setback shall be a minimum of 20 feet;

(B) On corner lots and through lots, the setback shall be a minimum of 20 feet, plus meet visual clearance areas, Chapter 17.76 SHMC;

(C) The side yard setback shall be a minimum of 20 feet; and

(D) The rear yard setback shall be a minimum of 20 feet;

(l) Schools.

(i) Lot Size. There shall be no minimum lot size requirements for schools other than what is required for the applicable zoning district;

(ii) Setbacks.

(A) The front yard setback shall be a minimum of 30 feet;

(B) On corner lots and through lots, the setback shall be a minimum of 20 feet on any side facing a street, plus meet visual clearance areas, Chapter 17.76 SHMC;

(C) The side yard setback shall be a minimum of 20 feet; and

(D) The rear yard setback shall be a minimum of 30 feet;

(m) Travel Trailer Parks. In addition to the standards of the zone in which they are located and other references in this code, travel trailer parks shall comply to the standards of this subsection. If there is a conflict between the two standards, the standards of this subsection shall govern.

(i) Trailer parks shall be located on well-drained sites, and shall be so located that their drainage shall not endanger any life or property. All such trailer parks should be located in areas free from marshes, swamps, or other potential breeding places for insects or rodents;

(ii) The area of the trailer park shall be large enough to handle: the designated number of trailer spaces, necessary streets and drives, off-street parking, service areas, recreation areas, and setbacks;

(iii) Each trailer space shall contain a minimum of 1,200 square feet, except that at the option of the owner, the minimum size may be 1,000 square feet if an area of 100 square feet for each trailer space is provided for recreation. Each trailer space shall be a minimum of 25 feet in width, and shall abut on a drive with unobstructed access to a street. Such spaces shall be clearly defined. Trailers shall be located in such spaces with a minimum of 15 feet between trailers, or between a trailer and any building;

(iv) No trailer shall be located less than five feet from a side or rear property line;

(v) No trailer shall be located less than 25 feet from any street or highway, or so that any part of such trailer will obstruct any drive or walkway;

(vi) No trailer shall remain in a trailer park unless a trailer space is available, and then only for a maximum of 30 consecutive days;

(vii) Access drives shall be provided to each trailer space, shall be continuous, shall connect with a street, and shall have a minimum width of 20 feet, with a minimum total width of 36 feet for exterior connections;

(viii) Improved walkways, not less than two feet in width, shall be provided from each trailer space to service buildings;

(ix) Access drives within the park shall be paved according to the city’s developmental standards;

(x) Off-street parking shall be provided with a minimum of one and one-half parking spaces for each trailer space. Minimum width access drives shall not be considered in fulfilling this requirement;

(xi) Recreation areas which may be provided according to subsection (3)(m)(iii) of this section shall be suitably equipped, maintained and restricted to such uses. Such areas shall be protected from streets, drives and parking areas. The minimum size of each such recreation area shall be 2,500 square feet;

(xii) No permanent additions of any kind shall be built onto, nor become part of, any trailer. Skirting of trailers is permissible, but such skirting shall not attach the trailer to the ground;

(xiii) Permanent structures located within any trailer space shall be used for storage purposes only, shall have a maximum area of 25 square feet, shall be located not less than six feet from any trailer, and shall be subject to all applicable city building codes;

(xiv) Wheels of trailers shall not be removed, except temporarily when in need of repairs; the wheels or jacking system must be attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices; and

(xv) A sight-obscuring fence of not less than eight feet in height shall be provided along any lot line which abuts or faces a more restricted residential district;

(n) All freestanding and detached towers, antennas, wind-generating devices and TV receiving dishes in residential zones shall have setbacks equal to or greater than the height of the proposed structure. Suitable protective anti-climb fencing and a landscape planting screen, in accordance with Chapter 17.72 SHMC, Landscaping and Screening, shall be provided and maintained around these structures and accessory attachments; and

(o) Vehicle Fuel Sales.

(i) Lot size: minimum of 10,000 square feet;

(ii) Setbacks.

(A) The front yard setback shall be 20 feet;

(B) On corner and through lots, the setback shall be 20 feet on any side facing a street; and

(C) No side or rear yard setback shall be required, except 40 feet, to include buffer and screening, where abutting a residential zoning district;

(iii) Fuel tank installation shall be in accordance with applicable sections of this code; and

(iv) Building height: same as applicable zone. 

(p) Marijuana Retailer and/or Medical Marijuana Dispensary.

(i) No marijuana retailer and/or medical marijuana dispensary shall be permitted to locate within 1,000 feet of any public or private: child care facility; preschool; elementary school; or junior, middle, or high school that lawfully exists at the time the conditional use permit application is deemed complete.

(A) Distance shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, objects or roads, from the closest point of the structure or portion of structure containing the proposed marijuana retailer and/or medical marijuana dispensary to the closest property line of the property upon which the other uses specified in subsection (3)(p)(i) of this section is listed.

(ii) No marijuana retailer and/or medical marijuana dispensary shall be permitted to locate within 2,000 feet of any other marijuana retailer and/or medical marijuana dispensary that lawfully exists at the time the conditional use permit application is deemed complete.

(A) Distance shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, objects or roads, from the closest point of the structure or portion of structure containing the proposed marijuana retailer and/or medical marijuana dispensary to the closest point of the structure or portion of structure containing the existing marijuana retailer and/or medical marijuana dispensary.

(B) If multiple conditional use permit applications are submitted for locations within the distance specified in subsection (3)(p)(ii) of this section but are not yet legally established, the valid conditional use permit submitted first shall take precedence for the purpose of this subsection.

(iii) No marijuana retailer and/or medical marijuana dispensary shall be allowed as a temporary use and shall be located in a permanent building.

(iv) Any marijuana retailer and/or medical marijuana dispensary shall have refuse containers or refuse collection areas that are secure from entry outside the facility.

(v) Any marijuana retailer and/or medical marijuana dispensary shall comply with all applicable state and local laws. (Ord. 3190 § 2 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 2875 § 1.140.150, 2003)


Chapter 17.104 NONCONFORMING SITUATIONS

Sections:

17.104.010    Purpose.

17.104.020    Administration – Determination of nonconforming use status.

17.104.030    Pending building permits.

17.104.040    Criteria for nonconforming situations.

17.104.050    Repairs and maintenance.

17.104.060    Uses under conditional use provisions not nonconforming uses.


17.104.010 Purpose.

(1) Within the districts established by this code or amendments that may later be adopted, there may exist lots, uses of land, and structures which were lawful before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this code, but which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms of this code or future amendments.

(2) It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to permit these nonconforming lots, structures, and uses to continue but to disallow the enlargement, expansion or extension of such with some exceptions.

(3) Nonconforming lots, uses and structures are incompatible with the comprehensive plan and, as such, would not currently be allowed in the zoning district involved. (Ord. 2875 § 1.142.010, 2003)


17.104.020 Administration – Determination of nonconforming use status.

(1) Upon written request, such as a building permit or land use application, the director shall make a written determination regarding nonconforming status.

(2) Upon application and payment of fees, the decision of the director may be appealed as provided by SHMC 17.24.310(1). (Ord. 2875 § 1.142.020, 2003)


17.104.030 Pending building permits.

(1) In order to avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter requires any change in the location, plans, construction, size, or designated use of any building, structure, or part thereof for which a required city building permit has been legally granted prior to enactment of this code.

(2) If a building permit is revoked or for any reason becomes void, all rights granted by this chapter are extinguished and the project shall thereafter be required to conform to all the provisions of this code. (Ord. 2875 § 1.142.030, 2003)


17.104.040 Criteria for nonconforming situations.

(1) Nonconforming Lots of Record.

(a) Except as provided in subsections (1)(b), (2) and (3) of this section, no nonconforming lot of record at the effective date of the ordinance codified in this code or amendment thereto shall be developed for any use, and no existing use on a nonconforming lot of record shall be enlarged, extended or reconstructed;

(b) If on the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this code a legally constituted lot does not meet the lot size requirements of the applicable zoning district in which the property is located, the lot may:

(i) Be occupied by one use permitted outright in a commercial zoning district, if the lot is located within a commercial zoning district; or

(ii) Be occupied by single-dwelling units and accessory structures if located in a residential zoning district; the house may be rebuilt on the same size, or smaller, footprint if destroyed by fire or natural disasters over 60 percent of value (any changes to the footprint must meet all setbacks and other regulations of the zone);

(c) In any district, construction on a single nonconforming lot of record existing at the effective date of the ordinance codified in this code or amendment thereto, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this code, are subject to the following:

(i) The nonconforming lot shall be in a separate ownership and not contiguous with other lots in the same ownership; and

(ii) All setback, height and other applicable provisions of the zoning district shall be satisfied;

(d) If two or more lots, or combinations of lots and portions of lots, in single ownership are of record at the effective date of the ordinance codified in this code and are made nonconforming as to lot area, width, or depth by this code, the lots involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this code, and:

(i) No portion of the aggregated parcels shall be conveyed, transferred, or used in any manner which violates or creates a violation of this code; and

(ii) No division of the parcel shall be made which creates any lot remaining with an area, width or depth which does not meet the requirements of this code.

(2) Criteria for Nonconforming Uses of Land. Where at the time of adoption of the ordinance codified in this code a lawful use of land exists which would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this code, and where such use involves no structure or building other than a single sign or accessory structure, the use may be continued as long as it remains otherwise lawful, provided:

(a) No such nonconforming use is enlarged, increased or extended to occupy a greater area of land or space than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance codified in this code;

(b) No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot other than that occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance codified in this code;

(c) The nonconforming use of land is not discontinued for any reason for a period of more than six months;

(d) If the use is discontinued or abandoned for any reason for a period of six months, any subsequent use of land shall conform to the regulations specified by this code for the zone in which such land is located; and

(e) For purposes of this section, a use is discontinued or abandoned upon the occurrence of the first of any of the following events:

(i) On the date when the use of land is vacated;

(ii) On the date the use ceases to be actively involved in the sale of merchandise or the provision of services;

(iii) On the date of termination of any lease or contract under which the nonconforming use has occupied the land; and

(iv) On the date a request for final reading of water and power meters is made to the applicable utility districts;

(f) No additional structure, building or sign shall be constructed on the lot in connection with such nonconforming use of land.

(3) Nonconforming Structures. Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of the ordinance codified in this code that could not be built under the terms of this code by reason of restrictions on lot area, lot coverage, height, yard, equipment, its location on the lot, or other requirements concerning the structure, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:

(a) No such nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity, but any structure or portion thereof may be enlarged or altered in a way that satisfies the requirements of this code or will decrease its nonconformity;

(b) Should such nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 60 percent of its current value as assessed value by the Columbia County assessor, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this code, except subsection (1)(b)(ii) of this section; and

(c) Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the zoning district in which it is located after it is moved.

(4) Nonconforming Use of Structures.

(a) If a single lawful use contained in a single structure involving that structure or structure and premises in combination (except for a single accessory structure) existed as of the adoption date of the ordinance codified in this code, it would not be allowed in the zoning district in which it is located, or which is nonconforming because of inadequate off-street parking, landscaping or other deficiency (under the terms of this code or amendment thereto), the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:

(i) No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this code in the zoning district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except to accommodate a changing of the use of the structure to a use permitted in the zone in which it is located;

(ii) Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any existing parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption or amendment of the ordinance codified in this code, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building;

(iii) A change of use for a single use in a single structure may occur under the following conditions:

(A) The nonconforming use status was registered with the director in the manner provided by subsection (4)(c) of this section for the purpose of establishing the use classification as listed in any of the permitted use subsections of this code;

(B) The new use is within the registered permitted use classification; and

(C) The new use conforms to the zoning ordinance provisions;

(iv) When a nonconforming use of a structure and premises is discontinued or abandoned for six months the structure and premises shall not thereafter be used except in full conformity with all regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. For purposes of this section, a use shall be deemed to be discontinued or abandoned upon the occurrence of the first of any of the following events:

(A) On the date when the structure or premises is vacated;

(B) On the date the use ceases to be actively involved in the sale of merchandise or the provision of services;

(C) On the date of termination of any lease or contract under which the nonconforming use has occupied the premises; or

(D) On the date a request for final reading of water and power meters is made to the applicable utility districts;

(v) Where a nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming use status of the land:

(A) “Destruction,” for the purpose of this subsection, is defined as damage to an extent of more than 60 percent of its current assessed value by the Columbia County assessor; and

(B) Any subsequent use shall conform fully to all provisions of the zoning district in which it is located;

(b) If a single structure or a structure and premises containing a number of lawful uses (except for a single accessory structure) existed as of the adoption date of the ordinance codified in this code, and those uses would not be allowed in the zoning district in which they are located, or which are nonconforming because of inadequate off-street parking, landscaping or other deficiency (under the terms of this chapter or amendment thereto), the lawful uses may be continued so long as they remain otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:

(i) No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this code in the zoning district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except to accommodate a changing of the use of the structure to a use permitted in the zone in which it is located;

(ii) Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any existing parts of a building which was manifestly arranged or designed for such use as of the adoption date of the ordinance codified in this code, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building except as limited by subsection (4)(b)(v) of this section;

(iii) A change of use may occur as follows:

(A) The nonconforming use status was registered with the director in the manner provided by subsection (4)(c) of this section for the purpose of establishing the use classification as listed in any of the permitted use subsections of this code;

(B) The new use is within the registered use classifications;

(C) The new use does not cause an increase in the total number of square feet in the registered use classification; or

(D) The new use conforms to the zoning ordinance provisions;

(iv) Where a structure had vacant units as of the adoption date of the ordinance codified in this code, such vacant spaces shall be classified with the most restrictive use classification applicable to the structure; and

(v) When the use of the structure, including all uses, is discontinued or abandoned for three months, the structure and premises shall not thereafter be used except in full conformity with all regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. For purposes of this section, a use shall be deemed to be discontinued or abandoned upon the occurrence of the first of any of the following events:

(A) The vacation of the structure or premises; or

(B) The making of a request for final reading of water and power meters to the applicable utility districts;

(c) Nonconforming use may be registered with the director upon proof that the use was in lawful existence as of the adoption date of the ordinance codified in this code;

(d) The provisions of this section shall not be interpreted as granting an owner of a nonconforming use a vested right. The provisions of this section may be revised in a manner which does not change the rights granted by this section;

(e) Ongoing home occupations may be granted nonconforming status provided it can be proven that they were:

(i) Permitted under county authority prior to annexation to the city and have been in continuous operation since initial approval;

(ii) Permitted under city authority prior to the adoption date of the ordinance codified in this code, and have since been in continuous operation; or

(iii) Home occupations without city or county approval which cannot prove nonconforming status shall be considered in violation of this chapter and shall cease until the appropriate approvals have been granted. (Ord. 2875 § 1.142.040, 2003)


17.104.050 Repairs and maintenance.

(1) On any nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming situation, normal repairs, or replacement on nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing may be performed in a manner not in conflict with the other provisions of this chapter.

(2) Nothing in this code prevents the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official. (Ord. 2875 § 1.142.050, 2003)


17.104.060 Uses under conditional use provisions not nonconforming uses.

(1) A permitted use existing before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this code which, under the provisions of this code, is now permitted only upon receiving a conditional use permit under the terms of this code shall not be deemed a nonconforming use in such zoning district if it otherwise conforms to the standards of this code, but shall without further action be considered a conforming use subject to the provisions applicable to conditional uses.

(2) Enlargement, extension, reconstruction, or moving of such use shall only be allowed subject to the provisions for conditional use as contained in Chapter 17.100 SHMC. (Ord. 2875 § 1.142.060, 2003)


Chapter 17.108 VARIANCE

Sections:

17.108.010    Purpose.

17.108.020    Applicability of provisions.

17.108.030    Administration and approval process.

17.108.040    Expiration of approval – Standards for extension of time.

17.108.050    Criteria for granting a variance.

17.108.060    Application submission requirements.

17.108.070    The site plan.

17.108.080    Exceptions to site development review standards.


17.108.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide the following:

(1) Standards for the granting of variances from the applicable zoning requirements of this code where it can be shown that, owing to special and unusual circumstances related to a specific piece of the land, the literal interpretation of the provisions of the applicable zone would cause an undue or unnecessary hardship, except that no use variances shall be granted; and

(2) For the reduction of the yard setback areas where a reduction is necessary to enlarge an existing structure or for the increase in lot coverage where an increase is for these reasons or new accessory structures. (Ord. 3189 § 2 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 2875 § 1.144.010, 2003)


17.108.020 Applicability of provisions.

(1) The variance standards are intended to apply to individual platted and recorded lots/parcels only.

(2) An applicant who is proposing to vary a specification standard for lots yet to be created through a subdivision process may not utilize the variance procedure unless otherwise specified in Chapter 17.136 SHMC, Land Division – Subdivision.

(3) The provisions of this chapter shall apply to building setback requirements in all zoning districts and pursuant to other chapters of the development code. (Ord. 3150 § 3 (Att. B), 2011; Ord. 2875 § 1.144.020, 2003)


17.108.030 Administration and approval process.

(1) The applicant for a variance shall be the recorded owner of the property or an agent authorized in writing by the owner.

(2) A preapplication conference with city staff shall be required.

(3) Due to possible changes in state statutes, or regional or local policy, information given by staff to the applicant during the preapplication conference is valid for no more than six months:

(a) Another preapplication conference is required if any variance application is submitted six months after the preapplication conference; and

(b) Failure of the director to provide any of the information required by this chapter shall not constitute a waiver of the standards, criteria or requirements of the applications.

(4) The commission shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny any application for a variance. The commission shall apply the standards set forth in SHMC 17.108.050 when reviewing an application for a variance.

(5) The decision of the commission may be appealed in accordance with SHMC 17.24.310(1). 

(6) The director shall mail notice of any variance decision to persons who are entitled to notice in accordance with SHMC 17.24.130. (Ord. 3189 § 2 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 2875 § 1.144.030, 2003)


17.108.040 Expiration of approval – Standards for extension of time.

(1) Approval of a variance shall be void unless:

(a) Substantial construction of the approved plan has begun within a one-year period; or

(b) Construction on the site is consistent with the approved plan.

(2) The director shall, upon written request by the applicant and payment of the required fee, grant an extension of the approval period not to exceed one year; provided, that:

(a) No changes are made on the original variance plan as approved by the director;

(b) The applicant can show intent of initiating construction on the site within the one-year extension period; and

(c) There have been no changes to the applicable comprehensive plan policies and ordinance provisions on which the approval was based.

(3) Notice of the decision shall be provided to the applicant. The decision of the director may be appealed by the applicant as provided by SHMC 17.24.310(1). (Ord. 2875 § 1.144.040, 2003)


17.108.050 Criteria for granting a variance.

(1) The commission shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for a variance based on finding that the following criteria are satisfied:

(a) The proposed variance will not be significantly detrimental in its consequence to the overall purposes of this code, be in conflict with the applicable policies of the comprehensive plan, to any other applicable policies and standards of this code, and be significantly detrimental in its consequence to other properties in the same zoning district or vicinity;

(b) There are special circumstances that exist which are peculiar to the lot size or shape, topography or other circumstances over which the applicant has no control, and which are not applicable to other properties in the same zoning district;

(c) The use proposed will be the same as permitted under this code and city standards will be maintained to the greatest extent that is reasonably possible while permitting some economic use of the land;

(d) Existing physical and natural systems, such as but not limited to traffic, drainage, dramatic landforms, or parks, will not be adversely affected any more than would occur if the development were located as specified in the code; and

(e) The hardship is not self-imposed and the variance requested is the minimum variance which would alleviate the hardship.

(2) The commission shall approve, approve with modifications, or deny an application for an access variance in accordance with the criteria set forth in SHMC 17.84.150.

(3) The planning commission shall approve, approve with modifications, or deny an application for a subdivision variance subject to the criteria set forth in SHMC 17.136.120.

(4) The setback requirements in the applicable zone may be reduced up to 20 percent (a reduction of 20 percent of the required setback) and/or the lot coverage standards increased up to five percent (maximum specified lot coverage plus five percent) without a variance, provided the following standards are satisfied:

(a) The reduction of the setback area or increase in lot coverage established by the applicable zoning district shall be necessary to allow for the enlargement or remodeling of an existing building, accessory structure, or auxiliary dwelling unit;

(b) The increase in lot coverage established by the applicable zoning district may also allow for new accessory structures or auxiliary dwelling units;

(c) The garage setback to the front property line satisfies the requirements of the applicable zoning district;

(d) The standards of Chapter 17.76 SHMC, Visual Clearance Areas, shall be satisfied;

(e) The proposed building, accessory structure, addition, or auxiliary dwelling unit shall not encroach upon any existing easements;

(f) When the proposed building or addition is within the rear yard, the setback adjacent to the rear property line shall be landscaped with sight-obscuring plantings in accordance with the standards set forth in SHMC 17.72.080, Buffering and screening requirements; and

(g) Setback, buffering and screening requirements that apply when commercial and industrial zones abut a residential zone shall be satisfied.

(5) Reasonable Accommodation.

(a) This development code has been developed to achieve the policy set out in ORS 197.663 to afford persons or groups of persons with disabilities an equal opportunity to use and enjoy housing within the city of St. Helens. Nevertheless, it may at times be necessary to make reasonable accommodations in land use and zoning policies or procedures to avoid discrimination against persons with disabilities.

(i) Upon request by an applicant, the director shall waive a requirement of this development code where the requested modification is reasonable and necessary to make a reasonable accommodation in compliance with the Federal Fair Housing Act. A requested modification shall be considered unreasonable when it would impose an undue burden or expense on the city or create a fundamental alteration in the zoning scheme. (Ord. 3232 § 2 (Att. A), 2018; Ord. 3189 § 2 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 3032 § 1(5), 2007; Ord. 2875 § 1.144.050, 2003)


17.108.060 Application submission requirements.

(1) All applications shall be made on forms provided by the director and shall be accompanied by:

(a) Copies of the variance site plan(s) and necessary data or narrative (number to be determined at the preapplication conference), which explains how the development conforms to the standards:

(i) Sheet size for a variance site plan and required drawings shall preferably not exceed 18 inches by 24 inches;

(ii) The scale of the site plan shall be an engineering scale; and

(iii) All drawings of structure elevations shall be a standard architectural scale, being one-fourth-inch or one-eighth-inch;

(b) The required fee.

(2) The required information may be combined and does not have to be placed on separate maps.

(3) The variance site plan, data, and narrative shall include the following:

(a) A site plan, SHMC 17.108.070; and

(b) A copy of all existing and proposed restrictions or covenants. (Ord. 2875 § 1.144.060, 2003)


17.108.070 The site plan.

(1) The proposed variance site plan shall include the following information:



(a) The proposed site and surrounding properties;

(b) The location, dimensions and names of all existing streets;

(c) The locations and dimensions of:

(i) Entrances and exits on the site;

(ii) Parking and circulation areas;

(iii) Loading and services areas;

(iv) Pedestrian and bicycle circulation;

(v) Outdoor common areas;

(vi) Above ground utilities; and

(vii) Existing landscaping;

(d) The location, dimensions and setback distances of all:

(i) Existing structures, improvements and utilities which are located within 25 feet of the sites and are on adjoining property; and

(ii) Proposed structures, improvements, landscaping, and utilities on the site.

(2) In the case of a request for a variance to the building height provisions of Chapter 17.68 SHMC:

(a) An elevation drawing of the structure and the proposed variances; and

(b) A drawing(s) to scale showing the impact on adjoining properties; for example, will the height variance, if granted, block a viewpoint from an adjoining property of a significant land feature. (Ord. 2875 § 1.144.070, 2003)


17.108.080 Exceptions to site development review standards.

(1) The director may grant an exception to the setback yard requirements in the applicable zone based on findings that the approval will result in the following:

(a) An exception which is not greater than 20 percent of the required setback;

(b) No adverse effect to adjoining properties in terms of light, noise levels, and fire hazard;

(c) No reduction in safety for vehicular and pedestrian access to the site and on site; 

(d) A more efficient use of the site which would result in more landscaping; and

(e) The preservation of natural features which have been incorporated into the overall design of the project.

(2) The director may grant an exception or deduction to the off-street parking dimensional and minimum number of space requirements in the applicable zoning district based on the following findings:

(a) The application is for a use designed for a specific purpose which is intended to be permanent in nature (for example, senior citizen housing) and which has a demonstrated low demand for off-street parking;

(b) There is an opportunity for shared parking and there is written evidence that the property owners have entered into a binding agreement to share parking; or

(c) There is community interest in the preservation of particular natural feature(s) on the site, public transportation is available to the site, and reducing the standards will not adversely affect adjoining uses; therefore, the public interest is not adversely affected by the granting of the exception.

(3) The director may grant an exception or deduction to the private outdoor area and shared outdoor recreation areas requirements, provided the application is for a use designed for a specific purpose which is intended to be permanent in nature (for example, senior citizen housing) and which can demonstrate a reduced demand for a private outdoor recreational area based on any one or more of the following findings:

(a) There is direct access by a pedestrian path, not exceeding one-quarter mile, from the proposed development to public open space or recreation areas which may be used by residents of the development;

(b) The development operates a motor vehicle which is available on a regular basis to transport residents of the development to public open space or recreation areas; or

(c) The required square footage of either the private outdoor area or the shared outdoor recreation area may be reduced if together the two areas equal or exceed the combined standard for both.

(4) The director shall grant an exception to the landscaping requirements of this code, SHMC 17.96.150, upon finding that the overall landscape plan provides for at least 20 percent of the gross site to be landscaped.

(5) The director’s decision may be appealed as provided by SHMC 17.24.310(1). No notice of the director’s decision need be given. (Ord. 2875 § 1.144.080, 2003)


Chapter 17.112 ESTABLISHED AREA – DEVELOPING AREA CLASSIFICATION

Sections:

17.112.010    Purpose.

17.112.020    Definitions.

17.112.030    Criteria for inclusion.

17.112.040    Designations.

17.112.050    Administration and approval process.


17.112.010 Purpose.

(1) The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards for the classification of land as it is annexed to the city.

(2) The intent of the comprehensive plan is that land within the city will not be reclassified except as a part of the plan update process. Any changes to the established and developing area boundaries shall comply with ORS 197.295(1). (Ord. 2875 § 1.150.010, 2003)


17.112.020 Definitions.

(1) Established Area.

(a) An “established area” is an area where the land is not classified as buildable land under OAR 660-08-0005;

(b) An established area may include some small tracts of vacant land (tracts less than an acre in size) provided the tracts are surrounded by land which is not classified as buildable land; and

(c) An area shown on a zone map or overlay map as an established area.

(2) Developing Area. A “developing area” is an area which is included in the city’s buildable land inventory under the provisions of OAR except as provided by subsection (1)(b) of this section. (Ord. 2875 § 1.150.020, 2003)


17.112.030 Criteria for inclusion.

(1) All land which is annexed to the city shall be classified as an established area or as a developing area on the plan map and on the zoning map.

(2) The decision shall be based on definition of the areas as set forth in SHMC 17.112.020. (Ord. 2875 § 1.150.030, 2003)


17.112.040 Designations.

An established area or developing area designation shall be placed on the plan map and on the zoning map upon approval of the designation. (Ord. 2875 § 1.150.040, 2003)


17.112.050 Administration and approval process.

(1) The applicant for annexation to the city shall apply for a land classification concurrently with the annexation application.

(2) The application shall be processed in the same manner as a zone change application under the provisions of Chapter 17.24 SHMC.

(3) The applicant shall provide the city with the following information:

(a) A map showing the land and uses surrounding the property to be annexed, conforming to the following standards:

(i) Sheet size indicating the area of the proposed established or developing area map change plan(s) and required drawings shall be drawn on sheets preferably not to exceed 18 inches by 24 inches; and

(ii) The scale of the site plan shall be an engineering scale;

(b) The required fee.

(4) The necessary data or narrative shall indicate:

(a) The number of acres to be included into the proposed established or developing area;

(b) The number of lots;

(c) The units/acre within the area;

(d) The general character of the area; and

(e) The location and dimensions of all existing streets. (Ord. 2875 § 1.150.050, 2003)


Chapter 17.116 TEMPORARY USES

Sections:

17.116.010    Purpose.

17.116.020    Administration and approval process.

17.116.030    Expiration of approval – Renewal.

17.116.040    Emergency situations.

17.116.050    Temporary use – Seasonal or special event.

17.116.060    Temporary use – Unforeseen/emergency situations.

17.116.065    Temporary use – Medical hardship.

17.116.070    Standards for approval of a temporary sales office, model house, or temporary building.

17.116.080    Application submission requirements.


17.116.010 Purpose.

(1) The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards for the approval of four types of temporary use:

(a) Use that is seasonal or directed toward a specific event;

(b) Use which is occasioned by an unforeseen event;

(c) Medical hardship; and

(d) Sales offices and model homes in conjunction with the sale of homes.

(2) This chapter is not intended to be a way to circumvent the strict application of the use districts. Therefore, time limits are to be strictly enforced. This chapter is not intended to apply to garage sales. (Ord. 3215 § 4 (Att. D), 2017; Ord. 2875 § 1.152.010, 2003)


17.116.020 Administration and approval process.

(1) The applicant for a temporary use proposal shall be the recorded owner of the property or an agent authorized in writing by the owner.

(2) A preapplication conference with city staff is required (see SHMC 17.24.040).

(3) Due to possible changes in state statutes, or regional or local policy, information given by staff to the applicant during the preapplication conference is valid for no more than six months, and:

(a) Another preapplication conference is required if any temporary use application is submitted six months after the preapplication conference; and

(b) Failure of the director to provide any of the information required by this chapter shall not constitute a waiver of the standards, criteria or requirements applicable to the applications.

(4) The director shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny any application for a temporary use as provided by SHMC 17.24.090. The director shall apply the standards set forth in sections of this code when reviewing an application.

(5) The director shall mail notice of any temporary use proposal decision to persons who may have the right to request a hearing before the commission in accordance with SHMC 17.24.120. (Ord. 2875 § 1.152.020, 2003)


17.116.030 Expiration of approval – Renewal.

(1) Temporary use approval by the director shall be effective for a period of up to one year unless otherwise stipulated by the approval. Except, medical hardship temporary use shall only be effective for up to six months.

(2) The temporary use approval by the director shall lapse if:

(a) Substantial construction of the approved plan or onset of the approved activity has not begun within the approval period; and

(b) Construction or activity on the site is a departure from the approved plan.

(3) A temporary use approval may be renewed once by the director for a period not to exceed one year. Except, medical hardship renewal use shall only be effective for up to six months. Notice of the decision shall be provided to the applicant. The director’s decision may be appealed by the applicant as provided by SHMC 17.24.310(1).

(4) A permit for temporary sales offices and model homes may be renewed on an annual basis in the same manner as if it were an original application as long as no more than 50 percent of the total number of dwelling units have been issued occupancy permits. (Ord. 3215 § 4 (Att. D), 2017; Ord. 2875 § 1.152.030, 2003)


17.116.040 Emergency situations.

The director may waive any of the requirements in this chapter or request additional information in accordance with SHMC 17.24.080 for cases which involve destruction of an existing structure due to fire, natural causes, or other circumstances that are beyond the control of the applicant. An emergency as allowed by this section shall not include failure by the applicant to submit a temporary use request as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2875 § 1.152.040, 2003)


17.116.050 Temporary use – Seasonal or special event.

(1) Definition.

(a) This type of temporary use is a use which by its nature will last less than one year. Examples of this type of use are uses associated with the sale of goods for a specific holiday, activity, or celebration, uses associated with construction or seasonal use. This type of use does not apply to businesses seeking a temporary or interim location;

(b) Very short-term temporary uses must meet criteria listed below but no notice shall be sent for anything less than 11 days per six-month period by the same organization; and

(c) A property owner is allowed only two temporary uses per calendar year on their property.

(2) Types of Use Permitted.

(a) Use associated with the celebration of a specific holiday such as the sale of Christmas trees and fireworks;

(b) Use associated with the sale of fresh fruits, produce, and flowers;

(c) Use associated with festivals or celebrations or special events;

(d) Seasonal activities such as the sale of food at sports events or activities;

(e) Use associated with construction such as the storage of equipment during the construction of roads or development, but not a temporary sales office or model home as provided by SHMC 17.116.070; and

(f) Temporary fund-raising and other civic activities in commercial zoning districts.

(3) Approval Criteria. Approval or approval with conditions shall be based on findings that all of the following criteria are satisfied:

(a) The temporary use is limited in duration by the purposes for which the permit is sought, such as parade stands, circus, fairs or other exhibitions, sales of goods, wares, merchandise, produce or Christmas trees, and other similar temporary needs;

(b) There exists adequate and safe ingress and egress when combined with the other use of the property as required by Chapter 17.84 SHMC, Access, Egress, and Circulation; and Chapter 17.76 SHMC, Visual Clearance Areas;

(c) There exists adequate parking for the customers of the temporary use as required by Chapter 17.80 SHMC, Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements. Exceptions to the parking space surface requirements may be granted as set forth in SHMC 17.80.050(10);

(d) The use will pose no hazard to pedestrians in the area of the use; and

(e) The use will not create adverse off-site impacts including noise, odors, vibrations, glare, or lights which will affect adjoining use in a manner which other use allowed outright in the zone would not affect adjoining uses. (Ord. 2875 § 1.152.050, 2003)


17.116.060 Temporary use – Unforeseen/emergency situations.

(1) Definitions. This type of temporary use is a use which is needed because of an unforeseen event such as fire, windstorm or flood, unexpected economic hardship, or due to an eviction resulting from condemnation or other proceedings.

(2) Types of Use Permitted.

(a) A mobile home or other temporary structure for a residential purpose in a residential zone;

(b) A mobile home or other temporary structure for a business purpose in a commercial or industrial zone; and

(c) Use of an existing dwelling or mobile or manufactured home during the construction period of a new residence on the same lot.

(3) Approval Criteria.

(a) Approval or approval with conditions shall be based on findings that one or more of the following criteria are satisfied:

(i) The need for use is the direct result of a casualty loss such as fire, windstorm, flood or other severe damage by the elements to a preexisting structure or facility previously occupied by the applicant on the premises for which the permit is sought;

(ii) The applicant has been evicted within 60 days of the date of the application from a preexisting occupancy of the premises for which the permit is sought as a result of condemnation proceedings by a public authority, or eviction by abatement of nuisance proceedings, or by determination of a public body or court having jurisdiction that the continued occupancy of the facilities previously occupied constitutes a nuisance or is unsafe for continued use; or

(iii) There has been a loss of leasehold occupancy rights by the applicant due to unforeseeable circumstances or other hardship beyond the foresight and control of the applicant;

(b) In addition to the criteria listed in subsection (3)(a) of this section, all of the following must be satisfied:

(i) There exists adequate and safe ingress and egress when combined with the other uses of the property, as required by Chapter 17.84 SHMC, Access, Egress, and Circulation; and Chapter 17.76 SHMC, Visual Clearance Areas;

(ii) There exists adequate parking for the customers of the temporary use as required by Chapter 17.80 SHMC, Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements;

(iii) The use will not result in congestion on adequate streets;

(iv) The use will pose no hazard to pedestrians in the area of the use;

(v) The use will not create adverse off-site impacts including noise, odors, vibrations, glare or lights which will affect adjoining use in a manner which other use allowed outright in the zone would not affect adjoining use; and

(vi) The use can be adequately served by sewer or septic system and water, if applicable. (Ord. 3215 § 4 (Att. D), 2017; Ord. 2875 § 1.152.060, 2003)


17.116.065 Temporary use – Medical hardship.

(1) The purpose of the temporary use medical hardship permit is to allow the convenient provision of supervision and/or assistance with daily care to a person or persons with a demonstrated health hardship by allowing the use of a recreational vehicle for living purposes on a lot or parcel developed with a detached single-family dwelling.

(2) The director may approve or approve with conditions a temporary use medical hardship permit, provided the following criteria are satisfied:

(a) The person(s) needing daily care (dependent person) is/are the principal resident(s) of the detached single-family dwelling or recreational vehicle. For the purpose of this section daily care includes but is not limited to bathing, grooming, eating, medication management, walking and transportation. Daily care does not include financial management or the improvement or maintenance of the subject property.

(i) Proof of the need for daily care shall be demonstrated by a written statement dated within 60 days of the submittal of temporary use permit or renewal thereof, by a medical doctor certifying the dependent person(s) has a health hardship that necessitates someone to provide care in order for them to remain independent (i.e., noninstitutional residence).

(ii) For the purpose of this section “health hardship” means a specific person’s need for daily supervision due to cognitive impairment and/or a specific person’s need for assistance with daily care as a result of age, physical impairment and/or poor health.

(b) The detached single-family dwelling or recreational vehicle not occupied by the person(s) needing daily care is occupied by the caregiver(s), who shall be specifically identified and named on the permit application.

(c) The temporary use of a recreational vehicle for living purposes shall not be a source of rental income.

(d) There exists adequate and safe ingress and egress when combined with the other uses of the property, as required by Chapter 17.84 SHMC, Access, Egress, and Circulation; and Chapter 17.76 SHMC, Visual Clearance Areas.

(e) The off-street parking available is not reduced below the minimum required by Chapter 17.80 SHMC as a result of the recreational vehicle used for temporary living purposes.

(f) During the duration of the approved temporary use permit, the recreational vehicle may connect to public water and sanitary sewer, if available, provided all permits are obtained to do so and requirements for connecting are met. If the recreational vehicle will be connected to public sewer, connection to public water shall be required, if available.

(g) The recreational vehicle shall be located on the same property as the detached single-family dwelling and shall not be allowed in a street or public right-of-way.

(h) Only one recreational vehicle shall be allowed on a property for this purpose.

(3) The director may revoke a temporary use medical hardship permit if it is found to not comply with the criteria per this section, constitutes a health hazard, or is otherwise contrary to public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 3215 § 4 (Att. D), 2017)


17.116.070 Standards for approval of a temporary sales office, model house, or temporary building.

(1) Temporary Sales Office. The director may approve or approve with conditions the use of any real property within the city as a temporary sales office or offices for the purpose of facilitating the sale of real property in any subdivision or tract of land within this city, but for no other purpose, provided the following criteria are satisfied:

(a) The temporary sales office shall be located within the boundaries of the subdivision or tract of land in which the real property is to be sold; and

(b) The property to be used for a temporary sales office shall not be permanently improved for that purpose.

(2) Model House. The director may approve or approve with conditions the use of any real property within the city as a model house to be used in connection with the sale of real property in any subdivision or tract of land within the city provided the following criteria are satisfied:

(a) The model house shall be located within the boundaries of the subdivision or tract of land where the real property to be sold is situated; and

(b) The property to be used for a model house shall be a permanently designed dwelling structure.

(3) Temporary Building. The director may approve or approve with conditions a temporary trailer or prefabricated building for use on any real commercial or industrial property within the city as a temporary commercial or industrial office or space associated with the primary use on the property, but for no other purpose, providing the following criteria are satisfied:

(a) The temporary trailer shall be located within the boundaries of the parcel of land on which it is located;

(b) The property to be used for a temporary trailer shall already be developed;

(c) There exists adequate and safe ingress and egress when combined with the other uses of the property, as required by Chapter 17.84 SHMC, Access, Egress, and Circulation; and Chapter 17.76 SHMC, Visual Clearance Areas;

(d) There exists adequate parking for the customers or users of the temporary use as required by Chapter 17.80 SHMC, Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements;

(e) The use will not result in congestion on adequate streets;

(f) The use will pose no hazard to pedestrians in the area of the use;

(g) The use will not create adverse off-site impacts including noise, odors, vibrations, glare or lights which will affect the adjoining uses in a manner which other uses allowed outright in the zone would not affect the adjoining uses; and

(h) The use can be adequately served by sewer or septic system and water, if applicable. (Ord. 2875 § 1.152.070, 2003)


17.116.080 Application submission requirements.

(1) The applicant shall submit:

(a) Copies for the director to review of site plan(s) (number determined at preapplication conference), and of the necessary data or narrative which explains how the temporary use proposal conforms to the standards:

(i) The site plan(s) drawings shall preferably be drawn on sheets not exceeding 18 inches by 24 inches;

(ii) The scale shall be an engineering scale; and

(iii) All drawings of structure elevations shall be a standard architectural scale, being one-fourth-inch or one-eighth-inch;

(b) An assessor’s map;

(c) One title transfer instrument; and

(d) The required fee.

(2) The proposed temporary use site plan shall include the following information (as noted on a preapplication checklist):

(a) The proposed site and its structures, driveways, parking, and landscaping areas;

(b) The number and location of all parking spaces to be used in conjunction with the temporary use;

(c) Location of any booth, stand, trailer, or vehicles;

(d) Location of any temporary signs; and

(e) Proposed route, date and time of any parade, or other such event involving the use of the public right-of-way.

(3) The applicant shall submit a statement which shall contain the following information and documentation (as noted on a preapplication checklist):

(a) Letter of acknowledgment from the affected property owner(s) of record on which the temporary use is to occur;

(b) Name of person(s) or organization sponsoring the event;

(c) Brief description of the purpose of the temporary use;

(d) Dates of operation, setup, and cleanup;

(e) Hours of operation;

(f) Estimated number of cars per day;

(g) Name, mailing address, and phone number of a contact person;

(h) Names, addresses, and phone numbers of any vendors;

(i) Proof of insurance, if required;

(j) Proof of city business license; and

(k) Any other information required by the director to evaluate the proposal. (Ord. 2875 § 1.152.080, 2003)


Chapter 17.120 HOME OCCUPATIONS

Sections:

17.120.010    Purpose.

17.120.020    Applicability and exemptions.

17.120.040    Approval criteria and standards.

17.120.050    Prohibited home occupations and residential business ventures.

17.120.060    Permit procedures for home occupations.

17.120.070    Submission requirements for home occupation applications.

17.120.080    Conditions applicable to home occupation approvals.

17.120.090    Revocation and expiration of home occupation permits.

17.120.100    Action regarding complaints and violation of standards.

17.120.110    Notice of decision and appeals.

17.120.120    Penalties.


17.120.010 Purpose.

It is the purpose of this chapter to:

(1) Permit residents an opportunity to use their homes to engage in small-scale business ventures which could not be sustained if it were necessary to lease commercial quarters, or because the nature of the activity would make it impractical to expand to a full-scale enterprise; and

(2) Establish approval criteria and standards to ensure that home occupations are conducted as lawful uses which are subordinate to the residential use of the property and are conducted in a manner that is not detrimental or disruptive in terms of appearance or operation to neighboring properties and residents. (Ord. 2875 § 1.154.010, 2003)


17.120.020 Applicability and exemptions.

(1) No person shall carry on a home occupation, or permit such use to occur, on property which that person owns or is in lawful control of, contrary to the provisions of this chapter.

(2) Exemptions from the provisions of this chapter are:

(a) Garage sales;

(b) For-profit production of produce or other food products grown on the premises. This may include temporary or seasonal sale of produce or other food products grown on the premises. Farming activities shall be consistent with the definition of farming contained in Chapter 17.16 SHMC (definitions);

(c) Hobbies which do not result in payment to those engaged in such activity;

(d) Business ventures that exhibit no evidence that a business is being conducted from the premises and comply with the following:

(i) There are no outside volunteers or employees to be engaged in the business activity other than the persons principally residing on the premises;

(ii) There is no exterior signage which identifies the property as a business location, except for vehicle signs as defined by Chapter 17.88 SHMC;

(iii) There are no clients or customers to visit the premises for any reason;

(iv) There is no exterior storage of materials; and

(v) The business venture does not exceed the provisions of SHMC 17.120.040(4); and

(e) Proven nonconforming home occupations as per SHMC 17.104.040(4)(e).

(3) A home occupation permit and associated fee are required for each property on which a home occupation is undertaken. (Ord. 3232 § 2 (Att. A), 2018; Ord. 2875 § 1.154.020, 2003)


17.120.040 Approval criteria and standards.

All home occupations except those that have proven nonconforming status shall comply with the following:

(1) Home occupations may be undertaken only by the principal occupant(s) of a residential property;

(2) There shall be no more than three deliveries per week to the residence by suppliers;

(3) There shall be no offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat or glare noticeable at or beyond the property line resulting from the operation. Home occupations shall observe the provisions of Chapter 17.52 SHMC, Environmental Performance Standards;

(4) The home occupation shall be operated entirely within the dwelling unit and any conforming accessory structure. The total area which may be used in the accessory building for either material product storage and/or the business activity shall not exceed 600 square feet. Otherwise, the home occupation and associated storage of materials and products shall not occupy more than 25 percent of the combined residence and accessory structure gross floor area. The indoor storage of materials or products shall not exceed the limitations imposed by the provisions of the building, fire, health, and housing codes;

(5) A home occupation shall not make necessary a change in the applicable building code (as administered by the building official) use classification of a dwelling unit. Any accessory building that is used must meet the applicable building code requirements and be in conformance with Chapter 17.124 SHMC;

(6) More than one business activity constituting two or more home occupations shall be allowed on one property only if the combined floor space of the business activities does not exceed 25 percent of the combined gross floor area of the residence and accessory structure. Each home occupation shall apply for a separate home occupation permit, if required as per this chapter, and each shall also have separate business licenses;

(7) There shall be no storage and/or distribution of toxic or flammable materials, nor spray-painting or spray-finishing operations that involve toxic or flammable materials which in the judgment of the fire marshal pose a dangerous risk to the residence, its occupants, and/or surrounding properties. Those individuals which are engaged in home occupations shall make available to the fire marshal for review the Material Safety Data Sheets which pertain to all potentially toxic and/or flammable materials associated with the use;

(8) No home occupation shall require any on- or off-street parking other than that normally required for a residence;

(9) There shall be no exterior storage of vehicles of any kind used for the business except that one commercially licensed vehicle of not longer than 25 feet or taller than 12 feet may be parked outside of a structure or screened area;

(10) No more than one nonilluminated sign, not exceeding one and one-half square feet, which shall be attached to the residence or accessory structure or placed in a window shall be allowed;

(11) No more than one outside volunteer or employee who is not a principal resident of the premises shall be allowed;

(12) No more than six daily customers or clients. Customers and clients shall not visit the business between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. and shall not generate excessive traffic or monopolize on-street parking;

(13) Any exterior storage of materials, goods, and equipment shall be screened entirely from view by a solid fence. Storage shall not exceed five percent of the total lot area and shall not occur within the front yard or the required side yard setback. If not proposed, exterior storage shall not be allowed. A new home occupation permit would be required; and

(14) Home occupation shall be listed as a permitted use in the applicable zoning district and the dwelling unit shall be legally established. (Ord. 3232 § 2 (Att. A), 2018; Ord. 3164 § 3 (Att. B), 2012; Ord. 2875 § 1.154.040, 2003)


17.120.050 Prohibited home occupations and residential business ventures.

The following uses are not allowed as home occupations or business ventures in or associated with dwelling units:

(1) Auto body repair and painting;

(2) Ongoing mechanical repair conducted outside of an entirely enclosed building;

(3) Junk and salvage operations; and

(4) Storage and/or sale of fireworks. (Ord. 3232 § 2 (Att. A), 2018; Ord. 2875 § 1.154.050, 2003)


17.120.060 Permit procedures for home occupations.

(1) A person wishing to engage in a home occupation must be a principal occupant of the property, pay a one-time review fee to the city, agree to abide by the provisions of this chapter, and acquire an annual business license.

(2) A person wishing to engage in a home occupation is required to have a preapplication conference with city staff in accordance with SHMC 17.24.040 and is also required to submit an application and a fee.

(a) The decision to approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for a home occupation permit shall be made by the director upon findings of whether or not the proposed use:

(i) Is in conformance with the standards contained in this chapter;

(ii) Will be subordinate to the residential use of the property; and

(iii) Is undertaken in a manner that is not detrimental nor disruptive in terms of appearance or operation to neighboring properties and residents;

(b) The director’s decision to deny an application or approve it with conditions may be appealed to the planning commission; and

(c) Upon approval of a home occupation application, the director shall issue a preliminary notice of approval and provide notice of the same to the applicant and to property owners within 300 feet of the property line of the proposed use. The decision shall be final within 20 days following the day of mailing of notice unless appealed to the planning commission.

(3) Appeals shall be made in accordance with SHMC 17.24.310(1) at a cost equal to 60 percent of the city’s standard appeal fee. (Ord. 3232 § 2 (Att. A), 2018; Ord. 2875 § 1.154.060, 2003)


17.120.070 Submission requirements for home occupation applications.

An application for a home occupation shall be made on forms provided by the director and shall be accompanied by:

(1) One copy of the applicant’s statement or narrative which explains how the proposal conforms to the approval criteria in SHMC 17.120.040;

(2) The required fee;

(3) A site plan of the property drawn to scale with a north arrow indicated. The site plan shall show all major features of the property including buildings, major vegetation, access for public streets, sidewalks, any proposed exterior storage related to the home occupation per SHMC 17.120.040(13), etc.;

(4) One floor plan of all structures on the property which are to be used for the home occupation(s);

(5) One title transfer instrument; and

(6) Property owner’s signature(s) or written authorization. (Ord. 3232 § 2 (Att. A), 2018; Ord. 2875 § 1.154.070, 2003)


17.120.080 Conditions applicable to home occupation approvals.

The director may impose conditions upon the approval of a home occupation permit to ensure the requirements of this chapter are complied with. These conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:

(1) Further limiting the hours, days, place, and manner of operation;

(2) Requiring site and building design features which minimize environmental impacts such as noise, vibration, air pollution, glare, odor, and dust;

(3) Requiring additional building setbacks, and increased lot area, depth or width;

(4) Further limiting the building area and outdoor storage used by the home occupation and restricting the location of the use on the site in relationship to adjoining uses;

(5) Designating the size, number, location, and design of vehicle access points;

(6) Requiring street right-of-way to be free at all times of vehicles associated with the home occupation;

(7) Requiring landscaping, buffering and/or screening of the home occupation from adjoining uses and establishing standards for the continued maintenance of these improvements;

(8) Requiring storm drainage improvements and surfacing of parking and loading areas;

(9) Limiting the extent and type of interior or exterior building remodeling necessary to accommodate the home occupation;

(10) Limiting or setting standards for the location and intensity of outdoor lighting;

(11) Requiring and designating the size, height and location of fences and materials used for their construction;

(12) Requiring the protection and preservation of existing trees, and other vegetation, watercourses, slopes, wildlife habitat areas, and drainage areas;

(13) Limiting the type and number of vehicles or equipment to be parked or stored on the site;

(14) Requirements to minimize public health and safety impacts of any hazardous materials used; and

(15) Any other limitations which the director considers to be necessary or desirable to make the use comply with the purposes stated in this chapter. (Ord. 3232 § 2 (Att. A), 2018; Ord. 2875 § 1.154.080, 2003)


17.120.090 Revocation and expiration of home occupation permits.

(1) The director may revoke a home occupation approval if the conditions of approval have not been or are not being complied with and the home occupation is otherwise being conducted in a manner contrary to this chapter. The process for revocation shall be as provided for in SHMC 17.120.100.

(2) A home occupation permit shall become invalid if the applicant moves his or her residence. (Ord. 2875 § 1.154.090, 2003)


17.120.100 Action regarding complaints and violation of standards.

(1) All home occupations are subject to review by the director.

(2) Complaints. Complaints may be originated by the city of St. Helens or the public. Complaints shall clearly state the objection to the home occupation, such as:

(a) Generation of excessive traffic;

(b) Exclusive use of on-street parking spaces; or

(c) Other offensive activities not compatible with a residential neighborhood.

(3) Review of Complaints. Complaints shall be reviewed by the director. The director shall either approve the continuation of the home occupation use as it exists, revoke the home occupation permit, or compel measures to be taken to ensure compatibility with the neighborhood and conformance with this chapter. The operator of the home occupation may appeal the director’s decision in accordance with SHMC 17.24.310(1).

(4) Cessation of Home Occupation Pending Review. If it is determined by the director, in exercise of reasonable discretion, that the home occupation in question (being appealed) will affect public health and/or safety, the use may be ordered to cease pending exhaustion of all appeals. Violation of such an order shall be deemed a violation of this code and subject to penalties as described in SHMC 17.120.120.

(5) Notice of Appeal Hearing. Written notice of a hearing on an appeal of the director’s decision to either revoke or not revoke a home occupation permit shall include its date, time and place and shall be given to the property owner(s) and the person(s) undertaking the use if other than the owner(s). Written notice shall also be given to property owners as per original process or at least abutting, whichever is greater.

(6) Higher Authority Decision on Appeal. It shall either approve the use as it exists, revoke the permit, or compel suitable restrictions and conditions to ensure compatibility with the neighborhood. (Ord. 2875 § 1.154.100, 2003)


17.120.110 Notice of decision and appeals.

(1) Written notice of the planning commission or director’s decision and associated findings shall be sent to the person(s) undertaking the activity, the property (if different than above), and persons participating in the above proceedings.

(2) The determination of the director or planning commission shall become final unless appealed. (Ord. 2875 § 1.154.110, 2003)


17.120.120 Penalties.

Noncompliance with the orders of the director or planning commission, as referred above, is an infraction per Chapter 17.12 SHMC. (Ord. 2875 § 1.154.120, 2003)


Chapter 17.124 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES

Sections:

17.124.010    Purpose.

17.124.020    Definition.

17.124.030    Applicability of provision.

17.124.040    Administration and approval process.

17.124.050    Expiration of approval – Standards for extension of time.

17.124.060    Modification of approved plans.

17.124.070    Approval criteria.

17.124.080    Application submission requirements.


17.124.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to:

(1) Establish criteria for regulating the type, size and location of accessory structures in residential zoning districts;

(2) Allow the property to be more useful while not altering the residential character of the principal structures; and

(3) Allow for accessory structures within commercial and industrial zoning districts. (Ord. 2875 § 1.156.010, 2003)


17.124.020 Definition.

(1) “Accessory structure” means a subordinate structure located on the lot, the use of which is clearly incidental to and associated with the principal structure.

(2) Where an accessory structure is attached to the principal structure in a substantial manner, as by a roof, such accessory structure shall normally be considered as a part of the principal structure.

(3) Where an accessory structure is detached, it must comply with all the requirements of this chapter and code.

(4) Examples of accessory structures are barns, garages, carports, playhouses, sheds, private greenhouses, gazebos, storage buildings, boathouses and docks, wind-generating devices, swimming pool pumphouses, radio- and television-receiving antenna towers and dishes and, pursuant to subsection (5) of this section, storage containers.

(5) “Storage container” means any factory-built container or part thereof designed or used for freight or storage and includes, but is not limited to, Conex boxes and sea-land containers. Such containers are typically originally designed for transport, but when intended to be used in a fixed location for more than a year are considered accessory structures for the purposes of this chapter. Placement for less than a year is governed by Chapter 17.116 SHMC, Temporary Uses. (Ord. 3105 § 2, 2009; Ord. 2875 § 1.156.020, 2003)


17.124.030 Applicability of provision.

(1) Review of accessory structures by the director is required except for the following situations:

(a) Buildings or structures within residential zoning districts which are less than 120 square feet in gross floor area and 15 feet or less in height, measured from base to highest point of the structure;

(b) Accessory buildings or structures attached to the principal building or structure, as long as they use the same architectural features such as roof lines and exterior building materials. “Attached” means wall-to-wall or any permanent roof attachment such as breezeways. Said structures shall be considered as building additions and shall require building permits and compliance with the applicable setback standards for the principal building or structure;

(c) Accessory buildings or structures for sites that have been approved or should be approved under site design or conditional use processes of this code must additionally comply with those requirements; and

(d) Fences and walls within all zoning districts shall be consistent with SHMC 17.72.090.

(e) Storage container(s) in industrial zones. This provision does not preclude the necessity of site design review, conditional use permit, or temporary use permit for such use(s), as applicable, however.

(2) All of the provisions and regulations of the underlying zone apply unless modified by this chapter.

(3) Multiple accessory structures that individually fall within the parameters of subsection (1)(a) of this section but are within 36 inches from each other as measured from any portion of each structure shall be considered one structure for the purpose of this section. (Ord. 3164 § 3 (Att. B), 2012; Ord. 3105 § 2, 2009; Ord. 2875 § 1.156.030, 2003)


17.124.040 Administration and approval process.

(1) The applicant for an accessory structure proposal shall be the recorded owner of the property or an agent authorized in writing by the owner.

(2) The director shall approve, approve with conditions or deny any application for an accessory structure. The director shall apply the standards set forth in SHMC 17.124.070 when reviewing an application. (Ord. 2875 § 1.156.040, 2003)


17.124.050 Expiration of approval – Standards for extension of time.

(1) Accessory structure approval by the director shall be effective for a one-and-one-half-year period from the date of approval.

(2) The accessory structure approval by the director shall lapse if:

(a) Substantial construction or installation of the approved accessory structure plan has not begun within a one-and-one-half-year period; or

(b) Construction on the site is a departure from the approved plan.

(3) The director shall, upon written request by the applicant and payment of the required fee, grant an extension of the approval period not to exceed one year; provided, that:

(a) No changes are made on the original accessory structure plan as approved by the director;

(b) The applicant can show intent of initiating construction of the site within the one-year extension period; and

(c) There have been no changes to the applicable comprehensive plan policies and ordinance provisions on which the approval was based.

(4) Notice of the decision shall be provided to the applicant. The director’s decision may be appealed by the applicant as provided by SHMC 17.24.310(1). (Ord. 3144 § 2 (Att. A), 2011; Ord. 3105 § 2, 2009; Ord. 2875 § 1.156.050, 2003)


17.124.060 Modification of approved plans.

(1) An applicant may request approval of a modification to an approved plan by:

(a) Providing the director with two copies of the proposed modified accessory structure plan; and

(b) A narrative which indicates the rationale for the proposed modification addressing the changes listed in subsection (2) of this section.

(2) The director shall grant the modification; provided, that the structure design and location conforms with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2875 § 1.156.060, 2003)


17.124.070 Approval criteria.

(1) Dimensional Approval Criteria.

(a) The following dimensions shall apply to all accessory structures:

(i) For parcels within a residential zone that are less than two and one-half acres in size, any accessory building within a residential zone shall have no more than 600 square feet of gross floor area;

(ii) For parcels within a residential zone that are two and one-half acres in size or larger, any accessory building shall have no more than 1,000 square feet of gross floor area; and

(iii) In no case shall the accessory building(s) and principal structure exceed the maximum lot coverage allowed by the base zone;

(b) Except as provided in subsection (1)(c) of this section, accessory structures in residential zones shall maintain the same rear and side yard setbacks as the principal building in accordance with the standards of the zone;

(c) All freestanding and detached towers, antennas, wind-generating devices and TV receiving dishes in residential zones shall have setbacks equal to or greater than the height of the proposed structure. Suitable protective anti-climb fencing and a landscape planting screen, in accordance with Chapter 17.72 SHMC, Landscaping and Screening, shall be provided and maintained around these structures and accessory attachments; and

(d) See Chapter 17.68 SHMC, Building Height Limitations – Exceptions, for exceptions.

(2) Nondimensional Approval Criteria.

(a) Accessory structures or buildings shall comply with all requirements for the principal structure, except where specifically modified by this chapter;

(b) If an application proposed for an accessory structure meets the following criteria, the director shall approve the application proposal:

(i) No accessory building or structure shall be allowed in any required front yard;

(ii) The applicant shall present documentation of the possession of any required license by any federal, state or local agency;

(iii) Any accessory building or structure attached to the principal building or structure must comply with all setbacks of the zoning district (“attached” means wall-to-wall or any permanent roof attachment such as breezeways);

(iv) No accessory building or structure shall encroach upon or interfere with the use of any adjoining property or public right-of-way including but not limited to streets, alleys and public or private easements;

(v) Except for dishes less than 24 inches in diameter, TV receiving dishes may be erected upon the roof of a structure only within a commercial or industrial zone; 

(vi) All accessory structures shall be built in accordance with the applicable building code as administered by the building official;

(vii) The style and exterior materials must be similar to the principal building; and

(viii) Roof pitch must be same as principal building if accessory building exceeds 15 feet in height;

(c) Accessory structures which are nonconforming are subject to the requirements of Chapter 17.104 SHMC, Nonconforming Situations, where an alteration, extension or reconstruction is requested;

(d) In instances where an alteration, extension or reconstruction to an existing detached accessory structure is requested, the applicant shall apply for an accessory structure permit in accordance with SHMC 17.124.040; and

(e) A conflict of interpretation concerning whether a structure is an accessory structure shall be resolved in accordance with the provisions of SHMC 17.24.090.

(3) Storage Containers. In addition to the other approval criteria of this chapter, storage containers in any commercial (e.g., HC, GC, MC), mixed use (e.g., MU, RD), or public lands (e.g., PL) zoning district shall comply with the following standards:

(a) Only one shall be allowed for properties that are less than or equal to one acre in size. A maximum of two may be allowed for properties greater than one acre in size.

(b) Each storage container shall be painted a neutral, earth-tone or otherwise site-compatible color. Color shall be uniform for the entire storage container. If storage containers will be placed within 50 feet of each other on the same property, they shall be of the same color.

(c) Signs are prohibited on storage containers, except those required that contain public safety information for the storage container.

(d) Shall be located and screened to minimize visibility from surrounding streets and neighboring properties.

(e) No storage container shall violate applicable zoning standards and shall not encroach into pedestrian or vehicle circulation areas, required parking areas, landscape areas, emergency access ways or vision clearance areas pursuant to Chapter 17.76 SHMC.

(f) No storage container shall be allowed to be placed or remain to be placed in a state of disrepair. Examples of states of disrepair include but are not limited to any damage that compromises the intended shape (i.e., disfigurement) and/or function of the storage container, significant rust, or graffiti.

(g) Use shall be restricted to storage only. Any form of human occupancy shall be prohibited.

(h) Shall not be used for any primary use.

(i) A permanent foundation is not required, but storage container shall be placed on a level surface of asphalt, concrete or other similar type materials approved by the city.

(j) Shall not exceed a height of 10 feet.

(k) Shall not be stacked.

(l) Shall not exceed a gross floor area of 360 square feet for each individual storage container. (Ord. 3180 § 1 (Att. A), 2015; Ord. 3164 § 3 (Att. B), 2012; Ord. 3105 § 2, 2009; Ord. 2875 § 1.156.070, 2003)


17.124.080 Application submission requirements.

(1) All applications shall be made on forms provided by the director and shall be accompanied by:

(a) Three copies for review by the director of site plan(s) and necessary data or narrative which explains how the accessory structure proposal conforms to the standards:

(i) Sheet size for an accessory structure site plan(s) and required drawings shall be drawn on sheets preferably not exceeding 18 inches by 24 inches;

(ii) The scale of the site plan shall be an engineering scale; and

(iii) All drawings of structure elevations shall be at standard architectural scale, being one-fourth-inch or one-eighth-inch;

(b) One copy of a current assessor’s map; and

(c) The required fee.

(2) The proposed accessory structure site plan shall include the following information:

(a) The location of all existing and proposed structures on the site and directly abutting the site, and their orientation;

(b) The location of existing and proposed utility lines and easements;

(c) The location of any streets abutting the site;

(d) The location of any accessway to the proposed structure; and

(e) The size (square footage) of the accessory structure.

(3) The proposed accessory structure architectural plans shall include the following information:

(a) At least two elevations of any proposed structure; and

(b) Enough information for determining height, type of siding, slope of roof, and type of roofing. (Ord. 2875 § 1.156.080, 2003)


Chapter 17.128 AUXILIARY DWELLING UNITS

Sections:

17.128.010    Purpose.

17.128.020    Applicability.

17.128.030    Design standards.

17.128.040    Addressing of auxiliary dwelling units.

17.128.050    Prohibited areas for auxiliary dwelling units.

17.128.060    Prohibited uses of auxiliary dwelling units.

17.128.070    Permit procedures for auxiliary dwelling units.


17.128.010 Purpose.

Auxiliary dwelling units are allowed in certain situations to:

(1) Create new housing units while respecting the look and scale of single-dwelling neighborhoods;

(2) Increase the housing stock of existing neighborhoods in a manner that is less intense than alternatives;

(3) Allow more efficient use of existing housing stock and infrastructure;

(4) Provide a mix of housing that responds to changing household needs, sizes and compositions;

(5) Provide a means for new homeowners to defray some of the costs associated with the purchase of a first home;

(6) Provide a means for residents, particularly seniors, single parents, and families with grown children, to remain in their homes and neighborhoods and obtain extra income, security, companionship and services;

(7) Provide a broader range of suitable and affordable housing; and

(8) Create additional long-term family living situations, while avoiding the exploitation of this housing type through their use as short-term living and other related business. (Ord. 3232 § 2 (Att. A), 2018; Ord. 2875 § 1.158.010, 2003)


17.128.020 Applicability.

(1) An auxiliary dwelling unit may be added to or constructed or installed on the same lot or parcel as a detached single-dwelling unit or manufactured home (principal dwelling) in any zone where the existing principal use is permitted and where auxiliary dwelling unit is listed as a permitted use.

(2) Only one auxiliary dwelling unit is allowed per lot or parcel developed with a detached single-family dwelling or manufactured home (principal dwelling). (Ord. 3232 § 2 (Att. A), 2018; Ord. 2875 § 1.158.020, 2003)


17.128.030 Design standards.

(1) Standards for creating auxiliary dwelling units address the following purposes:

(a) Ensure that auxiliary dwelling units are compatible with the desired character and livability of St. Helens residential zones;

(b) Respect the general building scale and placement of structures to allow sharing of common space on the lot, such as driveways and yards;

(c) Ensure that auxiliary dwelling units are smaller in size than detached single-family dwellings or manufactured homes;

(d) Provide adequate flexibility to site buildings so that they fit the topography of sites; and

(e) The design standards for auxiliary dwelling units are stated herein. If not addressed in this section, the base zone development standards apply.

(2) Requirements for All Auxiliary Dwelling Units. All auxiliary dwelling units must meet the following standards:

(a) Creation. An auxiliary dwelling unit may only be created through the following methods:

(i) Converting existing living area, attic, basement or attached garage of the detached single-family dwelling or manufactured home;

(ii) Adding floor area to the detached single-family dwelling or manufactured home;

(iii) Constructing a detached auxiliary dwelling unit on a developed site;

(iv) Constructing a new detached single-family dwelling or manufactured home with an internal or detached auxiliary dwelling unit; or

(v) Converting a lawfully existing accessory structure;

(b) Entrances. Only one entrance to the house may be located on the front facade of the detached single-family dwelling or manufactured home facing the street, unless the detached single-family dwelling or manufactured home contained additional front door entrances before the conversion to an auxiliary dwelling unit was created. An exception to this regulation is entrances that do not have access from the ground, such as entrances from balconies or decks;

(c) Parking. The parking requirements balance the need to provide adequate parking with maintaining the character of single-dwelling neighborhoods and reducing the amount of impervious surface on a site. More parking is required when a vacant lot is being developed because, generally, the site can more easily be designed to accommodate two parking spaces while minimizing impervious surface. In situations where an auxiliary dwelling unit is being added to a site with an existing dwelling unit, it is appropriate to not require additional impervious surface if adequate on-street parking is available:

(i) The following parking requirements apply to auxiliary dwelling units:

(A) No Additional Parking Space Required. No additional parking space is required for the auxiliary dwelling unit if it is created on a site with an existing detached single-family dwelling or manufactured home and the roadway of at least one abutting street is at least 20 feet wide and allows on-street parking;

(B) One Additional Parking Space Required. One additional off-street parking space is required for the auxiliary dwelling unit as follows:

1. When none of the roadways in abutting streets are at least 20 feet wide;

2. When none of the abutting streets allow on-street parking; or

3. When the auxiliary dwelling unit is created at the same time as the detached single-family dwelling or manufactured home. An auxiliary dwelling unit is considered created at the same time as the principal dwelling even if a permit per this chapter is applied for within one year from the date of certificate of occupancy of the principal dwelling.

(ii) When an additional off-street parking space is required it shall comply with the development code and shall be independently functional. “Independently functional” means the vehicle in the parking space is not dependent on another vehicle moving to get to the street from the parking space. For example, a two-vehicle garage with a garage door and driveway, both 20 feet in width, can only count as two parking spaces (not four), since the vehicles in the garage cannot get to the street without the ones in the driveway moving out of the way. In this instance, a new (additional) parking area would need to be created to the side of the garage or elsewhere while still complying with the development code (e.g., parking and access standards).

(d) Size.

(i) Minimum Size. The size of the auxiliary dwelling unit shall be no less than as allowed by the buildling code;

(ii) Maximum Size. The size of the auxiliary dwelling unit shall be no more than 75 percent of the living area of the detached single-family dwelling or manufactured home or 1,200 square feet, whichever is less. “Living area” means all areas subject to heat/air conditioning inclusive of walls. This does not include nonheated/non-air conditioned areas including but not limited to porches, garages, carports, balconies, hot tub/pool enclosure/rooms, etc.;

(iii) Building Height. The maximum building height of a detached auxiliary dwelling unit shall not exceed the height allowed by the zoning district or the height of the detached single-family dwelling or manufactured home, whichever is less. This provision does not apply when converting a lawfully existing accessory structure in its entirety or a portion thereof to an auxiliary dwelling unit provided the conversion does not increase the accessory structure’s footprint or height.

(3) Additional requirements for detached auxiliary dwelling units or for auxiliary dwelling units created through the addition of floor area to the detached single-family dwelling or manufactured home:

(a) Exterior Finish Materials. The exterior finish material must be the same, or visually match in type, size and placement, the exterior finish material of the detached single-family dwelling or manufactured home;

(b) Roof Pitch. The roof pitch must be the same as the predominant roof pitch of the detached single-family dwelling or manufactured home;

(c) Trim. Trim on edges of elements on the addition or detached unit must be the same in type, size, and location as the trim used on the rest of the detached single-family dwelling or manufactured home;

(d) Windows. Windows must match those in the detached single-family dwelling or manufactured home in proportion (relationship of width to height) and orientation (horizontal or vertical);

(e) Eaves. Eaves must project from the building walls the same distance as the eaves on the rest of the detached single-family dwelling or manufactured home;

(f) Setbacks. The auxiliary dwelling unit must meet the same setback requirements as principal dwelling units in the zone or as otherwise allowed by the development code; and

(g) Lot Coverage. The detached auxiliary dwelling unit may not have a larger footprint than the footprint of the detached single-family dwelling or manufactured home, and the combined footprint of all detached structures shall not exceed the lot coverage restriction of the zone or as otherwise allowed by the development code.

(h) The provisions of subsections (3)(a) through (f) of this section do not apply when converting a lawfully existing accessory structure in its entirety or a portion thereof to an auxiliary dwelling unit provided the conversion does not increase the accessory structure’s footprint or height. (Ord. 3232 § 2 (Att. A), 2018; Ord. 2875 § 1.158.030, 2003)


17.128.040 Addressing of auxiliary dwelling units.

(1) Auxiliary dwelling units shall use the same address number as the principal dwelling, but with a unit or similar number. For example, an auxiliary dwelling unit for a principal dwelling addressed as 101 Anystreet would have an address of 101B Anystreet.

(2) The applicant for or the owner of the auxiliary dwelling unit shall coordinate with the postmaster for its mailbox location. (Ord. 3232 § 2 (Att. A), 2018)


17.128.050 Prohibited areas for auxiliary dwelling units.

(1) In addition to zoning regulations, auxiliary dwelling units are prohibited in the following areas:

(a) Resource or resources per Chapter 17.40 SHMC;

(b) Protection zones per Chapter 17.40 SHMC; and

(c) Area of special flood hazard per Chapter 17.46 SHMC. (Ord. 3232 § 2 (Att. A), 2018)


17.128.060 Prohibited uses of auxiliary dwelling units.

(1) Given the purpose of auxiliary dwelling units per SHMC 17.128.010 and because they are not considered principal uses, the following uses are prohibited for them:

(a) Short-term rentals;

(b) Bed and breakfast, homestay, boarding house; and

(c) Lodging facilities or rooming house.

(2) Home occupations may be allowed in auxiliary dwelling units given compliance with Chapter 17.120 SHMC. (Ord. 3232 § 2 (Att. A), 2018)


17.128.070 Permit procedures for auxiliary dwelling units.

Notice and process for auxiliary dwelling units shall follow the same as for site development review, major, except for criteria and standards, which shall comply with this chapter. (Ord. 3232 § 2 (Att. A), 2018)


Chapter 17.132 TREE REMOVAL

Sections:

17.132.010    Purpose.

17.132.020    Definitions.

17.132.025    Tree plan requirement.

17.132.030    Permit requirement.

17.132.040    Permit criteria.

17.132.045    Incentives for tree retention.

17.132.050    Expiration of approval – Extension of time.

17.132.060    Application submission requirements.

17.132.070    Illegal tree removal – Violation – Replacement of trees.


17.132.010 Purpose.

(1) After years of both natural growth and planting by residents, the city now benefits from a large number of trees. These trees of varied types add to the aesthetic beauty of the community, help clean the air, help control erosion, maintain water quality and provide noise barriers.

(2) The purposes of this chapter are to:

(a) Encourage the preservation, planting and replacement of trees in the city;

(b) Regulate the removal of trees on sensitive lands in the city to eliminate unnecessary removal of trees;

(c) Provide for a tree plan for developing properties; 

(d) Protect sensitive lands from erosion;

(e) Protect water quality; 

(f) Provide incentives for tree retention and protection; and

(g) Regulate commercial forestry to control the removal of trees in an urban environment.

(3) The city recognizes that, notwithstanding these purposes, at the time of development it may be necessary to remove certain trees for public safety and in order to accommodate structures, streets, utilities, and other needed or required improvements within the development. (Ord. 2875 § 1.160.010, 2003)


17.132.020 Definitions.

(1) Except where the context clearly indicates otherwise, as used in this chapter:

(a) “Tree” shall mean a standing woody plant, or group of such, having a trunk which is six inches or more DBH.  

(b) “DBH,” also known as “diameter at breast height,” shall mean the outside bark diameter of a tree measured four and one-half feet above the ground level on the uphill side of the tree. If a tree’s trunk is asymmetric, this measurement shall be the widest portion. If a tree begins to branch or fork below four and one-half feet, measurement may be taken no more than one foot below the branching point. For a leaning tree, measure four and one-half feet from the base of the tree in the direction of the lean. If a tree is multistemmed (i.e., splits into several trucks at or within one foot of ground level), the DBH is determined by measuring the widest stem.

(c) “Canopy cover” means the area above ground which is covered by the trunk and branches of the tree.

(d) “Commercial forestry” shall mean the removal of 10 or more trees per acre per calendar year for sale.

(e) “Hazardous tree” shall mean a tree which by reason of disease, infestation, age, or other condition presents a known and immediate hazard to persons or to public or private property.

(f) “Pruning” shall mean the cutting or trimming of a tree in a manner which is consistent with recognized tree maintenance practices.

(g) “Removal” shall mean the cutting or removing of 50 percent or more of a crown, trunk or root system of a tree, or any action which results in the loss of aesthetic or physiological viability or causes the tree to fall or be in immediate danger of falling. “Removal” shall not include pruning.

(h) “Sensitive lands” shall mean those lands described at Chapter 17.44 SHMC.

(2) Except where the context clearly indicates otherwise, words in the present tense shall include the future and words in the singular shall include the plural. (Ord. 3144 § 2 (Att. A), 2011; Ord. 2875 § 1.160.020, 2003)


17.132.025 Tree plan requirement.

(1) A tree plan for the planting, removal, and protection of trees prepared by a certified arborist or other capable professional as allowed by the director (for property or site with more than 10 trees or any tree over two feet DBH) shall be provided for any lot, parcel or combination of lots or parcels for which a development application for a land division, site development review, planned development or conditional use is filed. Protection is preferred over removal where possible.

(2) The tree plan shall include the following:

(a) Identification of the location, size, DBH and species of all existing trees including trees designated as significant by the city;

(b) Identification of a program to save existing trees or mitigate tree removal over 12 inches DBH. Mitigation must follow the replacement guidelines of SHMC 17.132.070(4) according to the following standards:

(i) Retainage of less than 50 percent of existing trees over 12 inches DBH requires a mitigation program according to SHMC 17.132.070(4) with a ratio of two minimum two-inch DBH trees for each 12-inch or greater DBH tree to be removed.

(ii) Retainage of over 50 percent of existing trees over 12 inches DBH requires the trees to be mitigated according to SHMC 17.132.070(4) with a ratio of one minimum two-inch DBH tree for each 12-inch or greater DBH tree to be removed.

(c) Identification of all trees which are proposed to be removed; and

(d) A protection program defining standards and methods that will be used by the applicant to protect trees during and after construction.

(3) Trees removed within the period of one year prior to a development application listed above will be inventoried as part of the tree plan above and will be replaced according to SHMC 17.132.070(4). (Ord. 3144 § 2 (Att. A), 2011; Ord. 2875 § 1.160.025, 2003)


17.132.030 Permit requirement.

(1) Tree removal permits shall be required only for the removal of any tree which is located on or in a sensitive land area as defined by Chapter 17.44 SHMC.

(2) A tree removal permit shall not be required for the removal of a tree which:

(a) Obstructs visual clearance as defined in Chapter 17.76 SHMC;

(b) Is a hazardous tree;

(c) Is a nuisance affecting public safety as defined in the St. Helens Municipal Code; or

(d) Is used for Christmas tree production, or land registered with the Columbia County assessor’s office as property tax deferred tree farm or small woodlands, but does not stand on sensitive lands.

(3) Commercial forestry as defined by SHMC 17.132.020(1)(b) and excluding subsection (2)(d) of this section is permitted after a plan per SHMC 17.132.025 is reviewed and approved and only in accordance with the approved plan. (Ord. 2875 § 1.160.030, 2003)


17.132.040 Permit criteria.

(1) The following approval standards shall be used by the director or designee for the issuance of a tree removal permit on sensitive lands:

(a) Removal of the tree must not have a measurable negative impact on erosion, soil stability, flow of surface waters, or water quality as evidenced by an erosion control plan which precludes:

(i) Deposits of mud, dirt, sediment or similar material exceeding one-half cubic foot in volume on public or private streets, adjacent property, or into the storm and surface water system, either by direct deposit, dropping, discharge or as a result of the action of erosion; and

(ii) Evidence of concentrated flows of water over bare soils; turbid or sediment-laden flows; or evidence of on-site erosion such as rivulets on bare soil slopes where the flow of water is not filtered or captured on site.

(2) Within stream or wetland corridors, tree removal must maintain no less than a 75 percent canopy cover or no less than the existing canopy cover if the existing canopy cover is less than 75 percent. (Ord. 2875 § 1.160.040, 2003)


17.132.045 Incentives for tree retention.

(1) In order to assist in the preservation and retention of existing trees, the director may apply one or more of the following incentives as part of development review approval and the provisions of a tree plan according to SHMC 17.132.025:

(a) Density Bonus. For each two percent of canopy cover provided by existing trees over 12 inches DBH that are preserved and incorporated into a development plan, a one percent bonus may be applied to density computations of Chapter 17.56 SHMC. No more than a 20 percent bonus may be granted for any one development. The percentage density bonus shall be applied to the number of dwelling units allowed in the underlying zone;

(b) Lot Size Averaging. In order to retain existing trees over 12 inches DBH in the development plan for any land division under Chapter 17.136 SHMC, lot size may be averaged to allow lots less than the minimum lot size allowed by the underlying zone as long as the average lot area for all lots and private open space is not less than that allowed by the underlying zone. No lot area shall be less than 80 percent of the minimum lot size allowed in the zone;

(c) Lot Width and Depth. In order to retain existing trees over 12 inches DBH in the development plan for any land division under Chapter 17.136 SHMC, lot width and lot depth may be reduced up to 20 percent of that required by the underlying zone;

(d) Commercial/Industrial/Civic Use Parking. For each two percent of canopy cover provided by existing trees over 12 inches DBH that are preserved and incorporated into a development plan for commercial, industrial or civic uses listed in SHMC 17.80.030, Minimum off-street parking requirements, a one percent reduction in the amount of required parking may be granted. No more than a 20 percent reduction in the required amount of parking may be granted for any one development;

(e) Commercial/Industrial/Civic Use Landscaping. For each two percent of canopy cover provided by existing trees over 12 inches DBH that are preserved and incorporated into a development plan, a one percent reduction in the required amount of landscaping may be granted. No more than 20 percent of the required amount of landscaping may be reduced for any one development; and/or

(f) Setback Adjustment. The director may grant a modification from applicable setback requirements of this code for the purpose of preserving a tree or trees on the site of proposed development. Such modification may reduce the required setback by up to 50 percent, but shall not be more than is necessary for the preservation of trees on the site. The setback modification described in this subsection shall supersede any special setback requirements or exceptions set out elsewhere in this code, including but not limited to Chapters 17.64 and 17.108 SHMC, except SHMC 17.64.020.

(2) Any tree preserved or retained in accordance with this section may thereafter be removed only for the reasons set out in a tree plan according to SHMC 17.132.025, and shall not be subject to removal under any other section of this chapter. The property owner shall record a deed restriction as a condition of approval of any development permit impacted by this section to the effect that such tree may be removed only if the tree dies or is hazardous according to a certified arborist. The deed restriction may be removed or will be considered invalid if a tree preserved in accordance with this section should either die or be removed as a hazardous tree. The form of this deed restriction shall be subject to approval by the director.

(3) A modification to development requirements granted under this section shall not conflict with any other restriction on the use of the property, including but not limited to easements and conditions of development approval.

(4) The city engineer may adjust design specifications of public improvements to accommodate tree retention where possible and where it would not interfere with safety or increase maintenance costs. (Ord. 3144 § 2 (Att. A), 2011; Ord. 2875 § 1.160.045, 2003)


17.132.050 Expiration of approval – Extension of time.

(1) A tree removal permit shall be effective for one and one-half years from the date of approval.

(2) Upon written request by the applicant prior to the expiration of the existing permit, a tree removal permit shall be extended for a period of up to one year if the director finds that the applicant is in compliance with all prior conditions of permit approval and that no material facts stated in the original application have changed. (Ord. 2875 § 1.160.050, 2003)


17.132.060 Application submission requirements.

(1) Application for a tree removal permit shall be on a form provided by the director. Completed applications shall consist of this form, two copies of the supplemental data and narrative set out in subsection (2) of this section, and the required fee. Applications shall not be accepted unless they are complete as defined herein.

(2) The supplemental data and narrative shall include:

(a) The specific location of the property by address, assessor’s map number, and tax lot;

(b) The number, size, type and location of the tree(s) to be cut;

(c) The time and method of cutting or removing the tree(s);

(d) Information concerning any proposed landscaping or planting of new trees; and

(e) A narrative as to how the applicable criteria of this chapter, for example, SHMC 17.132.040(1), are satisfied.

(3) In accordance with SHMC 17.24.080, the director may waive any of the requirements in subsection (2) of this section or request additional information. (Ord. 2875 § 1.160.060, 2003)


17.132.070 Illegal tree removal – Violation – Replacement of trees.

(1) The following constitute a violation of this chapter:

(a) Removal of a tree:

(i) Without a valid tree removal permit; or 

(ii) In noncompliance with any condition of approval of a tree removal permit;

(iii) In noncompliance with any condition of any city permit or development approval; or

(iv) In noncompliance with any other section of this code.

(b) Breach of a condition of any city permit or development approval which results in damage to a tree or its root system.

(2) If the director has reason to believe that a violation of this chapter has occurred, then he or she may do any or all of the following:

(a) Require the owner of the land on which the tree was located to submit sufficient documentation, which may include a written statement from a qualified arborist or forester, showing that removal of the tree was permitted by this chapter;

(b) Pursuant to SHMC 17.24.390, initiate a hearing on revocation of the tree removal permit and/or any other permit or approval for which this chapter was an approval standard;

(c) Seek a stop order;

(d) Seek a citation; or

(e) Take any other action allowed by law.

(3) Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, any party found to be in violation of this chapter pursuant to Chapter 17.12 SHMC shall be subject to a civil penalty of up to $500.00 and shall be required to remedy any damage caused by the violation. Such remediation shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

(a) Replacement of unlawfully removed or damaged trees in accordance with subsection (4) of this section; and

(b) Payment of an additional civil penalty representing the estimated value of any unlawfully removed or damaged tree, as determined using the most current International Society of Arboriculture’s Guide for Plant Appraisal.

(4) Replacement of a tree shall take place according to the following guidelines:

(a) A replacement tree shall be a substantially similar species considering site characteristics;

(b) If a replacement tree of the species of the tree removed or damaged is not reasonably available, the director may allow replacement with a different species of equivalent natural resource value;

(c) The director may permit one or more replacement trees to be planted on other property within the city, either public property or, with the consent of the owner, private property whenever it is not viable to place the trees on the site;

(d) The planting of a replacement tree shall take place in a manner reasonably calculated to allow growth to maturity.

(5) In lieu of tree replacement under subsection (4) of this section, a party may, with the consent of the director, elect to compensate the city for its costs in performing such tree replacement.

(6) The remedies set out in this section shall not be exclusive. (Ord. 2875 § 1.160.070, 2003)


Chapter 17.136 LAND DIVISION – SUBDIVISION

Sections:

17.136.010    Purpose.

17.136.020    General provisions.

17.136.030    Administration and approval process.

17.136.040    Expiration of approval – Standards for extension of time.

17.136.050    Phased development.

17.136.060    Approval standards – Preliminary plat.

17.136.070    Application submission requirements – Preliminary plat.

17.136.080    Additional information required and waiver of requirements.

17.136.090    Variances authorized.

17.136.100    Referrals.

17.136.110    Appeal.

17.136.120    Criteria for granting a variance.

17.136.130    Variance application.

17.136.140    Application submission requirements – Final plat.

17.136.150    City review of final plat – Approval criteria.

17.136.160    Centerline monumentation – Monument box requirements.

17.136.170    Improvement agreement.

17.136.180    Bond – Cash deposit.

17.136.190    Filing and recording.

17.136.200    Prerequisites to recording the plat.

17.136.210    Vacation of plats.

17.136.220    Vacation of streets.


17.136.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is:

(1) To implement the comprehensive plan;

(2) To provide rules, regulations, and standards governing the approval of plats of subdivisions;

(3) To carry out the development pattern and plan of the city;

(4) To promote the public health, safety, and general welfare;

(5) To lessen congestion in the streets, and secure safety from fire, flood, pollution, and other dangers;

(6) To provide adequate light and air, prevent overcrowding of land, and facilitate adequate provision for transportation, water supply, sewage, and drainage; and

(7) To encourage the conservation of energy resources. (Ord. 2875 § 1.170.010, 2003)


17.136.020 General provisions.

(1) An application for a subdivision shall be processed through a two-step process*: the preliminary plat and the final plat:

(a) The preliminary plat shall be approved by the planning commission before the final plat can be submitted for approval consideration; and

(b) The final plat shall reflect all conditions of approval of the preliminary plat.

(2) All subdivision proposals shall be in conformity with all state regulations set forth in ORS Chapter 92, Subdivisions and Partitions.*

(3) When subdividing tracts into large lots, the planning commission shall require that the lots be of such size and shape as to facilitate future redivision in accordance with the requirements of the zoning district or comprehensive plan and this code and that a redevelopment plat be approved and used to approve building permits.

(4) Temporary sales offices in conjunction with any subdivision may be granted as set forth in Chapter 17.116 SHMC.

(5) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.

(6) All subdivision proposals shall have underground public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.

(7) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage; and

(8) Where base flood elevation has not been provided or is not available from another authoritative source, it shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments which contain at least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is less). (Ord. 2875 § 1.170.020, 2003)

*    Except for expedited land division applications.


17.136.030 Administration and approval process.*

(1) The applicant of a preliminary plat proposal shall be the recorded owner of the property or an agent authorized in writing by the owner.

(2) A preapplication conference with city staff is required. However, failure of the director to provide any of the information required by this section shall not constitute a waiver of the standards, criteria, or requirements of the applications.

(3) Another preapplication conference is required if any preliminary plat application is submitted more than six months after the initial preapplication conference.

(4) Upon receipt of an application, the director shall review it for compliance with the requirements set forth in SHMC 17.136.060, Approval standards – Preliminary plat, and:

(a) If a land division application is incomplete, the director shall notify the applicant in writing of the exact information which is missing within 30 days of receipt of the application;

(b) The applicant shall be allowed to submit the missing information, and upon submission of the missing information, the application shall be deemed complete; and

(c) The applicant may refuse to submit the missing information in which case the application shall be deemed complete on the thirty-first day after the initial submittal of the application.

(5) Final action, including the resolution of all appeals and review on the land division application, shall be taken within 120 days after the application is deemed complete, and the director shall:

(a) Schedule a public hearing to be held by the planning commission within 45 days from the time the complete application is filed and shall provide a notice of the hearing in accordance with the provisions of SHMC 17.24.130;

(b) Furnish one copy of the proposed preliminary plat to the city engineering division;

(c) Furnish one copy of the preliminary plat and supplemental material to:

(i) The Columbia County land development services; and

(ii) The Oregon Department of Transportation (ODOT), if the proposed subdivision is adjacent to a state highway and access to the state highway is desired by the applicant (these agencies will be given at least five days to review the plan, suggest revisions, and return the plans to the city);

(d) Incorporate all staff recommendations into a report to the planning commission.

(6) The director shall mail notice of the preliminary plat proposal to persons who are entitled to notice in accordance with SHMC 17.24.130.

(7) The planning commission shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny any application for preliminary plat per SHMC 17.136.060. The planning commission shall also apply the standards set forth in SHMC 17.136.070 when reviewing an application for a subdivision.

(8) The decision of the planning commission may be appealed in accordance with SHMC 17.24.310(2). (Ord. 2875 § 1.170.030, 2003)

*    Except for expedited land division applications.


17.136.040 Expiration of approval – Standards for extension of time.

(1) The preliminary plat approval by the planning commission or final approving authority shall lapse if:

(a) A final plat (first phase in an approved phased development) has not been submitted within a one-year period; or

(b) The final plat does not conform to the preliminary plat as approved or approved with conditions.

(2) The director shall, upon written request by the applicant and payment of the required fee, grant two extensions of the approval period not to exceed 12 months each; provided, that:

(a) No changes are made on the original preliminary plat plan as approved by the planning commission;

(b) The applicant has expressed written intent of submitting a final plat within the extension period;

(c) There have been no changes to the applicable comprehensive plan policies and ordinance provisions on which the approval was based;

(d) An extension of time will not preclude the development of abutting properties; and

(e) A performance bond is provided in accordance with the city’s standards. (Ord. 3105 § 2, 2009; Ord. 2875 § 1.170.040, 2003)


17.136.050 Phased development.

(1) The planning commission may approve a time schedule for developing a subdivision in phases, but in no case shall the actual construction time period for any phase be greater than two years (unless an extension is granted) without reapplying for a preliminary plat, nor the cumulative time exceed six years (regardless of extensions) without applying for a new preliminary plat.

(2) The criteria for approving a phased site development review proposal are:

(a) The public facilities shall be scheduled to be constructed in conjunction with or prior to each phase to ensure provision of public facilities prior to building occupancy;

(b) The development and occupancy of any phase shall not be dependent on the use of temporary public facilities:

(i) For purposes of this subsection, a temporary public facility is an interim facility not constructed to the applicable city or district standard; 

(c) The phased development shall not result in requiring the city or other property owners to construct public facilities that were required as a part of the approval of the preliminary plat; and

(d) Public facilities approved as conditions of approval must be bonded.

(3) The application for phased development approval shall be heard concurrently with the preliminary plat application and the decision may be appealed in the same manner as the preliminary plat. (Ord. 2875 § 1.170.050, 2003)


17.136.060 Approval standards – Preliminary plat.

(1) The planning commission may approve, approve with conditions or deny a preliminary plat based on the following approval criteria:

(a) The proposed preliminary plat complies with the city’s comprehensive plan, the applicable sections of this code and other applicable ordinances and regulations;

(b) The proposed plat name is not duplicative or otherwise satisfies the provisions of ORS Chapter 92[.090(1)];

(c) The streets and roads are laid out so as to conform to the plats of subdivisions and maps of partitions already approved for adjoining property as to width, general direction and in all other respects unless the city determines it is in the public interest to modify the street or road pattern; and

(d) An explanation has been provided for all common improvements.

(2) Lot Dimensions.

(a) Lot size, width, shape and orientation shall be appropriate for the location of the development and for the type of use contemplated, and:

(i) No lot shall be dimensioned to contain part of an existing or proposed public right-of-way;

(ii) The depth of all lots shall not exceed two and one-half times the average width, unless the parcel is less than one and one-half times the minimum lot size of the applicable zoning district; and

(iii) Depth and width of properties zoned for commercial and industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street parking and service facilities required by the type of use proposed.

(3) Through Lots.

(a) Through lots shall be avoided except where they are essential to provide separation of residential development from major traffic arterials or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation, and:

(i) A planting buffer at least 10 feet wide is required abutting the arterial rights-of-way; and

(ii) All through lots shall provide the required front yard setback on each street.

(4) Large Lots.

(a) In dividing tracts into large lots or parcels which at some future time are likely to be redivided, the approving authority may require that the lots be of such size and shape, and be so divided into building sites, and contain such site restrictions as will provide for the extension and opening of streets at intervals which will permit a subsequent division of any tract into lots or parcels of smaller size, and:

(i) The land division shall be denied if the proposed large development lot does not provide for the future division of the lots and future extension of public facilities.

(5) The planning commission may attach such conditions as are necessary to carry out the comprehensive plan and other applicable ordinances and regulations and may require:

(a) Reserve strips be granted to the city for the purpose of controlling access to adjoining undeveloped properties. (Ord. 2875 § 1.170.060, 2003)


17.136.070 Application submission requirements – Preliminary plat.

(1) All applications shall be made on forms provided by the director and shall be accompanied by:

(a) Eight copies of the preliminary plat map and required data or narrative; and

(b) The required fee.

(2) The preliminary plat map and data or narrative shall include the following:

(a) Sheet size for the preliminary plat shall preferably not exceed 18 inches by 24 inches and shall include at least one eight-and-one-half-inch by 11-inch copy;

(b) The scale shall be an engineering scale, and limited to one phase per sheet;

(c) The proposed name of the subdivision shall comply with ORS Chapter 92[.090(1)] and shall not duplicate or resemble the name of any other subdivision in the county, unless the land platted is contiguous to and platted by the same party that platted the subdivision bearing that name or unless the applicant files and records the consent of the party that platted the subdivision bearing that name;

(d) Vicinity map showing the general location of the subject property in relationship to arterial and collector streets;

(e) Names, addresses and telephone numbers of the owner, developer, engineer, surveyor, and designer, as applicable;

(f) The date of application;

(g) The assessor’s map and tax lot number and a legal description sufficient to define the location and boundaries of the proposed subdivision;

(h) The boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided;

(i) The names of adjacent subdivisions or the names of recorded owners of adjoining parcels of unsubdivided land;

(j) Contour lines related to a city-established benchmark at two-foot intervals for grades zero to 10 percent and five-foot intervals for grades over 10 percent;

(k) The purpose, location, type and size of all the following (within and adjacent to the proposed subdivision) existing and proposed:

(i) Public and private rights-of-way and easements;

(ii) Public and private sanitary and storm sewer lines, domestic water mains including fire hydrants, gas mains, major power (50,000 volts or better), telephone transmission lines, and watercourses; and

(iii) Deed reservations for parks, open spaces, pathways, and any other land encumbrances;

(l) For subdivisions of 10 lots or more: approximate plan and profiles of proposed sanitary and storm sewers with grades and pipe sizes indicated and plans of the proposed water distribution system, showing pipe sizes and the location of valves and fire hydrants;

(m) For subdivisions of 10 lots or more: approximate centerline profiles showing the finished grade of all streets including street extensions for a reasonable distance beyond the limits of the proposed subdivision;

(n) For subdivisions of 10 lots or more: scaled cross-sections of proposed street rights-of-way;

(o) For subdivisions of 10 lots or more: the location of all areas subject to inundation or storm water overflow, and the location, width, and direction of flow of all watercourses and drainageways;

(p) The proposed lot configurations, approximate lot dimensions and lot numbers. Where lots are to be used for purposes other than residential, it shall be indicated upon such lots. Each lot shall abut upon a street;

(q) The location of all trees as defined by Chapter 17.132 SHMC, and the location of proposed tree plantings, if any;

(r) The existing use of the property, including location of all structures and present use of the structures, and a statement of which structures are to remain after platting;

(s) Supplemental information including proposed deed restrictions, if any, proof of property ownership, and a proposed plan for provision of subdivision improvements; 

(t) Existing natural features including rock outcroppings, wetlands, and marsh areas; and

(u) A traffic impact analysis (TIA), as applicable, pursuant to Chapter 17.156 SHMC.

(3) If any of the foregoing information cannot practicably be shown on the preliminary plat, it shall be incorporated into a narrative and submitted with the application. (Ord. 3150 § 3 (Att. B), 2011; Ord. 3144 § 2 (Att. A), 2011; Ord. 2875 § 1.170.070, 2003)


17.136.080 Additional information required and waiver of requirements.

(1) The director may require information in addition to that required by this chapter in accordance with SHMC 17.24.080(1).

(2) The director may waive a specific requirement for information in accordance with SHMC 17.24.080(2) and (3). (Ord. 2875 § 1.170.080, 2003)


17.136.090 Variances authorized.

Variances to the subdivision regulations prescribed by this code may be authorized by the planning commission, and application shall be made with a preliminary plat application in accordance with SHMC 17.136.070. (Ord. 2875 § 1.170.090, 2003)


17.136.100 Referrals.

The director shall transmit copies of the application for variance to staff for review. (Ord. 2875 § 1.170.100, 2003)


17.136.110 Appeal.

The planning commission’s action on an application for a variance may be appealed in accordance with SHMC 17.24.310(2). (Ord. 2875 § 1.170.110, 2003)


17.136.120 Criteria for granting a variance.

(1) The planning commission shall consider the application for variance at the same meeting at which it considers the preliminary plat.

(2) A variance may be approved, approved with conditions, or denied provided the planning commission finds:

(a) There are special circumstances or conditions affecting the property which are unusual and peculiar to the land as compared to other lands similarly situated;

(b) The variance is necessary for the proper design or function of the subdivision;

(c) The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare or injurious to the rights of other owners of property; and

(d) The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right because of an extraordinary hardship which would result from strict compliance with the regulations of this code. (Ord. 2875 § 1.170.120, 2003)


17.136.130 Variance application.

(1) Application for a variance shall be made on forms provided by the director.

(2) The applicant shall state fully the reasons for the application, the supporting facts, and any other data pertinent to the findings prerequisite to the granting of a variance prescribed in SHMC 17.136.120. (Ord. 2875 § 1.170.130, 2003)


17.136.140 Application submission requirements – Final plat.

Unless otherwise provided in SHMC 17.136.020, the applicant shall submit:

(1) A final plat and five copies to the director within one year which complies with the approved preliminary plat; and

(2) The required fee. (Ord. 2875 § 1.170.140, 2003)


17.136.150 City review of final plat – Approval criteria.

The director, legal counsel and the city engineer shall review the final plat and shall approve or deny the final plat approval based on findings that:

(1) The final plat substantially complies with the plat approved by the commission and all conditions of approval have been satisfied (minor changes to lot configurations, topography issues, reduction in number of lots are not substantial changes);

(2) The streets and roads for public use are dedicated without reservation or restriction other than revisionary rights upon vacation of any such street or road and easements for public utilities;

(3) The streets and roads held for private use and indicated on the tentative plan of such subdivision have been approved by the city;

(4) The plat contains a donation to the public of all common improvements, including but not limited to streets, roads, parks, sewage disposal, and water supply systems;

(5) An explanation is included which explains all of the common improvements required as conditions of approval and are in recordable form and have been recorded and referenced on the plat. This is to include CC&Rs for HOAs set up to own and maintain on common properties or facilities in the subdivision (with provisions for city to veto dissolution of HOA or to have right to assess owners for taxes and maintenance or lien properties);

(6) The plat complies with the applicable zoning ordinance and other applicable ordinances and regulations;

(7) A certification by the city’s engineering division that municipal water will be available to a lot line of each and every lot depicted on the proposed plat or bond, contract or other assurance has been provided by the subdivider to the city that a municipal water system will be installed by or on behalf of the subdivider to the lot line of each and every lot depicted on the proposed plat. The amount of the bond, contract or other assurance by the subdivider shall be determined by a registered professional engineer, subject to any change in amount as determined necessary by the city;

(8) A certificate has been provided by the city’s engineering division that a municipal sewage disposal system will be available to the lot line of each and every lot depicted in the proposed plat;

(9) Copies of signed deeds have been submitted granting the city a reserve strip as provided by SHMC 17.136.060;

(10) The lettering of the approvals, dedication and affidavit of the surveyor is of such a size and type, and the plat is at such a scale, as will be clearly legible, but no part shall come nearer any edge of the sheet than one inch;

(11) If there is more than one sheet, a face sheet and index has been provided;

(12) The plat contains a surveyor’s affidavit by the surveyor who surveyed the land represented on the plat to the effect the land was correctly surveyed and marked with proper monuments as provided by ORS Chapter 92[.060] and indicating the initial point of the survey, and giving the dimensions and kind of such monument, and its reference to some corner established by the U.S. survey or giving two or more objects for identifying its location; and

(13) A development agreement has been signed by the owner/developer. (Ord. 2875 § 1.170.150, 2003)


17.136.160 Centerline monumentation – Monument box requirements.

(1) Centerline Monumentation.

(a) The centerlines of all street and roadway rights-of-way shall be monumented before city acceptance of street improvements; and

(b) The following centerline monuments shall be set:

(i) All centerline-centerline intersection points;

(ii) All cul-de-sac center points; and

(iii) Curve points, beginning and ending points (point of curvature [P.C.] and point of tangency [P.T.]).

(2) Monument Boxes Required.

(a) Monument boxes conforming to city standards will be required around all centerline intersection points and cul-de-sac center points; and

(b) The tops of all monument boxes will be set to finished pavement grade. (Ord. 2875 § 1.170.160, 2003)


17.136.170 Improvement agreement.

(1) Before city approval is certified on the final plat the subdivider shall:

(a) Execute and file an agreement with the city engineer specifying the period within which all required unfinished improvements and repairs shall be completed; and

(b) Include in the agreement provisions that if such work is not completed within the period specified, the city may complete the work and recover the full cost and expenses from the subdivider.

(2) The agreement shall stipulate improvement fees and deposits as may be required to be paid and may also provide for the construction of the improvements in stages and for the extension of time under specific conditions therein stated in the contract. (Ord. 2875 § 1.170.170, 2003)


17.136.180 Bond – Cash deposit.

(1) As required by SHMC 17.136.170, the subdivider shall file with the agreement an assurance of performance supported by one of the following:

(a) An irrevocable letter of credit executed by an acceptable financial institution authorized to transact business in the state of Oregon;

(b) A surety bond executed by an acceptable surety company authorized to transact business in the state of Oregon which remains in force until the surety company is notified by the city in writing that it may be terminated; or

(c) Cash.

(2) The assurance of performance shall be for a sum determined by the city engineer as required to cover the cost of the improvements and repairs, including related engineering and incidental expenses.

(3) The subdivider shall furnish to the city engineer an itemized improvement estimate, certified by a registered civil engineer, to assist the city engineer in calculating the amount of the performance assurance.

(4) In the event the subdivider fails to carry out all provisions of the agreement and the city has unreimbursed costs or expenses resulting from such failure, the city shall call on the bond, cash deposit or letter of credit for reimbursement.

(5) The subdivider shall not cause termination of nor allow expiration of said guarantee without having first secured written authorization from the city. (Ord. 2875 § 1.170.180, 2003)


17.136.190 Filing and recording.

(1) Within 60 days of the city review and approval, the applicant shall submit the final plat to the county for signatures of county officials as required by ORS Chapter 92 and SHMC 17.136.150.

(2) Upon final recording with the county, the applicant shall submit to the city a mylar copy of the recorded final plat and proof of recording of any required CC&Rs for HOA. No building permit shall be issued until this is accomplished. (Ord. 2875 § 1.170.190, 2003)


17.136.200 Prerequisites to recording the plat.

(1) No plat shall be recorded unless all ad valorem taxes and all special assessments, fees, or other charges required by law to be placed on the tax roll have been paid in the manner provided by ORS Chapter 92[.095].

(2) No plat shall be recorded until it is approved by the county surveyor in the manner provided by ORS Chapter 92. (Ord. 2875 § 1.170.200, 2003)


17.136.210 Vacation of plats.

(1) Any plat or portion thereof may be vacated by the owner of the platted area at any time prior to the sale of any lot within the platted subdivision.

(2) All applications for a plat or street vacation shall be made in accordance with SHMC 17.136.020, 17.136.030 and 17.136.160(1).

(3) The application may be denied if it abridges or destroys any public right in any of its public uses, improvements, streets, or alleys.

(4) All approved plat vacations shall be recorded in accordance with SHMC 17.136.190:

(a) Once recorded, the vacation shall operate to eliminate the force and effect of the plat prior to vacation; and

(b) The vacation shall also divest all public rights in the streets, alleys and public grounds, and all dedications laid out or described on the plat.

(5) When lots have been sold, the plat may be vacated in the manner herein provided by all of the owners of lots within the platted area. (Ord. 2875 § 1.170.210, 2003)


17.136.220 Vacation of streets.

All street vacations shall comply with the procedures and standards set forth in ORS Chapter 271 and applicable local regulations. (Ord. 2875 § 1.170.220, 2003)


Chapter 17.140 LAND DIVISION – LAND PARTITIONING – LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT

Sections:

17.140.010    Purpose.

17.140.020    Partition or lot line adjustment required.

17.140.030    Administration and approval process.

17.140.035    Expiration of approval – Standards for extension of time.

17.140.040    Partition approval criteria.

17.140.050    Special provisions for lots created through partition process.

17.140.055    Creation of flag lot.

17.140.060    Lot line adjustments – Approval standards.

17.140.070    Preliminary application submission requirements.

17.140.080    Final submission requirements – Partition.

17.140.085    Final submittal requirements – Lot line adjustment.

17.140.090    Additional information required and waiver of requirements.

17.140.100    City acceptance of dedicated land.

17.140.110    Centerline monumentation – Monument box requirements.

17.140.120    Recording of partitions – Lot line adjustments.

17.140.130    Variances to standards.


17.140.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide rules, regulations, and standards governing approval of land partitions and lot line adjustments. (Ord. 2875 § 1.172.010, 2003)


17.140.020 Partition or lot line adjustment required.

(1) A land partition review is required when a division of land creates a street or road, within one calendar year.

(2) A land partition review is required when two or three lots are created with or without the creation of a street or road, within one calendar year.

(3) A lot line adjustment review is required where any adjustment to a property line by the relocation of a common boundary is requested. (Ord. 2875 § 1.172.020, 2003)


17.140.030 Administration and approval process.

(1) The applicant of a partition or lot line adjustment proposal shall be the recorded owner of the property or an agent authorized in writing by the owner.

(2) Any application for a land partition or lot line adjustment shall be in conformity with all state regulations set forth in ORS Chapter 92, Subdivision and Partitions.*

(3) No lot or parcel to be created through the partitioning process shall be sold until approval and filing of the final partition plat.

(4) When partitioning tracts into large parcels, the director shall require that the parcels be of such size and shape to facilitate future repartitioning of such parcels in accordance with the requirements of the comprehensive plan and the zoning district and this code. Also, a redevelopment plat is required to be approved by the director and applied to any building permit issued.

(5) The applicant is required to meet with the director for a preapplication conference in accordance with SHMC 17.24.040:

(a) Another preapplication conference is required if an application is submitted more than six months after the preapplication conference; and

(b) Failure of the director to provide any of the information required by this section shall not constitute a waiver of the standards, criteria, or requirements of the applications.

(6) The director shall approve, approve with conditions or deny an application. The director shall apply the standards set forth in SHMC 17.140.040 when reviewing an application for a partition or the standards in SHMC 17.140.060 when reviewing an application for a lot line adjustment. When in conflict with other portions of this code, this chapter shall prevail.

(7) The decision of the director may be appealed in accordance with SHMC 17.24.310(1).* (Ord. 2875 § 1.172.030, 2003)

*    Except for expedited land division applications.


17.140.035 Expiration of approval – Standards for extension of time.

(1) The partition or lot line adjustment approval by the director shall be effective for a period of 12 months from the date of approval.

(2) The partition or lot line adjustment approval by the director shall lapse if:

(a) The partition or lot line adjustment has been improperly recorded with Columbia County without the satisfactory completion of all conditions attached to the approval; or

(b) The final recording is a departure from the approved plan.

(3) The director shall, upon written request by the applicant and payment of the required fee, grant an extension of the approval period not to exceed six months; provided, that:

(a) No changes are made on the original plan as approved by the director;

(b) The applicant can show intent of recording the approved partition or lot line adjustment within the extension period; and

(c) There have been no changes in the applicable comprehensive plan policies and ordinance provisions on which the approval was based.

(4) Notice of the decision shall be provided to the applicant. The director’s decision may be appealed as provided by SHMC 17.24.310(1).* (Ord. 3144 § 2 (Att. A), 2011; Ord. 2875 § 1.172.035, 2003)

*    Except for expedited land division applications.


17.140.040 Partition approval criteria.

A request to partition land shall meet all of the following criteria:

(1) The proposal conforms with the city’s comprehensive plan;

(2) The proposed partition complies with all statutory and ordinance requirements and regulations;

(3) Adequate public facilities are available to serve the proposal (to address transportation facilities in this regard, a traffic impact analysis shall be prepared, as applicable, pursuant to Chapter 17.156 SHMC);

(4) All proposed lots conform to the size and dimensional requirements of this code; and

(5) All proposed improvements meet city and applicable agency standards. (Ord. 3150 § 3 (Att. B), 2011; Ord. 2875 § 1.172.040, 2003)


17.140.050 Special provisions for lots created through partition process.

(1) Lot Dimensions. Lot size, width, shape and orientation shall be appropriate for the location of the development and for the type of use contemplated, and:

(a) No lot shall be dimensioned to contain part of an existing or proposed public right-of-way;

(b) The depth of all lots shall not exceed two and one-half times the average width, unless the parcel is less than one and one-half times the minimum lot size of the applicable zoning district; and

(c) Depth and width of properties zoned for commercial and industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street parking and service facilities required by the type of use proposed.

(2) Through Lots. Through lots shall be avoided except where they are essential to provide separation of residential development from major traffic arterials or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation, and:

(a) A planting buffer at least 10 feet wide is required abutting the arterial rights-of-way; and

(b) All through lots shall provide the required front yard setback on each street.

(3) Large Lots. In dividing tracts into large lots or parcels which at some future time are likely to be redivided, the approving authority may require that the lots be of such size and shape, and be so divided into building sites, and contain such site restrictions as will provide for the extension and opening of streets at intervals which will permit a subsequent division of any tract into lots or parcels of smaller size, and:

(a) The land division shall be denied if the proposed large development lot does not provide for the future division of the lots and future extension of public facilities.

(4) Fire Protection. The fire district may require the installation of a fire hydrant where the length of an accessway would have a detrimental effect on fire fighting capabilities.

(5) Reciprocal Easements. Where a common drive is to be provided to serve more than one lot, a reciprocal easement which will ensure access and maintenance rights shall be recorded with the approved partition map.

(6) Accessway. Any accessway shall comply with the standards set forth in Chapter 17.84 SHMC, Access, Egress, and Circulation.

(7) The streets and roads are laid out so as to conform to the plats of subdivisions and maps of partitions already approved for adjoining property as to width, general direction and in all other respects unless the city determines it is in the public interest to modify the street or road pattern. (Ord. 2875 § 1.172.050, 2003)


17.140.055 Creation of flag lot.

(1) Provisions of this section on flag lots shall apply to the creation or future use of flag lots whether created herewithin or by other land division rules.

(2) The creation of flag lots is permitted only in the R-5, AR, MU, and MHR residential zones.

(3) The following standards shall apply to flag lots:

(a) Flag lots shall have access to a public or private street;

(b) The “flag” portion of a flag lot must meet standards for size and area per underlying zone requirements;

(c) There shall not be a front lot line. The applicant may choose the front lot line at the time of lot creation and all other definitions shall follow that choice;

(d) The principal dwelling(s) must have a minimum of 10-foot setback from all property lines;

(e) Dwellings on flag lots will increase the setback by 25 percent for each five feet of building height over 15 feet;

(f) Building orientation for a future principal building shall be such as to comply with solar access and to allow maximum separation and privacy from existing and future dwellings on adjacent lots; and

(g) A minimum six-foot landscaping buffer (see SHMC 17.72.080 for standards) shall be on all sides of “flag” and three-foot landscape buffer on both sides of “flag pole.” (Ord. 2875 § 1.172.055, 2003)


17.140.060 Lot line adjustments – Approval standards.

(1) The director shall approve or deny a request for a lot line adjustment in writing based on findings that the criteria stated are satisfied as follows:

(a) An additional parcel is not created by the lot line adjustment, and the existing parcel reduced in size by the adjustments is not reduced below the minimum lot size established by the zoning district;

(b) By reducing the lot size, the lot or structure(s) on the lot will not be in violation of the site development or zoning district regulations for that district; 

(c) The resulting parcels are in conformity with the dimensional standards of the zoning district; and

(d) The lots involved were legally created.

(2) The provisions of SHMC 17.140.050 shall also apply to lot line adjustments. (Ord. 2875 § 1.172.060, 2003)


17.140.070 Preliminary application submission requirements.

(1) All applications for partitions and lot line adjustments shall be made on forms provided by the director and shall be accompanied by:

(a) Copies of the preliminary partition map or lot line adjustment map (number of copies determined at preapplication conference) and necessary data or narrative; and

(b) The required fee.

(2) The preliminary partition map and necessary data or narrative shall include the following:

(a) The name(s), addresses, and phone numbers of the following:

(i) The owner(s) of the subject parcel;

(ii) The owner(s)’ authorized agent (if applicable); and

(iii) The land surveyor and engineer (if applicable);

(b) The map scale, north arrow, and date;

(c) Sufficient description to define the location and boundaries of the proposed area to be partitioned or adjusted;

(d) The scale shall be an engineering scale sufficient to show the details of the plan and related data;

(e) The location, width and names of streets or other public ways and easements within and adjacent to the proposed partition;

(f) Other important features, to include:

(i) The location of all permanent buildings on and within 25 feet of all property lines;

(ii) The location and width of all watercourses;

(iii) Any trees having a six-inch caliper or greater at four feet above ground level;

(iv) All slopes greater than 25 percent; and

(v) The location of existing utilities and utility easements;

(g) In the case of a land partition creating a street, the applicant shall include the proposed right-of-way location and width, and a scaled cross-section of the proposed street (to include any reserve strip);

(h) Any deed restrictions that apply to the existing lot; and

(i) Where it is evident that the subject parcel can be further partitioned, the applicant must show that the land partition will not preclude the efficient division of land in the future.

(3) The preliminary partition plat or lot line adjustment map shall be as accurate as possible to ensure proper review by affected agencies.

(4) Upon receipt of an application, the director shall review it for compliance with the requirements for submittal (see subsections (1) and (2) of this section). If the application is found to be incomplete, the director shall within 30 days notify the applicant of the reasons therefor and advise the applicant of the requirements for an acceptable application.*

(5) Upon acceptance of a complete application, the director shall transmit copies of the preliminary land partition application or lot line adjustment map to the city engineering department and building division as well as other potentially affected agencies where necessary.

(6) The director shall review the proposal for compliance with the provisions of this code and coordinate the review conducted by affected city agencies and applicable districts for compliance with applicable regulations.

(7) The director shall review the proposed lot line adjustment for compliance with the provisions of this code, and shall issue a decision to owners of the involved parcels, abutting property owners, and affected service providing agencies with regard to the compliance of the application with respect to all applicable approval criteria. If the director believes that existing utilities may be affected by the proposed adjustment, the director may defer making a decision on the application until the affected service providing agencies have been given an opportunity to review and comment upon the proposal. In addition, an affected agency may request an amended decision within 10 days of the issuance of a decision for which comments were not requested, if the agency finds that utilities may be affected by the proposed adjustment.

(8) Following the review of the land partition or lot line adjustment by the applicable agencies, the applicant will be advised of the status of the proposal and of any additional information which shall be required prior to the filing of a final land partition plat or lot line adjustment map and shall be notified of conditions to be attached to the approval. (Ord. 2875 § 1.172.070, 2003)

*    Except for expedited land division applications.


17.140.080 Final submission requirements – Partition.

The partition plat and data or narrative shall be drawn to the minimum standards set forth by the Oregon Revised Statutes (ORS 92.050) and by Columbia County and shall include the following:

(1) Sheet sizes for the final partition map shall be drawn on paper that is eight and one-half inches by 11 inches, 11 inches by 17 inches or 18 inches by 24 inches in size (if 18 inches by 24 inches, then one copy must be on reducible paper);

(2) The scale of the map shall be an engineering scale;

(3) The name and address of the following:

(a) The owner(s) of the subject parcel;

(b) The owner(s)’ authorized agent; and

(c) The land surveyor and engineer;

(4) The assessor’s map and lot number and a copy of the deed, sales contract or document containing a legal description of the land to be partitioned;

(5) The map scale, north arrow, and date;

(6) Dimensions and legal descriptions of the parent parcel and all proposed parcels;

(7) Boundary lines and names of adjacent partitions and subdivisions, and tract lines abutting the site;

(8) The locations, width and names of streets or other public ways and easements within and adjacent to the proposed partition;

(9) In the case of a land partition creating a street, the applicant shall include the proposed right-of-way location and width, and a scaled cross-section of the proposed street (to include any reserve strip);

(10) Any deed restrictions that apply to the existing lot; and

(11) Signature blocks for city approval and acceptance of public easements and rights-of-way. (Ord. 2875 § 1.172.080, 2003)


17.140.085 Final submittal requirements – Lot line adjustment.

The lot line adjustment survey map and data or narrative shall include the following:

(1) Sheet sizes for the final map shall be drawn on paper that is eight and one-half inches by 11 inches, 11 inches by 17 inches or 18 inches by 24 inches in size (if 18 inches by 24 inches, then one copy must be on reducible paper);

(2) The scale of the map shall be an engineering scale;

(3) The name and address of the following:

(a) The owner(s) of the subject parcel;

(b) The owner’s authorized agent; and

(c) The land surveyor and engineer;

(4) The map scale, north arrow, and date;

(5) Dimensions and parcel sizes of both the original parcels and adjusted parcels;

(6) Boundary lines of parcels abutting the parcels;

(7) The locations, width and names of streets or other public ways and easements within and adjacent to the subject parcels;

(8) Any deed restrictions that apply to the parcels; and

(9) Signature blocks for city approval and acceptance of public easements and rights-of-way. (Ord. 2875 § 1.172.085, 2003)


17.140.090 Additional information required and waiver of requirements.

(1) The director may require information in addition to that required by this chapter in accordance with SHMC 17.24.080(1).

(2) The director may waive a specific requirement for information in accordance with SHMC 17.24.080(2) and (3). (Ord. 2875 § 1.172.090, 2003)


17.140.100 City acceptance of dedicated land.

(1) The city council may accept the proposed right-of-way dedication prior to recording a land partition or lot line adjustment.

(2) The city engineer shall accept all public easements shown for dedication on partition plats or lot line adjustment maps. (Ord. 2875 § 1.172.100, 2003)


17.140.110 Centerline monumentation – Monument box requirements.

(1) Centerline Monumentation for all Partitions. The centerlines of all street and roadway rights-of-way shall be monumented as prescribed in ORS 92.060(2) before city acceptance of street improvements under the following specifications:

(a) Centerline monuments are required to have monument boxes conforming to city standards set for those monuments within the pavement area; and

(b) The tops of all monument boxes shall be set to finished pavement grade. (Ord. 2875 § 1.172.110, 2003)


17.140.120 Recording of partitions – Lot line adjustments.

(1) Upon the director’s approval of the proposed submitted final partition plat or lot line adjustment and the city council’s acceptance of any dedicated land to the city, the applicant shall record the partition plat or lot line adjustment survey map with Columbia County and submit the recordation numbers to the city, to be incorporated into the record. Final plats must be recorded within 90 days after all required signatures are obtained.

(2) The applicant shall submit a recorded reproducible copy of the final partition plat or lot line adjustment survey map to the city within 15 days of recording, or notify the city engineering division of the county survey number. (Ord. 2875 § 1.172.120, 2003)


17.140.130 Variances to standards.

An application for a variance to the standards prescribed in this chapter shall be made in accordance with Chapter 17.108 SHMC, Variance. (Ord. 2875 § 1.172.130, 2003)


Chapter 17.144 EXPEDITED LAND DIVISIONS

Sections:

17.144.010    Expedited land division defined – Applicability.

17.144.020    Application for expedited land division – Notice requirements – Procedure.

17.144.030    Failure of local government to approve or deny application within specified time.

17.144.040    Appeal of decision on application for expedited land division – Notice requirements – Standards for review – Procedure – Costs.

17.144.050    Application fees for expedited land division.


17.144.010 Expedited land division defined – Applicability.

(1) An “expedited land division”:

(a) Is an action of a local government that:

(i) Includes land that is zoned for residential uses and is within an urban growth boundary;

(ii) Is solely for the purposes of residential use, including recreational or open space uses accessory to residential use;

(iii) Does not provide for dwellings or accessory buildings to be located on land that is specifically mapped and designated in the comprehensive plan and land use regulations for full or partial protection of natural features under the statewide planning goals that protect:

(A) Open spaces, scenic and historic areas and natural resources;

(B) The Willamette River Greenway;

(C) Estuarine resources;

(D) Coastal shorelands; and

(E) Beaches and dunes;

(iv) Satisfies minimum street or other right-of-way connectivity standards established by acknowledged land use regulations or, if such standards are not contained in the applicable regulations, as required by statewide planning goals or rules;

(v) Creates enough lots or parcels to allow building residential units at 80 percent or more of the maximum net density permitted by the zoning designation of the site;

(b) Is a land division that:

(i) Will create three or fewer parcels under ORS 92.010; and

(ii) Meets the criteria set forth for an action under subsection (1)(a)(i) through (v) of this section.

(2) An expedited land division as described in this section is not a land use decision or a limited land use decision under ORS 197.015 or a permit under ORS 215.402 or 227.160.

(3) The provisions of this section through SHMC 17.144.050 apply to all elements of a local government comprehensive plan and land use regulations applicable to a land division, including any planned development standards and any procedures designed to regulate:

(a) The physical characteristics of permitted uses;

(b) The dimensions of the lots or parcels to be created; or

(c) Transportation, sewer, water, drainage and other facilities or services necessary for the proposed development, including but not limited to right-of-way standards, facility dimensions and on-site and off-site improvements.

(4) An application to a local government for an expedited land division shall describe the manner in which the proposed division complies with each of the provisions of subsection (1) of this section. (Ord. 2875 § 1.176.010, 2003)


17.144.020 Application for expedited land division – Notice requirements – Procedure.

(1) When requested by an applicant for an expedited land division, in lieu of the procedure set forth in its comprehensive plan and land use regulations, the local government shall use the following procedures for an expedited land division under SHMC 17.144.010:

(a) If the application for expedited land division is incomplete, the local government shall notify the applicant of exactly what information is missing within 21 days of receipt of the application and allow the applicant to submit the missing information. For purposes of computation of time under this section, the application shall be deemed complete on the date the applicant submits the requested information or refuses in writing to submit it.

(b) If the application was complete when first submitted or the applicant submits the requested additional information within 180 days of the date the application was first submitted, approval or denial of the application shall be based upon the standards and criteria that were applicable at the time the application was first submitted.

(2) The local government shall provide written notice of the receipt of the completed application for an expedited land division to any state agency, local government or special district responsible for providing public facilities or services to the development and to owners of property as per type of land division (e.g., subdivision, 300 feet; partitions, 200 feet). The notification list shall be compiled from the most recent property tax assessment roll. For purposes of appeal to the referee under SHMC 17.144.040, this requirement shall be deemed met when the local government can provide an affidavit or other certification that such notice was given. Notice shall also be provided to any neighborhood or community planning organization recognized by the governing body and whose boundaries include the site.

(3) The notice required under subsection (2) of this section shall:

(a) State:

(i) The deadline for submitting written comments;

(ii) That issues that may provide the basis for an appeal to the referee must be raised in writing prior to the expiration of the comment period; and

(iii) That issues must be raised with sufficient specificity to enable the local government to respond to the issue;

(b) Set forth, by commonly used citation, the applicable criteria for the decision;

(c) Set forth the street address or other easily understood geographical reference to the subject property;

(d) State the place, date, and time that comments are due;

(e) State a time and place where copies of all evidence submitted by the applicant will be available for review;

(f) Include the name and telephone number of a local government contact person; and

(g) Briefly summarize the local decision-making process for the expedited land division decision being made.

(4) After notice under subsections (2) and (3) of this section, the local government shall:

(a) Provide a 14-day period for submission of written comments prior to the decision;

(b) Make a decision to approve or deny the application within 63 days of receiving a completed application, based on whether it satisfies the substantive requirements of the local government’s land use regulations. An approval may include conditions to ensure that the application meets the applicable land use regulations. For applications subject to this section, the local government:

(i) Shall not hold a hearing on the application; and

(ii) Shall issue a written determination of compliance or noncompliance with applicable land use regulations that includes a summary statement explaining the determination. The summary statement may be in any form reasonably intended to communicate the local government’s basis for the determination;

(c) Provide notice of the decision to the applicant and to those who received notice under subsection (2) of this section within 63 days of the date of a competed application. The notice of decision shall include:

(i) The summary statement described in subsection (4)(b)(ii) of this section; and

(ii) An explanation of appeal rights under SHMC 17.144.040. (Ord. 2875 § 1.176.020, 2003)


17.144.030 Failure of local government to approve or deny application within specified time.

(1) Except as provided in subsection (2) of this section, if the local government does not make a decision on an expedited land division within 63 days after the application is deemed complete, the applicant may apply in the circuit court for the county in which the application was filed for a writ of mandamus to compel the local government to issue the approval. The writ shall be issued unless the local government shows that the approval would violate a substantive provision of the applicable land use regulations or the requirements of SHMC 17.144.010. A decision of the circuit court under this section may be appealed only to the Court of Appeals.

(2) After seven days’ notice to the applicant, the governing body of the local government may, at a regularly scheduled public meeting, take action to extend the 63-day time period to a date certain for one or more applications for an expedited land division prior to the expiration of the 63-day period, based on a determination that an unexpected or extraordinary increase in applications makes action within 63 days impracticable. In no case shall an extension be to a date more than 120 days after the application was deemed complete. Upon approval of an extension, the provisions of SHMC 17.144.010 through 17.144.050, including the mandamus remedy provided by subsection (1) of this section, shall remain applicable to the expedited land division, except that the extended period shall be substituted for the 63-day period wherever applicable.

(3) The decision to approve or not approve an extension under subsection (2) of this section is not a land use decision or limited land use decision. (Ord. 2875 § 1.176.030, 2003)


17.144.040 Appeal of decision on application for expedited land division – Notice requirements – Standards for review – Procedure – Costs.

(1) An appeal of a decision made under SHMC 17.144.010 and 17.144.020 shall be made as follows:

(a) An appeal must be filed with the local government within 14 days of mailing of the notice of the decision under SHMC 17.144.020(4), and shall be accompanied by a $300.00 deposit for costs;

(b) A decision may be appealed by:

(i) The applicant; or

(ii) Any person or organization who files written comments in the time period established under SHMC 17.144.020;

(c) An appeal shall be based solely on allegations:

(i) Of violation of the substantive provisions of the applicable land use regulations;

(ii) Of unconstitutionality of the decision;

(iii) That the application is not eligible for review under SHMC 17.144.010 through 17.144.050 and should be reviewed as a land use decision or limited land use decision; or

(iv) That the parties’ substantive rights have been substantially prejudiced by an error in procedure by the local government.

(2) The local government shall appoint a referee to decide the appeal of a decision made under SHMC 17.144.010 and 17.144.020. The referee shall not be an employee or official of the local government. However, a local government that has designated a hearings officer under ORS 215.406 or 227.165 may designate the hearings officer as the referee for appeals of a decision made under SHMC 17.144.010 and 17.144.020. 

(3) Within seven days of being appointed to decide the appeal, the referee shall notify the applicant, the local government, the appellant if other than the applicant, any person or organization entitled to notice under SHMC 17.144.020(2) that provided written comments to the local government and all providers of public facilities and services entitled to notice under SHMC 17.144.020 and advise them of the manner in which they may participate in the appeal. A person or organization that provided written comments to the local government but did not file an appeal under subsection (1) of this section may participate only with respect to the issues raised in the written comments submitted by that person or organization. The referee may use any procedure for decision-making consistent with the interests of the parties to ensure a fair opportunity to present information and argument. The referee shall provide the local government an opportunity to explain its decision, but is not limited to reviewing the local government decision and may consider information not presented to the local government.

(4) The referee shall apply the substantive requirements of the local government’s land use regulations and SHMC 17.144.010. If the referee determines that the application does not qualify as an expedited land division as described in SHMC 17.144.010, the referee shall remand the application for consideration as a land use decision or limited land use decision. In all other cases, the referee shall seek to identify means by which the application can satisfy the applicable requirements.

(5) The referee may not reduce the density of the land division application. The referee shall make a written decision approving or denying the application or approving it with conditions designed to ensure that the application satisfies the land use regulations, within 42 days of the filing of an appeal. The referee may not remand the application to the local government for any reason other than as set forth in this subsection.

(6) Unless the governing body of the local government finds exigent circumstances, a referee who fails to issue a written decision within 42 days of the filing of an appeal shall receive no compensation for service as referee in the appeal.

(7) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the referee shall order the local government to refund the deposit for costs to an appellant who materially improves his or her position from the decision of the local government. The referee shall assess the cost of the appeal in excess of the deposit for costs, up to a maximum of $500.00, including the deposit paid under subsection (1) of this section, against an appellant who does not materially improve his or her position from the decision of the local government. The local government shall pay the portion of the costs of the appeal not assessed against the appellant. The costs of the appeal include the compensation paid the referee and costs incurred by the local government, but not the costs of other parties.

(8) The Land Use Board of Appeals does not have jurisdiction to consider any decision, aspects of decisions or actions made under SHMC 17.144.010 through 17.144.050.

(9) Any party to a proceeding before a referee under this section may seek judicial review of the referee’s decision in the manner provided for review of final orders of the Land Use Board of Appeals under ORS 197.850 and 197.855. The Court of Appeals shall review decisions of the referee in the same manner as provided for review of final orders of the Land Use Board of Appeals in those statutes. However, notwithstanding ORS 197.850(9) or any other provision of law, the court shall reverse or remand the decision only if it finds:

(a) That the decision does not concern an expedited land division as described in SHMC 17.144.010 and the appellant raised this issue in proceedings before the referee;

(b) That there is a basis to vacate the decision as described in ORS 36.705(1)(a) to (d) (Vacating award), or a basis for modification or correction of an award as described in ORS 36.710 (Modification or correction of award); or

(c) That the decision is unconstitutional. (Ord. 3186 § 23, 2015; Ord. 2875 § 1.176.040, 2003)


17.144.050 Application fees for expedited land division.

Application fees for expedited land division shall be the same as for subdivisions if over three lots, and the same as for partitions if less than four lots. (Ord. 2875 § 1.176.050, 2003)


Chapter 17.148 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT

Sections:

17.148.010    Purpose.

17.148.015    The process.

17.148.020    Administration and approval process.

17.148.030    Expiration of approval – Standards for extension of time.

17.148.040    Noncompliance – Bond.

17.148.050    Applicability of zone as condition of approval.

17.148.060    Planned development allowed and disallowed.

17.148.070    Applicability and allowed uses.

17.148.080    Applicability of the base zone provisions.

17.148.090    Applicability of site development review chapter.

17.148.100    Phased development.

17.148.110    Application submission requirements – Preliminary development plan.

17.148.120    Approval standards.

17.148.130    Site conditions.

17.148.140    Additional information required and waiver of requirements.

17.148.150    Detailed plan.

17.148.160    Grading and drainage plan.

17.148.170    The landscape plan.

17.148.180    Sign drawings.

17.148.190    Exceptions to underlying zone, yard, parking, sign and landscaping provisions.

17.148.200    Shared open space.


17.148.010 Purpose.

The purposes of the planned development overlay zone are:

(1) To provide a means for creating planned environments through the application of flexible standards which allow for the application of new techniques and new technology in community development which will result in a superior living arrangement;

(2) To facilitate the efficient use of land;

(3) To promote an economic arrangement of land use, buildings, circulation systems, open space, and utilities;

(4) To preserve to the greatest extent possible the existing landscape features and amenities through the use of a planning procedure that can relate the type and design of a development to a particular site; and

(5) To encourage development that recognizes the relationship between buildings, their use, open space, and accessways and thereby maximizes the opportunities for innovative and diversified living environments. (Ord. 2875 § 1.180.010, 2003)


17.148.015 The process.

(1) The planned development designation is an overlay zone applicable to all zones.

(2) There are three elements to the planned development approval process and the elements are as follows:

(a) The recommendation of approval by the planning commission of the planned development overlay zone and the subsequent approval by the city council;

(b) The approval by the planning commission of the preliminary planned development plan; and

(c) The approval by the director of the final detailed development plan.

(3) The planned development overlay zone shall be processed in the same manner as a zone change under the provisions of SHMC 17.24.090(3)(o), Approval authority responsibilities, except in the situation where zone change is part of a legislative rezoning. In the case of an existing planned development overlay zone for a subdivision, conditional use or site development review application, the proposal shall be reviewed by the commission. In the case of an existing planned development overlay zone for any other type of application, the application shall be reviewed under the provisions required in the chapters which apply to the particular land use application.

(4) The application for the overlay zone and for approval of the preliminary development plan may be heard concurrently if an application for each of the actions is submitted.

(5) If the application involves subdivision of land, the applicant may apply for preliminary plat approval and the applications shall be heard concurrently.

(6) The application for the preliminary development plan shall satisfy all of the requirements of SHMC 17.148.110. The applicant may file for exceptions under the provision of SHMC 17.148.190.

(7) The application for the detailed development plan shall satisfy all of the requirements of SHMC 17.148.020(7). 

(8) The applicant can file for an overlay zone, or overlay plus preliminary planned development, or overlay zone and subdivision preliminary plat. (Ord. 2875 § 1.180.015, 2003)


17.148.020 Administration and approval process.

(1) The applicant for a planned development overlay zone may be as provided by SHMC 17.24.020. The applicant for the preliminary plan and detailed plan shall be the recorded owner of the property or an agent authorized in writing by the owner.

(2) A preapplication conference with city staff is required (see SHMC 17.24.040).

(3) Due to possible changes in state statutes, or regional or local policy, information given by staff to the applicant during the preapplication conference is valid for no more than six months:

(a) Another preapplication conference is required if any planned development application is submitted six months after the preapplication conference; and

(b) Failure of the director to provide any of the information required by this section shall not constitute a waiver of the standards, criteria, or requirements of the applications.

(4) Notice of the planned development proceeding before the commission shall be given as required by SHMC 17.24.130.

(5) Action on the application shall be in accordance with Chapter 17.24 SHMC and the following:

(a) The commission shall make a recommendation per planned development overlay zone application to city council for their final decision;

(b) Unless otherwise provided by this code, the commission shall hold a public hearing and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application for subdivision or development plan based on findings related to the applicable criteria set forth in SHMC 17.148.120; and

(c) A decision on subdivision or development plan by the commission may be reviewed by the council as provided by SHMC 17.24.310(2).

(6) Where a planned development overlay zone has been approved, the development zoning district map shall be amended to indicate the approved planned development designation for the subject development site.

(7) Within one and one-half years after the date of commission approval of the preliminary development plan, the owner shall prepare and file with the director a detailed, final development plan. Action on the detailed development plan shall be ministerial and taken by the director, and:

(a) The director shall approve the detailed, final development plan upon finding that the final plan conforms with the preliminary development plan approved, or approved with conditions, by the commission. The final plan shall be approved unless the director finds:

(i) The change increases the residential densities, the lot coverage by buildings or reduces the amount of parking;

(ii) The change reduces the amount of open space and landscaping;

(iii) The change involves a change in use;

(iv) The change commits land to development which is environmentally sensitive or subject to a potential hazard; and

(v) The change involves a major shift in the location of buildings, proposed streets, parking lot configuration, utility easements, landscaping, or other site improvements;

(b) A decision by the director may be appealed by the applicant or other affected/approved parties to the commission and the commission shall decide whether the detailed, final development plan substantially conforms to the approved preliminary development plan based on the criteria set forth in subsection (7)(a) of this section:

(i) The decision shall be based on testimony from the applicant and the staff exclusively; and

(ii) No notice shall be required except as required by SHMC 17.24.120.

(8) Substantial modifications made to the approved preliminary development plan shall require a new application. (Ord. 2875 § 1.180.020, 2003)


17.148.030 Expiration of approval – Standards for extension of time.

(1) The approval of the planned development overlay zone shall not expire.

(2) The preliminary development plan approval by the commission shall lapse if a detailed development plan proposal has not been submitted for approval within the one-and-one-half-year period or unless an extension of time is granted.

(3) The director shall, upon written request by the applicant and payment of the required fee, grant an extension of the approval period not to exceed one year; provided, that:

(a) No changes have been made on the original preliminary development plan as approved by the commission;

(b) The applicant can show intent of applying for detailed development plan review within the one-year extension period; and

(c) There have been no changes to the applicable comprehensive plan policies and ordinance provisions on which the approval was based.

(4) Notice of the decision shall be provided to the applicant. The director’s decision may be appealed by the applicant as provided by SHMC 17.24.310(1). (Ord. 2875 § 1.180.030, 2003)


17.148.040 Noncompliance – Bond.

(1) Noncompliance with an approved detailed development plan shall be a violation of this chapter.

(2) The development shall be completed in accordance with the approved detailed development plan including landscaping and recreation areas before any occupancy permits are issued, except that:

(a) When the director determines that immediate execution of any feature of an approved detailed development plan is impractical due to climatic conditions, unavailability of materials, or other temporary condition, the director shall, as a precondition of the issuance of a required permit, require the posting of a performance bond or other surety to secure execution of the feature at a time certain not to exceed one year. (Ord. 2875 § 1.180.040, 2003)


17.148.050 Applicability of zone as condition of approval.

An approval authority may apply the provisions of this chapter as a condition of approving any application for a commercial or industrial development. (Ord. 2875 § 1.180.050, 2003)


17.148.060 Planned development allowed and disallowed.

(1) A planned development shall not be allowed on any lands, with less than a two-acre minimum, shown on the comprehensive plan map as “developing areas” (SHMC 17.112.030).

(2) A planned development shall not be allowed in residential zones located in areas designated as “established areas” on the comprehensive plan map, except the commission may approve a planned development within an “established area” where the commission finds:

(a) Development of the land in accordance with the provisions of the “established area” would:

(i) Result in an inefficient use of land;

(ii) Result in removing significant natural features; or

(iii) Result in a change of the character of the area surrounding a significant historic feature or building;

(b) The planned development approach is the most feasible method of developing the area; and

(c) The site is of a size and shape that the compatibility provisions of Chapter 17.56 SHMC can be met. (Ord. 2875 § 1.180.060, 2003)


17.148.070 Applicability and allowed uses.

(1) In addition to the use allowed outright in an underlying residential zone the following uses are allowed outright where all other applicable standards are met:

(a) Community building;

(b) Indoor recreation facility, athletic club, fitness center, racquetball court, swimming pool, tennis court, or similar use;

(c) Outdoor recreation facility, golf course, golf driving range, swimming pool, tennis court, or similar use; and

(d) Recreational vehicle storage area.

(2) In all commercial and industrial planned developments the uses permitted outright shall comply with the underlying zoning district. (Ord. 2875 § 1.180.070, 2003)


17.148.080 Applicability of the base zone provisions.

(1) The provisions of the base zone are applicable as follows:

(a) Lot Dimensional Standards. The minimum lot size, lot depth and lot width standards shall not apply except as related to the density computation under Chapter 17.56 SHMC;

(b) Site Coverage. The site coverage provisions of the base zone shall apply;

(c) Building Height. The building height provisions shall not apply except within 100 feet of an “established area”; and

(d) Structure Setback Provisions.

(i) Front yard and rear yard setbacks for structures on the perimeter of the project shall be the same as that required by the base zone unless otherwise provided by Chapter 17.96 SHMC;

(ii) The side yard setback provisions shall not apply except that all detached structures shall meet the applicable building code (as administered by the building official) requirements for fire walls; and

(iii) Front yard and rear yard setback requirements in the base zone setback shall not apply to structures on the interior of the project except that:

(A) A minimum front yard setback of 20 feet is required for any garage structure which opens facing a street;

(B) A minimum front yard setback of eight feet is required for any garage opening for an attached single-family dwelling facing a private street as long as the required off-street parking spaces are provided.

(2) All other provisions of the base zone shall apply except as modified by this chapter. (Ord. 3164 § 3 (Att. B), 2012; Ord. 2875 § 1.180.080, 2003)


17.148.090 Applicability of site development review chapter.

The provisions of Chapter 17.96 SHMC shall apply to all uses except as provided by Chapter 17.96 SHMC. (Ord. 2875 § 1.180.090, 2003)


17.148.100 Phased development.

(1) The commission shall approve a time schedule for developing a site in phases, but in no case shall the total time period for all phases be greater than seven years without reapplying for preliminary development plan review.

(2) The criteria for approving a phased detailed development plan proposal are that:

(a) The public facilities shall be constructed in conjunction with or prior to each phase; and

(b) The development and occupancy of any phase shall not be dependent on the use of temporary public facilities. A temporary public facility is any facility not constructed to the applicable city or district standard. (Ord. 2875 § 1.180.100, 2003)


17.148.110 Application submission requirements – Preliminary development plan.

(1) All applications shall be made on forms provided by the director and shall be accompanied by:

(a) Eight copies of the preliminary development plan(s) and necessary data or narrative which explains how the development conforms to the standards:

(i) Sheet size for the preliminary development plan(s) and required drawings shall preferably not exceed 18 inches by 24 inches; and

(ii) The scale for a preliminary development plan shall be an engineering scale; and

(b) The required fee.

(2) The required information may be combined and does not have to be placed on separate maps.

(3) The preliminary development plan, data, and narrative shall include the following:

(a) Existing site conditions, SHMC 17.148.130;

(b) A site concept, SHMC 17.148.150;

(c) A grading concept, SHMC 17.148.160;

(d) A landscape concept, SHMC 17.148.170;

(e) A sign concept, SHMC 17.148.180; and

(f) A copy of all existing or proposed restrictions or covenants. (Ord. 2875 § 1.180.110, 2003)


17.148.120 Approval standards.

The approving authority shall make findings that the following criteria are satisfied when approving or approving with conditions, or the criteria are not satisfied when denying an application:

(1) All the provisions of the land division provisions, Chapters 17.136 and 17.140 SHMC, et seq., shall be met;

(2) The provisions of the following chapters shall also be met:

(a) Chapter 17.56 SHMC, Density Computations;

(b) Chapter 17.48 SHMC, Solar Access Requirements;

(c) Chapter 17.64 SHMC, Additional Yard Setback Requirements and Exceptions;

(d) Chapter 17.68 SHMC, Building Height Limitations – Exceptions;

(e) Chapter 17.72 SHMC, Landscaping and Screening;

(f) Chapter 17.76 SHMC, Visual Clearance Areas; 

(g) Chapter 17.80 SHMC, Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements;

(h) Chapter 17.84 SHMC, Access, Egress, and Circulation;

(i) Chapter 17.88 SHMC, Signs; and 

(j) Chapter 17.124 SHMC, Accessory Structures;

(3) In addition, the following criteria shall be met:

(a) Relationship to the Natural and Physical Environment.

(i) The streets, buildings, and other site elements shall be designed and located to preserve the existing trees, topography, and natural drainage to the greatest degree possible (justification required);

(ii) Structures located on the site shall not be in areas subject to ground slumping and sliding;

(iii) There shall be adequate distance between on-site buildings and other on-site and off-site buildings on adjoining properties to provide for adequate light and air circulation and for fire protection;

(iv) The structures shall be oriented with consideration for the sun and wind directions, where possible; and

(v) Trees with a six-inch caliper measured at four feet in height from ground level shall be saved where possible (justification required to cut down trees);

(b) Buffering, Screening, and Compatibility between Adjoining Uses.

(i) Buffering shall be provided between different types of land uses (for example, between single-family and multiple-family residential, and residential and commercial);

(ii) In addition to the requirements of the buffer matrix, the following factors shall be considered in determining the adequacy and extent of the buffer required under Chapter 17.72 SHMC:

(A) The purpose of the buffer, for example, to decrease noise levels, absorb air pollution, filter dust, or to provide a visual barrier;

(B) The size of the buffer needs in terms of width and height to achieve the purpose;

(C) The direction(s) from which buffering is needed;

(D) The required density of the buffering; and

(E) Whether the viewer is stationary or mobile;

(iii) On-site screening from view from adjoining properties of such things as service areas, storage areas, parking lots, and mechanical devices on rooftops shall be provided and the following factors shall be considered in determining the adequacy of the type and extent of the screening:

(A) What needs to be screened;

(B) The direction from which it is needed; and

(C) Whether the screening needs to be year-round;

(c) Privacy and Noise. Nonresidential structures which abut existing residential dwellings shall be located on the site or be designed in a manner, to the maximum degree possible, to protect the private areas on the adjoining properties from view and noise;

(d) Private Outdoor Area – Residential Use.

(i) In addition to the requirements of subsection (3)(d)(iii) of this section, each ground level residential dwelling unit shall have an outdoor private area (patio, terrace, porch) of not less than 48 square feet;

(ii) Wherever possible, private outdoor open spaces should be oriented toward the sun; and

(iii) Private outdoor spaces shall be screened or designed to provide privacy for the use of the space;

(e) Shared Outdoor Recreation Areas – Residential Use.

(i) In addition to subsections (3)(e)(ii) and (iii) of this section each multiple-dwelling development shall incorporate shared usable outdoor recreation areas within the development plan as follows:

(A) Studio units up to and including two-bedroom units, 200 square feet per unit; and

(B) Three- or more bedroom units, 300 square feet per unit;

(ii) Shared outdoor recreation space shall be readily observable from adjacent units for reasons of crime prevention and safety;

(iii) The required recreation space may be provided as follows:

(A) It may be all outdoor space; or

(B) It may be part outdoor space and part indoor space; for example, an outdoor tennis court and indoor recreation room; or

(C) It may be all public or common space; or

(D) It may be part common space and part private; for example, it could be an outdoor tennis court, indoor recreation room, and balconies on each unit; or

(E) Where balconies are added to units, the balconies shall not be less than 48 square feet;

(f) Access and Circulation.

(i) The number of allowed access points for a development shall be as provided in Chapter 17.84 SHMC;

(ii) All circulation patterns within a development must be designed to accommodate emergency vehicles; and

(iii) Provisions shall be made for pedestrian and bicycle ways if such facilities are shown on an adopted plan;

(g) Landscaping and Open Space.

(i) Residential Development. In addition to the requirements of subsections (3)(d) and (e) of this section, a minimum of 20 percent of the site shall be landscaped;

(ii) Commercial Development. A minimum of 15 percent of the site shall be landscaped; and

(iii) Industrial Development. A minimum of 15 percent of the site shall be landscaped;

(h) Signs.

(i) In addition to the provisions of Chapter 17.88 SHMC, Signs:

(A) Location of all signs proposed for the development site; and

(B) The signs shall not obscure vehicle drivers’ sight distance;

(i) Parking.

(i) All parking and loading areas shall be generally laid out in accordance with the requirements set forth in Chapter 17.80 SHMC;

(ii) Up to 50 percent of required off-street parking spaces for single-family attached dwellings may be provided on one or more common parking lots within the planned development as long as each single-family lot contains one off-street parking space;

(j) Drainage. All drainage provisions shall be generally laid out in accordance with the requirements set forth in Chapter 17.44 SHMC and the criteria in the adopted 1999 master drainage plan. (Ord. 2875 § 1.180.120, 2003)


17.148.130 Site conditions.

(1) The site analysis shall include:

(a) A vicinity map showing the location of the property in relation to adjacent properties, roads, pedestrianways and bikeways, and utility access;

(b) The parcel boundaries, dimensions, and gross area;

(c) Contour lines at two-foot intervals for slopes from zero to 10 percent and five-foot intervals for slopes over 10 percent;

(d) The drainage patterns and drainage courses on the site and on adjacent lands;

(e) Potential natural hazard areas including:

(i) Floodplain areas;

(ii) Areas having a high seasonal water table within zero to 24 inches of the surface for three or more weeks of the year;

(iii) Unstable ground (areas subject to slumping, earth slides or movement). See Soil Conservation Service maps;

(iv) Areas having a severe soil erosion potential; and

(v) Areas having severe weak foundation soils;

(f) Resource areas including:

(i) Wetland areas; and

(ii) Wildlife habitat areas identified by the city in its comprehensive plan;

(g) Site features including:

(i) Large rock outcroppings;

(ii) Areas having unique views; and

(iii) Streams and stream corridors;

(h) The location of trees having a six-inch caliper at four feet and, where the site is heavily wooded, an aerial photograph at the same scale as the site analysis may be submitted and only those trees that will be affected by the proposed development need to be sited accurately;

(i) The location and type of noise sources.

(2) Where the site is subject to landslides or other potential hazard, a soils and engineering geologic study based on the proposed project shall be submitted which shows the area can be made suitable for the proposed development. (Ord. 2875 § 1.180.130, 2003)


17.148.140 Additional information required and waiver of requirements.

(1) The director may require information in addition to that required by this chapter in accordance with SHMC 17.24.080(1).

(2) The director may waive a specific requirement for information in accordance with SHMC 17.24.080(2) and (3). (Ord. 2875 § 1.180.140, 2003)


17.148.150 Detailed plan.

The site plan shall be at the same scale as the site conditions, and shall show the following:

(1) The applicant’s entire property and the surrounding property to a distance sufficient to determine the relationship between the applicant’s property and proposed development and adjacent property and development;

(2) Boundary lines and dimensions for the perimeter of the property and the dimensions for all proposed lot lines, section lines, corners, and monuments;

(3) The location of at least one temporary benchmark and contours as provided by SHMC 17.148.130(1)(c);

(4) Identification information, including the name and address of the owner, developer, and project designer, and the scale and north arrow;

(5) The location, dimensions, and names of all:

(a) Existing and platted streets and other public ways, railroad tracks and crossings, and easements on adjacent property and on the site; and

(b) Proposed streets or other public ways and easements on the site;

(6) The location, dimensions and setback distances of all:

(a) Existing structures, improvements, utility and drainage facilities on adjoining properties;

(b) Existing structures, improvements, utility and drainage facilities to remain on the site; and

(c) Proposed structures, improvements, utility and drainage facilities on the site;

(7) The location and dimensions of:

(a) The entrances and exits to the site;

(b) The parking and circulation areas;

(c) Pedestrian and bicycle circulation areas;

(d) On-site outdoor recreation spaces and common areas; and

(e) Above ground utilities;

(8) The location of areas to be landscaped; and

(9) The location and type of street lighting with specific consideration given to crime prevention. (Ord. 2875 § 1.180.150, 2003)


17.148.160 Grading and drainage plan.

The grading and drainage plan shall be at the same scale as the site conditions and shall include the following:

(1) The location and extent to which grading will take place indicating general contour lines, slope ratios, and slope stabilization proposals;

(2) A statement from a registered engineer supported by factual data that all drainage facilities are designed in conformance with the city’s master drainage plan. This shall be reviewed by the city engineer; and

(3) Identification information including the name and address of the owner, developer, project designer, and the project engineer. (Ord. 2875 § 1.180.160, 2003)


17.148.170 The landscape plan.

(1) The landscape plan shall be prepared on the site plan and in addition shall show:

(a) The conceptual location of the underground irrigation system or hose bibs where applicable;

(b) The location and height of fences and other buffering or screening materials;

(c) The location, size, and species of existing plant materials;

(d) General location and function of proposed plant materials (buffer, shading, cover, etc.); and

(e) The location of trees to be removed.

(2) The landscape plan shall be accompanied by a narrative description of:

(a) The soil conditions and plant selection requirements relating to the soil conditions;

(b) Plans for soil treatment such as stockpiling the top soil; and

(c) The erosion controls which will be used if necessary. (Ord. 2875 § 1.180.170, 2003)


17.148.180 Sign drawings.

Specify location and size. (Ord. 2875 § 1.180.180, 2003)


17.148.190 Exceptions to underlying zone, yard, parking, sign and landscaping provisions.

(1) The commission may grant an exception to the off-street parking dimensional and minimum number of space requirements in the applicable zone based on findings that:

(a) The minor exception is not greater than 10 percent of the required parking; and

(b) The application is for a use designed for a specific purpose which is intended to be permanent in nature (for example, a nursing home) and which has a low demand for off-street parking; or

(c) There is an opportunity for sharing parking and there is written evidence that the property owners are willing to enter into a legal agreement; or

(d) Public transportation is available to the site, reducing the standards, and will not adversely affect adjoining uses; or

(e) There is a community interest in the preservation of particular natural features of the site which make it in the public interest to grant an exception to parking standards.

(2) The commission may grant an exception to the sign dimensional requirements in the applicable zone based on findings that:

(a) The minor exception is not greater than 10 percent of the required applicable dimensional standard for signs;

(b) The exception is necessary for adequate identification of the use on the property; and

(c) The sign will be compatible with the overall site plan, the structural improvements and with the structures and uses on adjoining properties.

(3) The commission may grant an exception to the landscape requirements of this code upon a finding that:

(a) The overall landscape plan provides for 20 percent of the gross site area to be landscaped. (Ord. 2875 § 1.180.190, 2003)


17.148.200 Shared open space.

Where the open space is designated on the plan as common open space the following applies:

(1) The open space area shall be shown on the final plan and recorded with the director; and

(2) The open space shall be conveyed in accordance with one of the following methods:

(a) By dedication to the city as publicly owned and maintained as open space. Open space proposed for dedication to the city must be acceptable to it with regard to the size, shape, location, improvement, and budgetary and maintenance limitations;

(b) By leasing or conveying title (including beneficial ownership) to a corporation, home association, or other legal entity, with the city retaining the development rights to the property. The terms of such lease or other instrument of conveyance must include provisions suitable to the city attorney for guaranteeing the following:

(i) The continued use of such land for the intended purposes;

(ii) Continuity of property maintenance;

(iii) When appropriate, the availability of funds required for such maintenance;

(iv) Adequate insurance protection; and

(v) Recovery for loss sustained by casualty and condemnation or otherwise;

(c) By any method which achieves the objectives set forth in subsection (2) of this section. (Ord. 2875 § 1.180.200, 2003)


Chapter 17.152 STREET AND UTILITY IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS

Sections:

17.152.010    Purpose.

17.152.020    General provisions.

17.152.030    Streets.

17.152.040    Blocks.

17.152.050    Easements.

17.152.060    Sidewalks.

17.152.070    Public use areas.

17.152.080    Water services.

17.152.090    Sanitary sewers.

17.152.100    Storm drainage.

17.152.110    Bikeways and off-street trails.

17.152.120    Utilities.

17.152.130    Cash or bond required.

17.152.140    Monuments.

17.152.150    Installation – Prerequisite/permit fee.

17.152.160    Installation – Conformation required.

17.152.170    Plan checking required.

17.152.180    Notice to city required.

17.152.190    City inspection required.

17.152.200    Engineer’s certification required.

17.152.210    Temporary parklets.


17.152.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to provide construction standards for the implementation of public and private facilities and utilities such as streets, sewers, and drainage and to indicate when and where they are required. (Ord. 2875 § 1.184.010, 2003)


17.152.020 General provisions.

(1) Unless otherwise provided, the standard specifications for construction, reconstruction or repair of streets, sidewalks, curbs and other public improvements within the city shall occur in accordance with the standards of this code.

(2) The city engineer may recommend changes or supplements to the standard specifications consistent with the application of engineering principles.

(3) The appropriate provision of the St. Helens Municipal Code shall apply to this chapter. 

(4) The city has adopted “City of St. Helens Engineering Department Public Facilities Construction Standards Manual.” (Ord. 2875 § 1.184.020, 2003)


17.152.030 Streets.

(1) Improvements. No development shall occur unless the development has frontage or approved access to a public street:

(a) Streets within a development and streets adjacent shall be improved in accordance with this code;

(b) Development on site adjacent to nonstandard street shall require improvement of street to applicable city standards;

(c) Any new street or additional street width planned as a portion of an existing dedicated/public street shall be dedicated and improved in accordance with this code; and

(d) The director may accept a future improvement guarantee in lieu of street improvements if one or more of the following conditions exist:

(i) A partial improvement is not feasible due to the inability to achieve proper design standards;

(ii) A partial improvement may create a potential safety hazard to motorists or pedestrians;

(iii) Due to the nature of existing development on adjacent properties it is unlikely that street improvements would be extended in the foreseeable future and the improvement associated with the project under review does not, by itself, provide a significant improvement to street safety or capacity;

(iv) The improvement would be in conflict with an adopted capital improvement plan;

(v) The improvement is associated with an approved land partition on property zoned residential and the proposed land partition does not create any new streets; or

(vi) Additional planning work is required to define the appropriate design standards for the street and the application is for a project which would contribute only a minor portion of the anticipated future traffic on the street.

(2) Creation of Rights-of-Way for Streets and Related Purposes. Rights-of-way shall be created through the approval of a final land division plat; however, the council may approve the creation of a street by acceptance of a deed; provided, that such street is deemed essential by the council for the purpose of general traffic circulation:

(a) The council may approve the creation of a street by deed of dedication without full compliance with the regulations applicable to land divisions if any one or more of the following conditions are found by the council to be present:

(i) Establishment of a street is initiated by the council and is found to be essential for the purpose of general traffic circulation, and partitioning or subdivision of land has an incidental effect rather than being the primary objective in establishing the road or street for public use; or

(ii) The tract in which the road or street is to be dedicated is an isolated ownership of one acre or less and such dedication is recommended by the commission to the council based on a finding that the proposal is not an attempt to evade the provisions of this code governing the control of land divisions;

(b) With each application for approval of a road or street right-of-way not in full compliance with the regulations applicable to the standards, the proposed dedication shall be made a condition of land division:

(i) The applicant shall submit such additional information and justification as may be necessary to enable the commission in its review to determine whether or not a recommendation for approval by the council shall be made;

(ii) The recommendation, if any, shall be based upon a finding that the proposal is not in conflict with the purpose of this code;

(iii) The commission in submitting the proposal with a recommendation to the council may attach conditions which are necessary to preserve the standards of this code; and

(c) All deeds of dedication shall be in a form prescribed by the city and shall name “the public” as grantee.

(3) Creation of Access Easements. The approval authority may approve an access easement established by deed without full compliance with this code provided such an easement is the only reasonable method by which a lot, large enough to develop, can be created:

(a) Access easements which exceed 150 feet shall be improved in accordance with the Uniform Fire Code;

(b) Access shall be in accordance with Chapter 17.84 SHMC and Figures 15, 16, and 17.

(4) Street Location, Width and Grade. The location, width and grade of all streets shall conform to an approved street plan and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographic conditions, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed use of the land to be served by such streets:

(a) Street grades shall be approved by the city engineer in accordance with subsection (13) of this section; and

(b) Where the location of a street is not shown in an approved street plan, the arrangement of streets in a development shall either:

(i) Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing streets in the surrounding areas; or

(ii) Conform to a plan adopted by the commission, if it is impractical to conform to existing street patterns because of particular topographical or other existing conditions of the land. Such a plan shall be based on the type of land use to be served, the volume of traffic, the capacity of adjoining streets and the need for public convenience and safety.

(5) Minimum Rights-of-Way and Street Widths. Unless otherwise indicated on an approved street plan, or as needed to continue an existing improved street, street right-of-way and roadway widths shall not be less than the minimum width described in Figure 19. Where a range is indicated, the width shall be determined by the decision-making authority based upon anticipated average daily traffic (ADT) on the new street segment. (The city council may adopt, by resolution, design standards for street construction and other public improvements. The design standards will provide guidance for determining improvement requirements within the specified ranges.) (See “City of St. Helens Engineering Department Public Facilities Construction Standards Manual.”)

(a) The planning director shall recommend, to the decision-making body, desired right-of-way width and pavement width of the various street types within the subdivision or development after consideration of the following:

(i) The type of road as set forth in Figure 19, Road Standards;

 

ROAD STANDARDS 

MINIMUM RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND STREET WIDTHS (see Transportation Systems Plan [TSP] Figures 7-2 and 7-3) Figure 19  

	Type of Street	Right-of-Way Width	Roadway Width	Moving Lanes	Bicycle Lanes*

	Major Arterial	101' minimum	74'	4	2 @ 6'

	Minor Arterial (Typical)	60'	36'	2	2 @ 6'

	Minor Arterial (One-Way, Uptown)	80'	46'	2	1 @ 6'

	Minor Arterial (Two-Way, Downtown)	80'	52'	2	2 @ 6'

	Collector	60'	36'	2	2 @ 6'

	Local	50'	34'	1 – 2	None

	Local “Skinny” Street	40'	20' or 26'	1 – 2	None

*    Applies to bicycle lanes required in Transportation Systems Plan (TSP) or Public Facilities Plan (PFP)

(ii) Anticipated traffic generation;

(iii) On-street parking needs;

(iv) Sidewalk and bikeway requirements;

(v) Requirements for placement of utilities;

(vi) Street lighting;

(vii) Drainage and slope impacts;

(viii) Street tree location;

(ix) Planting and landscape areas;

(x) Safety for motorists, bicyclists, and pedestrians; and

(xi) Access needs for emergency vehicles;

(b) Improvements to streets shall be made according to adopted city standards, unless the approval authority determines that the standards will result in an unacceptable adverse impact on existing development or on the proposed development or on natural features such as wetlands, steep slopes or existing mature trees. In approving an exception to the standards, the approval authority shall determine that the potential adverse impacts exceed the public benefits of the standards. In evaluating the public benefits, the approval authority shall consider the criteria listed in subsection (5)(a) of this section.

(6) Future Street Plan and Extension of Streets.

(a) A future street plan shall:

(i) Be filed by the applicant in conjunction with an application for a land division. The plan shall show the pattern of existing and proposed future streets from the boundaries of the proposed land division and shall include other parcels within 200 feet surrounding and adjacent to the proposed land division. At the applicant’s request and expense, the city shall prepare a future streets proposal. A street proposal may be modified when subsequent land division proposals are submitted; and

(ii) Identify existing or proposed bus routes, pullouts or other transit facilities, bicycle routes and pedestrian facilities on or within 500 feet of the site;

(b) Where necessary to give access or permit a satisfactory future division of adjoining land, streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the tract to be developed, and:

(i) These extended streets or street stubs to adjoining properties are not considered to be cul-de-sacs since they are intended to continue as through streets at such time as the adjoining property is developed;

(ii) A barricade shall be constructed at the end of the street by the property owners which shall not be removed until authorized by the city engineer, the cost of which shall be included in the street construction cost; and

(iii) Temporary hammerhead turnouts or temporary cul-de-sac bulbs shall be constructed for stub street in excess of 150 feet in length.

(7) Street Alignment and Connections.

(a) Staggering of streets making “T” intersections at collectors and arterials shall not be designed so that jogs of less than 300 feet on such streets are created, as measured from the centerline of such street. Minimum separation of 125 feet between local street intersections is recommended;

(b) All local and collector streets which abut a development site shall be extended within the site to provide through circulation when not precluded by environmental or topographical constraints, existing development patterns or strict adherence to other standards in this code. A street connection or extension is considered precluded when it is not possible to redesign or reconfigure the street pattern to provide required extensions. In the case of environmental or topographical constraints, the mere presence of a constraint is not sufficient to show that a street connection is not possible. The applicant must show why the constraint precludes some reasonable street connection;

(c) Proposed street or street extensions shall be located to provide direct access to existing or planned transit stops and other neighborhood activity centers, such as schools, shopping areas and parks; and

(d) All developments should provide an internal network of connecting streets that minimizes travel distances within the development.

(8) Intersection Angles. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect at an angle as near to a right angle as practicable, except where topography requires a lesser angle, but in no case shall the angle be less than 60 unless there is special intersection design, and:

(a) Streets shall have at least 25 feet of tangent adjacent to the right-of-way intersection unless topography requires a lesser distance;

(b) Intersections which are not at right angles shall have a minimum corner radius of 20 feet along the right-of-way lines of the acute angle; and

(c) Right-of-way lines at intersection with arterial streets shall have a corner radius of not less than 20 feet.

(9) Existing Rights-of-Way. Whenever existing rights-of-way adjacent to or within a tract are of less than standard width, additional rights-of-way shall be provided at the time of land division or development.

(10) Partial Street Improvements. Partial street improvements resulting in a pavement width of less than 20 feet, while generally not acceptable, may be approved where essential to reasonable development when in conformity with the other requirements of these regulations, and when it will be practical to require the improvement of the other half when the adjoining property is developed.

(11) Cul-de-Sacs. A cul-de-sac street shall only be used when environmental or topographical constraints, existing development patterns, or compliance with other standards in this code preclude street extension and through circulation. When cul-de-sacs are provided, all of the following shall be met:

(a) A cul-de-sac shall be no more than 400 feet long nor provide access to greater than 20 dwelling units:

(i) All cul-de-sacs shall terminate with a turnaround in accordance with the engineering standards manual. Use of turnaround configurations other than circular shall be approved by the city engineer;

(ii) The length of the cul-de-sac shall be measured along the centerline of the roadway from the near side of the intersecting street to the farthest point of the cul-de-sac; and

(iii) An intersecting street must lead to another street or be a future street with the practical ability to be extended someday;

(b) If a cul-de-sac is more than 300 feet long, a lighted direct pathway to an adjacent street may be required to be provided and dedicated to the city.

(12) Street Names. No street name shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with the names of existing streets in Columbia County emergency communications district, except for extensions of existing streets. Street names and numbers shall conform to the established pattern in the surrounding area or as agreed with Columbia County.

(13) Grades and Curves. Grades shall not exceed 10 percent on arterials, 12 percent on collector streets, or 12 percent on any other street (except that local or residential access streets may have segments with grades up to 15 percent for distances of no greater than 250 feet), and:

(a) Centerline radii of curves shall not be less than 700 feet on arterials, 500 feet on collectors, or 100 feet on other streets; and

(b) Streets intersecting with a collector functional classification street, or streets intended to be posted with a stop sign or signalization, shall provide a landing averaging five percent or less. Landings are that portion of the street within 20 feet of the edge of the intersecting street at full improvement.

(14) Curbs, Curb Cuts, Ramps, and Driveway Approaches. Concrete curbs, curb cuts, wheelchair/bicycle ramps and driveway approaches shall be constructed in accordance with standards specified in the “City of St. Helens Engineering Department Public Facilities Construction Standards Manual,” and:

(a) Concrete curbs and driveway approaches are required; except where no sidewalk is planned, an asphalt approach may be constructed with city engineer approval;

(b) Asphalt and concrete driveway approaches to the property line shall be built to city configuration standards; and

(c) All driveways shall be at right angle to public or private street for at least 20 feet.

(15) Streets Adjacent to Railroad Right-of-Way. Wherever the proposed development contains or is adjacent to a railroad right-of-way, provision shall be made for a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the land, and:

(a) The distance shall be determined with due consideration at cross streets or the minimum distance required for approach grades and to provide sufficient depth to allow screen planting along the railroad right-of-way in nonindustrial areas.

(16) Access to Arterials and Collectors.

(a) Where a development abuts or is traversed by an existing or proposed arterial or collector street, the development design shall provide adequate protection for residential properties and shall separate residential access and through traffic, or if separation is not feasible, the design shall minimize the traffic conflicts. The design shall include any of the following:

(i) A parallel access street along the arterial or collector;

(ii) Lots of suitable depth abutting the arterial or collector to provide adequate buffering with frontage along another street;

(iii) Screen planting at the rear or side property line to be contained in a nonaccess reservation along the arterial or collector; or

(iv) Other treatment suitable to meet the objectives of this subsection;

(b) See “City of St. Helens Engineering Department Public Facilities Construction Standards Manual.”

(17) Alleys, Public or Private. Alleys, 20 feet in width, shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts, unless other permanent provisions for access to off-street parking and loading facilities are made, and:

(a) While alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided, the corners of necessary alley intersections shall have a radius of not less than 12 feet.

(18) Survey Monuments. Upon completion of a street improvement and prior to acceptance by the city, it shall be the responsibility of the developer’s registered professional land surveyor to provide certification to the city that all boundary and interior monuments shall be reestablished and protected.

(19) Private Streets.

(a) Design standards for private streets shall be established by the city engineer; 

(b) The city shall require legal assurances for the continued maintenance of private streets, such as:

(i) A bonded maintenance agreement; and

(ii) The creation of a homeowners association.

(20) Railroad Crossings. Where an adjacent development results in a need to install or improve a railroad crossing, the cost for such improvements may be a condition of development approval, or another equitable means of cost distribution shall be determined by the public works director and approved by the commission.

(21) Street Signs. The city shall install all street signs, relative to traffic control and street names, as specified by the city engineer for any development. The cost of signs shall be the responsibility of the developer.

(22) Mailboxes. Joint mailbox facilities shall be provided in all residential developments, with each joint mailbox serving at least two dwelling units or as required by the Postmaster.

(a) Joint mailbox structures shall be placed adjacent to roadway curbs;

(b) Proposed locations of joint mailboxes shall be designated on a copy of the preliminary plat or development plan, and shall be approved by the city engineer/U.S. Post Office prior to final plan approval;

(c) Plans for the joint mailbox structures to be used shall be submitted for approval by the city engineer/U.S. Post Office prior to final approval; and

(d) There shall be at least one accessible route from the principal use(s) to the respective joint mailbox which:

(i) As located on private property, shall comply with SHMC 17.84.050 and the applicable building code as administered by the building official; and 

(ii) As located within a public right-of-way or public street, shall comply with SHMC 18.12.110 or as required by the city engineer.

(23) Traffic Signals. The location of traffic signals shall be noted on approved street plans, and:

(a) Where a proposed street intersection will result in an immediate need for a traffic signal, a signal meeting approved specifications shall be installed. The cost shall be included as a condition of development.

(24) Street Light Standards. Street lights shall be installed in accordance with regulations adopted by the city’s direction. At the very least, there shall be a street light at each street intersection. In addition, lighting within the Columbia Boulevard/St. Helens Street corridor master plan area shall be installed in accordance with the US 30 and Columbia Boulevard/St. Helens Street corridor master plan (Ordinance No. 3181, Attachment A) and shall be:

(a) Pedestrian-scale lighting between 12 to 18 feet in height;

(b) Uniform in design;

(c) Placed in the planter/landscape strip or curb extension (e.g., at street corners) when possible; and

(d) Spaced no more than 100 feet apart along the block face.

(25) Street Name Signs. Street name signs shall be installed at all street intersections. Stop signs and other signs may be required.

(26) Street Cross-Sections. The cross-section of streets in inches shall not be less than the minimum shown in the “City of St. Helens Engineering Department Public Facilities Construction Standards Manual”:

CROSS-SECTION OF STREETS IN INCHES Figure 20  

	Type of Street	Subbase	Leveling Course	Surface

	Minor Arterial	12"	4"	4"

	Commercial and Collectors	12"	3"	4"

	Local	8"	2"	3"

	Residential Access	8"	2"	3"

(27) Local “Skinny” Streets. Such streets, as set forth in Figure 19, Road Standards, of this chapter, may be allowed, provided:

(a) The street will provide access to land uses whose combined average daily trip rate (ADT) is 200 ADT or less; and

(b) Where the roadway/pavement width will be 20 feet, on-street parking shall be prohibited. (Ord. 3181 § 4 (Att. C), 2015; Ord. 3164 § 3 (Att. B), 2012; Ord. 3150 § 3 (Att. B), 2011; Ord. 2875 § 1.184.030, 2003)


17.152.040 Blocks.

(1) Block Design. The length, width and shape of blocks shall be designed with due regard to providing adequate building sites for the use contemplated, consideration of needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic and recognition of limitations and opportunities of topography.

(2) Sizes.

(a) The perimeter of blocks formed by streets shall not exceed 1,800 feet measured along the right-of-way line except:

(i) Where street location is precluded by natural topography, wetlands or other bodies of water, or preexisting development; 

(ii) For blocks adjacent to arterial streets, limited access highways, collectors or railroads; or

(iii) For nonresidential blocks in which internal public circulation provides equivalent access;

(b) When block lengths greater than 600 feet are permitted, pedestrian/bikeways shall be provided through the block. (Ord. 2875 § 1.184.040, 2003)


17.152.050 Easements.

(1) Easements. Easements for sewers, drainage, water mains, electric lines or other public utilities shall be either dedicated or provided for in the deed restrictions, and:

(a) Where a development is traversed by a watercourse, or drainageway, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of the watercourse.

(2) Utility Easements. A property owner proposing a development shall make arrangements with the city, the applicable district and each utility franchise for the provision and dedication of utility easements necessary to provide full services to the development. (Ord. 2875 § 1.184.050, 2003)


17.152.060 Sidewalks.

(1) Sidewalks shall be constructed, replaced or repaired to city design standards as set forth in the standard specifications manual and located as follows:

(a) On both sides of arterial and collector streets to be built at the time of street construction;

(b) On both sides of all other streets and in pedestrian easements and rights-of-way, except as provided further in this section or per SHMC 17.152.030(1)(d), to be constructed along all portions of the property designated for pedestrian ways in conjunction with development of the property.

(2) A planter strip separation of at least five feet between the curb and the sidewalk shall be required in the design of any arterial or collector street, except where the following conditions exist: there is inadequate right-of-way; the curbside sidewalks already exist on predominant portions of the street; it would conflict with the utilities; or as indicated otherwise by the transportation systems plan (TSP) (see TSP Figures 7-2 and 7-3) or an adopted street plan.

(3) Maintenance. Maintenance of sidewalks, curbs, and planter strips is the continuing obligation of the adjacent property owner.

(4) Application for Permit and Inspection. If the construction of a sidewalk is not included in a performance bond of an approved subdivision or the performance bond has lapsed, then every person, firm or corporation desiring to construct sidewalks as provided by this chapter shall, before entering upon the work or improvement, apply for a street opening permit to the engineering department to so build or construct:

(a) An occupancy permit shall not be issued for a development until the provisions of this section are satisfied or a fee in lieu has been paid to the city pursuant to subsection (6) of this section;

(b) The city engineer may issue a permit and certificate allowing temporary noncompliance with the provisions of this section to the owner, builder or contractor when, in his opinion, the construction of the sidewalk is impractical for one or more of the following reasons:

(i) Sidewalk grades have not and cannot be established for the property in question within a reasonable length of time;

(ii) Forthcoming installation of public utilities or street paving would be likely to cause severe damage to the new sidewalk;

(iii) Street right-of-way is insufficient to accommodate a sidewalk on one or both sides of the street; or

(iv) Topography or elevation of the sidewalk base area makes construction of a sidewalk impractical or economically infeasible; 

(c) The city engineer shall inspect the construction of sidewalks for compliance with the provision set forth in the standard specifications manual.

(5) Council Initiation of Construction. In the event one or more of the following situations are found by the council to exist, the council may adopt a resolution to initiate construction of a sidewalk in accordance with city ordinances:

(a) A safety hazard exists for children walking to or from school and sidewalks are necessary to eliminate the hazard;

(b) A safety hazard exists for pedestrians walking to or from a public building, commercial area, place of assembly or other general pedestrian traffic, and sidewalks are necessary to eliminate the hazard;

(c) Fifty percent or more of the area in a given block has been improved by the construction of dwellings, multiple dwellings, commercial buildings or public buildings and/or parks; and

(d) A criterion which allowed noncompliance under subsection (4)(b) of this section no longer exists and a sidewalk could be constructed in conformance with city standards.

(6) Fee in Lieu Option. An applicant may request or the city may require the applicant to pay a fee in lieu of constructing sidewalks to be approved by the city engineer.

(a) A fee in lieu may be approved given conditions including but not limited to the following:

(i) There is no existing or planned sidewalk network in the area.

(ii) There is a planned sidewalk or multi-use pathway in the vicinity of the site, or an existing multi-use pathway stubbing into the site, that would provide better pedestrian connectivity.

(iii) When physical improvements are present along an existing or proposed street that would prevent a reasonable installation within the right-of-way.

(iv) When sidewalks would be located on land with cross slopes greater than nine percent, or other conditions that would create a potential hazard.

(v) Other situations unique to the site.

(b) The fee shall be not less than 125 percent of the cost to perform the work, as determined by the city engineer, based on the applicable city standards in effect at the time of application. The fee shall be paid prior to plat recording or issuance of a building or development permit.

(c) All fees paid shall be used for construction of a sidewalk or multi-use pathway or repair and maintenance of an existing sidewalk or pathway within the city of St. Helens. (Ord. 3150 § 3 (Att. B), 2011; Ord. 2875 § 1.184.060, 2003)


17.152.070 Public use areas.

(1) Indicated in Development Plan – Dedication Requirements. Where a proposed park, playground, transit stop or other public use shown in a development plan adopted by the city is located in whole or in part in a subdivision, the commission may require the dedication or reservation of such area within the subdivision.

(2) Not Indicated in Development Plan – Dedication Requirements. Where considered desirable by the commission in accordance with adopted comprehensive plan policies, and where a development plan of the city does not indicate proposed public use areas, the commission may require the offer of a dedication or reservation of areas within the subdivision or sites of a character, extent and location suitable for the development of parks and other public use.

(3) Acquisition by Public Agency. If the subdivider is required to reserve land area for a park, playground, or other public use, such land shall be acquired by the appropriate public agency within 18 months following plat approval, at a price agreed upon prior to approval of the plat, or such reservation shall be released to the subdivider. 

(4) Transit Improvements. Development proposals for sites that include existing or planned transit facilities, as shown in the adopted St. Helens transportation systems plan or adopted county transit plan, shall be required to provide any of the following, as applicable, if the approval authority determines such is necessary for public health, safety, and welfare: 

(a) A reasonably direct pedestrian connection between the transit facility and building entrances of the site. For the purpose of this section “reasonably direct” means a route that does not deviate unnecessarily from a straight line or a route that does not involve a significant amount of out-of-direction travel for likely users. 

(b) A transit passenger landing pad accessible to disabled persons.

(c) An easement or dedication for a passenger shelter or bench if such facility is identified in the St. Helens transportation systems plan or adopted county transit plan.

(d) Lighting at the transit facility. (Ord. 3144 § 2 (Att. A), 2011; Ord. 2875 § 1.184.070, 2003)


17.152.080 Water services.

(1) Water Supply (Required). Municipal water system shall be installed to serve each new development and to connect development to existing mains in accordance with the provisions set forth in the standard specification manual and the adopted policies of the St. Helens comprehensive plan.

(2) Water Supply Plan Approval. The city engineer shall approve all water supply plans and proposed systems prior to issuance of development permits involving water service. Such plans and systems shall be designed by a registered professional engineer.

(3) Oversizing. Proposed water systems shall include consideration of additional development within the area as projected by the St. Helens comprehensive plan.

(4) Permits Denied. Development permits may be restricted by the commission or council (i.e., the applicable approval authority) where a deficiency exists in the existing water system or portion thereof which cannot be rectified within the development and which if not rectified will result in a threat to public health or safety, surcharging of existing mains, or violations of state or federal standards pertaining to operation of the water system.

(5) In some cases, a municipal water system may not be required, such as for nonconsumption purposes like landscape irrigation or industrial processing. The city engineer and building official shall decide when this exception is to be allowed. 

(6) Extension of water mains shall be public (i.e., under control of a public authority) except where a variance is approved per Chapter 17.108 SHMC. (Ord. 3150 § 3 (Att. B), 2011; Ord. 2875 § 1.184.080, 2003)


17.152.090 Sanitary sewers.

(1) Sewers (Required).

(a) Public sanitary sewers shall be installed to serve all properties being developed and having to comply with plumbing codes adopted by the city of St. Helens except where a variance is approved per Chapter 17.108 SHMC.

(b) Any proposed installation of sanitary sewers shall comply with this section.

(2) Sewer Plan Approval. The city engineer shall approve all sanitary sewer plans and proposed systems prior to issuance of development permits involving sewer service. Such plans and systems shall be designed by a registered professional engineer.

(3) Oversizing. Proposed sewer systems shall include consideration of additional development within the area as projected by the St. Helens comprehensive plan.

(4) Permits Denied. Development permits may be restricted by the commission or council (i.e., the applicable approval authority) where a deficiency exists in the existing sewer system or portion thereof which cannot be rectified within the development and which if not rectified will result in a threat to public health or safety, surcharging of existing mains, or violations of state or federal standards pertaining to operation of the sewage treatment system. 

(5) For the purpose of this section “public sanitary sewer” means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by the city. (Ord. 3150 § 3 (Att. B), 2011; Ord. 2875 § 1.184.090, 2003)


17.152.100 Storm drainage.

(1) Storm Drainage – General Provisions. The director and city engineer shall issue a development permit only where adequate provisions for storm water and floodwater runoff have been made, which may require storm water facilities, and:

(a) The storm water drainage system or storm water facilities shall be separate and independent of any sanitary sewerage system;

(b) Where possible, inlets shall be provided so surface water is not carried across any intersection or allowed to flood any street; and

(c) Surface water drainage patterns shall be shown on every development proposal plan.

(2) Easements. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse and such further width as will be adequate for conveyance and maintenance.

(3) Accommodation of Upstream Drainage (Must Comply with State and Federal Requirements). A culvert or other drainage or storm water facility shall be large enough to accommodate potential runoff from its entire upstream drainage area, whether inside or outside the development, and:

(a) The city engineer shall approve the necessary size of the storm water facility, based on the provisions of the city’s adopted master drainage plan.

(4) Effect on Downstream Drainage. Where it is anticipated by the city engineer that the additional runoff resulting from the development will overload an existing drainage or storm water facility, the director and engineer shall withhold approval of the development until provisions have been made for improvement of the potential condition or until provisions have been made for storage of additional runoff caused by the development in accordance with the city’s current master drainage plan. 

(5) Any storm water facility shall be designed by a registered professional engineer.

(6) Any storm water facility shall be public (i.e., under control of a public authority) and located on city owned property, city right-of-way or city easement except where a variance is approved per Chapter 17.108 SHMC or where such facility is determined to be private by the city engineer (e.g., private detention ponds for commercial or industrial development).

(7) For the purpose of this section, “storm water facility” means any structure(s) or configuration of the ground that is used or by its location becomes a place where storm water flows or is accumulated including, but not limited to, pipes, sewers, street gutters, manholes, catch basins, ponds, open drainageways and their appurtenances. Milton Creek, McNulty Creek, and the Columbia River are not storm drain facilities. (Ord. 3150 § 3 (Att. B), 2011; Ord. 2875 § 1.184.100, 2003)


17.152.110 Bikeways and off-street trails.

(1) Developments adjoining or containing proposed bikeways and off-street trails identified within adopted city plans, including but not limited to the Transportation Systems Plan (2011) and the Parks and Trails Master Plan (2015), shall include provisions for the future extension of such bikeways and off-street trails through the dedication of easements or rights-of-way (subject to constitutional limitations).

(2) Development permits issued for planned unit developments, conditional use permits, subdivisions, and other developments which will principally benefit from such bikeways and/or off-street trails shall be conditioned to include the cost of construction of bikeway and/or off-street trail improvements (subject to constitutional limitations).

(3) Minimum width for bikeways within the roadway is six feet per bicycle travel lane. Minimum width for two-way bikeways separated from the road is eight feet.

(4) Minimum off-street trail width is determined by the trail function and classification from Chapter 6 of the Parks and Trails Master Plan attached to Ordinance No. 3191 as Attachment A. (Ord. 3203 § 2 (Att. A), 2016; Ord. 3150 § 3 (Att. B), 2011; Ord. 2875 § 1.184.110, 2003)


17.152.120 Utilities.

(1) Underground Utilities. All utility lines including, but not limited to, those required for electric, communication, lighting and cable television services and related facilities shall be placed underground, except for surface-mounted transformers, surface-mounted connection boxes and meter cabinets which may be placed above ground, temporary utility service facilities during construction, high capacity electric lines operating at 50,000 volts or above, and:

(a) The subdivider shall make all necessary arrangements with the serving utility to provide the underground services;

(b) The city reserves the right to approve location of all surface-mounted facilities;

(c) All underground utilities, including sanitary sewers and storm drains installed in streets by the subdivider, shall be constructed prior to the surfacing of the streets; and

(d) Stubs for service connections shall be long enough to avoid disturbing the street improvements when service connections are made.

(2) Information on Development Plans. The applicant for a subdivision shall show on the development plan, or in the explanatory information, easements for all underground utility facilities, and:

(a) Plans showing the location of all underground facilities as described herein shall be submitted to the city engineer for review and approval; and

(b) Care shall be taken in all cases to ensure that above ground equipment does not obstruct vision clearance areas for vehicular traffic. 

(3) Exception to Undergrounding Requirement.

(a) The applicant shall pay a fee in lieu of undergrounding costs when the development is proposed to take place on a street where existing utilities which are not underground will serve the development and the approval authority determines that the cost and technical difficulty of undergrounding the utilities outweigh the benefit of undergrounding in conjunction with the development. The determination shall be on a case-by-case basis. The most common, but not the only, such situation is a short frontage development for which undergrounding would result in the placement of additional poles, rather than the removal of above ground utilities facilities;

(b) An applicant for a development which is served by utilities which are not underground and which are located across a public right-of-way from the applicant’s property shall pay the fee in lieu of undergrounding; and

(c) The exceptions in subsections (3)(a) and (b) of this section shall apply only to existing utility lines. All new utility lines shall be placed underground.

(4) Fee in Lieu of Undergrounding.

(a) The city engineer shall establish utility service areas in the city. All development which occurs within a utility service area shall pay a fee in lieu of undergrounding for utilities if the development does not provide underground utilities, unless exempted by this code;

(b) The city engineer shall establish the fee by utility service area which shall be determined based upon the estimated cost to underground utilities within each service area. The total estimated cost for undergrounding in a service area shall be allocated on a front-foot basis to each party within the service area. The fee due from any applicant shall be calculated based on a front-foot basis;

(c) An applicant shall receive a credit against the fee for costs incurred in the undergrounding of existing overhead utilities. The city engineer shall determine the amount of the credit, after review of cost information submitted by the applicant with the request for credit; and

(d) The funds collected in each service area shall be used for undergrounding utilities within the city at large. The city engineer shall prepare and maintain a list of proposed undergrounding projects which may be funded with the fees collected by the city. The list shall indicate the estimated timing and cost of each project. The list shall be submitted to the city council for their review and approval annually. (Ord. 2875 § 1.184.120, 2003)


17.152.130 Cash or bond required.

(1) All public improvements installed by the land divider shall be guaranteed as to workmanship and material for a period of one year following acceptance by the city council.

(2) Such guarantee shall be secured by cash deposit or bond in the amount of the value of the improvements as set by the city engineer.

(3) The cash or bond shall comply with the terms and conditions of SHMC 17.136.180. (Ord. 2875 § 1.184.130, 2003)


17.152.140 Monuments.

Any monuments that are disturbed before all improvements are completed by the land divider shall be replaced prior to final acceptance of the improvements. (Ord. 2875 § 1.184.140, 2003)


17.152.150 Installation – Prerequisite/permit fee.

(1) No land division public facility improvements, including sanitary sewers, storm sewers, streets, sidewalks, curbs, lighting or other requirements, shall be undertaken except after the plans have been approved by the city, permit fee paid (if any), and permit issued (if required).

(2) A permit fee may be required to defray the costs and expenses incurred by the city for construction and other services in connection with the public facility improvement. The permit fee shall be determined by the city engineer based upon estimates. (Ord. 2875 § 1.184.150, 2003)


17.152.160 Installation – Conformation required.

(1) In addition to other requirements, public facility improvements installed by the land divider, either as a requirement of these regulations or at his own option, shall conform to the requirements of this chapter and to improvement standards and specifications followed by the city.

(2) The Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, Oregon Chapter APWA, shall be a part of the city’s adopted installation standard(s); other standards may also be required upon recommendation of the city engineer. (Ord. 2875 § 1.184.160, 2003)


17.152.170 Plan checking required.

(1) Work shall not begin until four (for city engineer, applicant, public works, and file) sets of construction and construction estimate plans have been submitted and checked for adequacy and approved by the city in writing.

(2) All such plans shall be prepared in accordance with requirements of the city. (Ord. 2875 § 1.184.170, 2003)


17.152.180 Notice to city required.

(1) Work shall not begin until the city has been notified in advance.

(2) If work is discontinued for any reason, it shall not be resumed until the city is notified. (Ord. 2875 § 1.184.180, 2003)


17.152.190 City inspection required.

Public facility improvements shall be constructed to the satisfaction of the city. The city may require changes in typical sections and details if unusual conditions arising during construction warrant such changes in the public interest. (Ord. 2875 § 1.184.190, 2003)


17.152.200 Engineer’s certification required.

The land divider’s engineer shall provide written certification on a form provided by the city that all public facility improvements, workmanship and materials are in accord with current and standard engineering and construction practices, and are of high grade, prior to city acceptance of the subdivision’s public improvements or any portion thereof for operation and maintenance. In most cases, “as-built” drawings are required prior to acceptance by the city of any public facilities. (Ord. 2875 § 1.184.200, 2003)


17.152.210 Temporary parklets.

Temporary parklets may be permitted in the right-of-way in on-street parking spaces pursuant to procedures in SHMC 18.12.190 and 8.12.080. (Ord. 3181 § 4 (Att. C), 2015)


Chapter 17.156 TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS (TIA)

Sections:

17.156.010    Purpose.

17.156.020    Typical average daily trips and level-of-service standards.

17.156.030    Applicability.

17.156.040    Traffic impact analysis requirements.

17.156.050    Study area.

17.156.060    Analysis periods.

17.156.070    Peak hour analysis.

17.156.080    Approval criteria.

17.156.090    Conditions of approval.


17.156.010 Purpose.

The purpose of this chapter is to implement OAR 660-012-0045(2)(e) of the State Transportation Planning Rule that requires the city to adopt a process to apply conditions to development proposals in order to protect and minimize adverse impacts to transportation facilities. This chapter establishes the standards for when a proposal must be reviewed for potential traffic impacts; when a traffic impact analysis must be submitted with a development application in order to determine whether conditions are needed to minimize impacts to and protect transportation facilities; what must be in a traffic impact analysis; and who is qualified to prepare the analysis. (Ord. 3150 § 3 (Att. B), 2011)


17.156.020 Typical average daily trips and level-of-service standards.

(1) The latest edition of the trip generation manual published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) shall be used as standards by which to gauge average daily vehicle trips.

(2) Pursuant to the transportation systems plan (TSP) (see TSP Section 4), the following minimum operating standards apply to city-maintained intersections. As measured using the Highway Capacity Manual, latest edition, Level of Service “D” is considered acceptable at signalized and all-way stop controlled intersections if the intersection volume-to-capacity ratio is not higher than 1.0 for the sum of critical movements. Level of Service “E” is considered acceptable for the poorest operating approach at two-way stop intersections. Level of Service “F” is allowed in situations where a traffic signal is not warranted. (Ord. 3150 § 3 (Att. B), 2011)


17.156.030 Applicability.

A traffic impact analysis shall be required to be submitted to the city with a land use application when the application involves one or more of the following actions:

(1) A change in zoning or a comprehensive plan amendment designation, except when the change will result in a zone or plan designation that will result in less vehicle trips based on permitted uses (e.g., from a high density residential district to a lower density residential district or from a commercial district to a residential district);

(2) The site proposes to take access on Highway 30 or on an approach to Highway 30; or

(3) The development shall cause one or more of the following effects, which can be determined by field counts, site observation, traffic impact analysis or study, field measurements, crash history, Institute of Transportation Engineers Trip Generation, and information and studies provided by the local reviewing jurisdiction(s) and/or ODOT:

(a) The proposed action is estimated to generate 2501 average daily trips (ADT) or more or 25 or more weekday a.m. or p.m. peak hour trips (or as required by the city engineer);

(b) The proposed action is projected to further degrade mobility at the Deer Island Road/Highway 30, Pittsburg Road/Highway 30, Wyeth Street/Highway 30, Gable Road/Highway 30, or Millard Road/Highway 30 intersections;

(c) An increase in use of adjacent streets by vehicles exceeding the 20,000 pound gross vehicle weights by 10 vehicles or more per day;

(d) The location of the access driveway does not meet minimum intersection sight distance requirements, or is located where vehicles entering or leaving the property are restricted, or such vehicles queue or hesitate, creating a safety hazard;

(e) The location of the access driveway does not meet the access spacing standard of the roadway on which the driveway is located; or

(f) A change in internal traffic patterns that may cause safety problems, such as backup onto the highway or traffic crashes in the approach area. (Ord. 3150 § 3 (Att. B), 2011)


17.156.040 Traffic impact analysis requirements.

(1) Preparation. A traffic impact analysis shall be prepared by an Oregon registered professional engineer who is qualified to perform traffic engineering analysis and will be paid for by the applicant.

(2) Transportation Planning Rule Compliance. See SHMC 17.08.060, Transportation planning rule compliance.

(3) Pre-application Conference. The applicant will meet with the city engineer prior to submitting an application that requires a traffic impact analysis. The city has the discretion to determine the required elements of the TIA and the level of analysis expected. (Ord. 3150 § 3 (Att. B), 2011)


17.156.050 Study area.

The following facilities shall be included in the study area for all traffic impact analyses (unless modified by the city engineer):

(1) All site access points and intersections (signalized and unsignalized) adjacent to the proposed site. In particular, if the proposed site fronts an arterial or collector street, the analysis shall address all intersections and driveways along the site frontage, including those serving parcels on the opposite side of the street(s).

(2) Roads through and adjacent to site.

(3) Any intersection of two streets, each with a classification of collector or arterial, where site traffic will exceed 20 vehicles during a peak hour or, in the case of a rezone, if the trip differential resulting from the rezone will exceed 20 vehicles during a peak hour.

(4) All intersections needed for signal progression analysis.

(5) In addition to these requirements, the city engineer may determine any additional intersections or roadway links that may be adversely affected as a result of the proposed development. (Ord. 3150 § 3 (Att. B), 2011)


17.156.060 Analysis periods.

To adequately assess the impacts of a proposed land use action, the following study periods, or horizon years, should be addressed in the transportation impact analysis where applicable:

(1) Existing Year.

(2) Background Conditions, Future Year. The conditions in the year in which the proposed land use action will be completed and occupied, but without the expected traffic from the proposed land use action. This analysis should include all in-process developments, or city approved developments that are expected to be fully built out in the proposed land use action horizon year. It should also account for all in-process/planned transportation system improvements.

(a) Depending on funding or project development issues, it may not be appropriate to assume that certain planned transportation system improvements will be in place on opening day. Applicants should contact the city engineer to confirm appropriate assumptions.

(3) Full Buildout. The background condition plus traffic from the proposed land use action assuming full buildout and occupancy.

(4) Phased Years of Completion. If the project involves construction or occupancy in phases or for master plans, the applicant shall assess the expected roadway, intersection, and land use conditions resulting from major development phases. Phased years of analysis will be determined in coordination with city staff.

(5) Twenty-Year or TSP Horizon Year. For master plans, zone changes, and conditional uses, the applicant shall assess the expected future roadway, intersection, and land use conditions resulting from deviations from approved comprehensive planning documents. A 20-year or TSP horizon year analysis will not be required for outright permitted uses under the current zoning. (Ord. 3150 § 3 (Att. B), 2011)


17.156.070 Peak hour analysis.

(1) The traffic impact analysis shall address the weekday a.m. and p.m. peak hours when the proposed land use action is expected to generate 25 trips or more during the peak time periods. If the applicant can demonstrate that the peak hour trip generation of the proposed land use action is fewer than 25 trips during one of the two peak study periods and the peak trip generation of the land use action corresponds to the roadway system peak, then only the worse of the two peak periods must be analyzed.

This does not mean, however, that all aspects of the other peak period can be ignored. The applicant should consider, for example, the possibility that inbound and outbound trips at the site driveway have specific operational issues that may need to be addressed for both peak hours.

(2) Depending upon the proposed land use action and the expected trip generating characteristics of that development, other time periods may be specified, either as a substitute for or in addition to the a.m. and p.m. peak hours. Examples of land uses that have nontypical trip generating characteristics include schools, movie theaters, and churches. Applicants should assume that the city will require additional analysis periods for certain uses as summarized below:

(a) Schools: End of the school day (early afternoon) peak hour.

(b) Churches and worship facilities: Peak period prior to and after worship services.

(c) Restaurants: Midday weekday peak hour.

(d) Theaters: Friday theater peak hour.

The above list is not necessarily an all-inclusive list of uses for which additional analysis periods is required. The city engineer and applicant should discuss the potential for additional study periods prior to the start of the traffic impact analysis. (Ord. 3150 § 3 (Att. B), 2011)


17.156.080 Approval criteria.

When a traffic impact analysis is required, approval of the development proposal requires satisfaction of the following criteria:

(1) The traffic impact analysis was prepared by an Oregon registered professional engineer using the analysis procedures of the Highway Capacity Manual, latest edition;

(2) If the proposed development shall cause one or more of the effects per SHMC 17.156.030 or other traffic hazard or negative impact to a transportation facility, the traffic impact analysis shall include mitigation measures that meet the city’s adopted level-of-service standards (per the transportation systems plan and noted under SHMC 17.156.020) and are satisfactory to the city engineer and ODOT, when applicable; and

(3) The proposed site design and traffic and circulation design and facilities for all transportation modes, including any mitigation measures, are designed to:

(a) Have the least negative impact on all applicable transportation facilities;

(b) Accommodate and encourage non-motor vehicular modes of transportation to the extent practicable;

(c) Make the most efficient use of land and public facilities as practicable;

(d) Provide the most direct, safe and convenient routes practicable between on-site destinations, and between on-site and off-site destinations; and

(e) Otherwise comply with applicable requirements of the SHMC. (Ord. 3150 § 3 (Att. B), 2011)


17.156.090 Conditions of approval.

The city may deny, approve, or approve a development proposal with appropriate conditions needed to meet operations and safety standards and provide the necessary right-of-way and improvements to develop the future planned transportation system. Conditions of approval that should be evaluated as part of land divisions, conditional use permits, and site development reviews include:

(1) Crossover or reciprocal easement agreements for all adjoining parcels to facilitate future access between parcels.

(2) Access for new developments that have proposed access points that do not meet the designated access spacing policy and/or have the ability to align with opposing access driveways.

(3) Right-of-way dedications for future planned roadway improvements.

(4) Half-street improvements along site frontages that do not have full-buildout improvements in place at the time of development. (Ord. 3150 § 3 (Att. B), 2011)1

As an example, 250 ADT is roughly equivalent to 25 single-family homes, 37 apartments, 22,000 square feet of office space, or a 2,300 square foot supermarket. This example is not a substitute for determination of vehicle trips per SHMC 17.156.020. 


Title 18 ENGINEERING STANDARDS MANUAL

Chapters:

18.04    Abbreviations and Definitions

18.08    General Design Requirements

18.12    Streets

18.16    Storm Drainage

18.20    Traffic Devices and Street Illumination

18.24    Sanitary Sewers 

18.28    Water System

18.32    Bicycle/Pedestrian Facilities

18.36    Environmental Protection, Erosion Prevention, and Sediment Control Rules


Chapter 18.04 ABBREVIATIONS AND DEFINITIONS

Sections:

18.04.010    Abbreviations and definitions.


18.04.010 Abbreviations and definitions.

“AASHTO” means American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.

“AC” means asphaltic concrete.

“ACI” means American Concrete Institute.

“ADA” means Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990.

“ADT” means average daily traffic.

“ALTA Survey” means American Land Title Association Survey.

“ANSI” means American National Standards Institute.

“APWA” means American Public Works Association.

“ASTM” means American Society for Testing and Materials.

“AWWA” means American Water Works Association.

“Bicycle” means a vehicle having two tandem wheels, propelled solely by human power.

“Bicycle facilities” is a general term denoting improvements and provisions which accommodate or encourage bicycling, including parking facilities, maps, signs, pathways, bike lanes, widened sidewalks, bikeways and shared roadways designated for bicycle use.

“Bicycle lane (bike lane)” means a portion of a roadway which has been designated by striping, signing and pavement markings for the preferential or exclusive use of bicyclists.

“Bicycle path (off-street pathway)” means a paved pathway physically separated from motorized vehicular traffic by an open space or barrier within an independent right-of-way.

“Bicycle route (bike route)” means a segment of a system of bikeways designated by the jurisdiction having authority with appropriate directional and informational markers, with or without a specific bicycle route number or as designated on a bicycle map, brochure or guidebook.

“Bikeway” means any road, path or way which in some manner is specifically designated as being open to bicycle travel, regardless of whether such facilities are designated for the exclusive use of bicycles or are to be shared with other transportation modes.

“CARV” means combination air and vacuum release valve.

CBE. “Crushed base equivalent (CBE)” is the number that directly relates the traffic coefficient to the required number of inches of rock for street structural sections.

“CBR” means California bearing ratio.

“City engineer” means city engineer or designated representative.

“DEQ” means Oregon Department of Environmental Quality.

“Development Code” refers to the city of St. Helens Development Code (SHMC Title 17, Ordinance 2875 and amendments).

“DSL” means Division of State Lands.

“Engineer” means the design engineer, stamping engineer, or engineer of record.

“EPA” means U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.

“FEMA” means Federal Emergency Management Agency.

“GPS” means global positioning system.

“IE” means invert elevation.

“Intersection” refers to the area jointed by two or more roads intersecting. For approaches of a continuous street at an acute curve or some other angle point with different street names.

“MUTCD” means Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.

“NEC” means National Electric Code with Oregon amendments.

“OAR” means Oregon Administrative Rules.

“ODOT” means Oregon Department of Transportation.

“ORS” means Oregon Revised Statutes.

“OSHA” means Occupational Safety and Health Administration.

“OSHD” means Oregon State Highway Division.

“Parking lot” means paved surfaces on private property intended for the movement and storage of six or more vehicles.

“PRV” means pressure-reducing valve.

“Review authority” means city staff that the city engineer consults when a decision regarding a design standard modification is made. For the purposes of this title, these staff include the public works director, fire marshal, planning director, and engineering staff.

“Sidewalk” means the portion of a street designed for preferential or exclusive use by pedestrians.

“Street” means a public way which affords the principal means of access to abutting property.

“TCDH” means Traffic Control Device Handbook.

“Temporary parklet” means the use of a vehicle space (e.g., on-street parking space) or curb extension for public use, social interaction, and passive or active recreation. Temporary parklets in an on-street parking space are typically comprised of a platform, barriers to traffic, and seating, yet creativity in incorporating landscaping, art, and other elements is encouraged, given safety requirements are met. The duration of temporary parklets and the design vary accordingly. See SHMC 18.12.190.

“Traffic coefficient” means a number used in determining the structural section of a street.

“Transportation plan” refers to the city of St. Helens transportation plan which is an element of the comprehensive plan.

“UBC” means Uniform Building Code with Oregon amendments.

“UFC” means Uniform Fire Code with Oregon amendments.

“UL” means Underwriter’s Laboratory.

“UMC” means Uniform Mechanical Code with Oregon amendments.

“UPC” means Uniform Plumbing Code with Oregon amendments.

“Wetlands” means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. Identification and delineation of jurisdictional wetlands and wetland boundaries shall be done by a qualified biologist using applicable state and federal guidelines. (Ord. 3181 § 4 (Att. C), 2015; Ord. 2875 Appx., 2003)


Chapter 18.08 GENERAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS

Sections:

Article I. Requirements for Public Improvements

18.08.005    Requirements for public improvements.

18.08.010    General.

18.08.020    Precedence of documents.

Article II. Submittal Requirements

18.08.030    General.

18.08.040    Design plan format.

18.08.050    Site grading plan.

18.08.060    Drainage calculations.

18.08.070    Other requirements.

18.08.080    Standard details.

18.08.090    Review procedure.

18.08.100    As-built drawings.

Article III. Street Design

18.08.110    Functional classification.

18.08.120    Access.

18.08.130    Width.

18.08.140    Number of lanes.

18.08.150    Easements.

18.08.160    City maps/plans not guaranteed.

Article IV. Surveying

18.08.170    General.

18.08.180    Existing survey monuments.

18.08.190    New survey monuments.

18.08.200    Global positioning system (GPS) specifications.

Article V. Structural Design

18.08.210    General.

Article VI. Design Modifications

18.08.220    Modification process.

Article VII. Construction Specifications

18.08.230    General.

18.08.240    City inspector’s activities.

18.08.250    Inspecting engineer’s activities.

18.08.260    Safety requirements.

18.08.270    Scheduling.

18.08.280    Testing.

18.08.290    Preservation, restoration, and cleanup.

18.08.300    Interferences and obstructions.

18.08.310    Railroad crossings.

18.08.320    Building permits.

Article VIII. Environmental Protection During Construction

18.08.330    General policy and requirements.

18.08.340    Air pollution control.

18.08.350    Erosion control.

18.08.360    Maintaining surface water quality.

18.08.370    Fish and wildlife habitat preservation.

18.08.380    Control of noise levels.

18.08.390    Natural vegetation.

18.08.400    Historical and archaeological areas.

18.08.410    Use of pesticides.

Article IX. Revisions

18.08.420    Revisions.

Article I. Requirements for Public Improvements


18.08.005 Requirements for public improvements.

The exclusion of any topic, specification, detail, etc., does not relieve the designer, engineer, and/or contractor from the responsibility of following proper design and construction procedures. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 110, 2003)


18.08.010 General.

The purpose of this title is to set standards for the construction of public improvements to serve new and future developments and for the reconstruction of existing facilities to upgrade existing infrastructure. These standards shall apply to all improvements within the public right-of-way, to all improvements required within the proposed public right-of-way of new subdivisions, for all improvements intended for maintenance by the city, and for all other improvements for which the city code requires approval of the city engineer or designee. These include street, bikeway, drainage, water, and sanitary sewer improvements as required by the development review process, city ordinance, and other city policies adopted by the city council. Standards for site grading, erosion control, parking lot and driveway construction on private property are also contained in this title. Designs submitted shall be stamped by a registered professional engineer licensed to practice in the state of Oregon. At the discretion of the city engineer, registered architects licensed to practice in the state of Oregon may be approved to stamp site grading, erosion control, parking lot, sidewalk, and driveway construction plans. In this case, an architect’s Oregon registration number must appear on or next to their professional stamp on each page submitted.

The standards contained in this title are intended as guidelines for designers and developers in preparing their plans, and for city staff in reviewing plans. Where minimum values are stated, greater values should be used whenever practical; where maximum values are stated, lesser values should be used where practical. In some locations, due to existing development or unusual topography, conformance to these standards may impose an unusual hardship. In such locations, the city may approve modifications to the standards, or a variance from the standard, as allowed by law.

All public improvements and private streets, parking lots, sidewalks, and driveways shall be designed and constructed in such a manner as to be readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities as per the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. This includes providing curb ramps at intersections with pedestrian crosswalks to allow a smooth transition between street and sidewalk elevations. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 110.1, 2003)


18.08.020 Precedence of documents.

If there is a conflict between approval documents, the document highest in precedence shall control. The precedence shall be:

First: Permits from other agencies or jurisdictions, as may be required by law.

Second: Engineering review and planning commission conditions of approval.

Third: “City of St. Helens Engineering Design Manual” and standard drawings.

Fourth: City of St. Helens Development Code (SHMC Title 17, Ordinance 2875 and supplements).

Fifth: Plans and details prepared by the design engineer.

Sixth: ODOT/APWA Oregon Standard Specifications for Construction.

Seventh: Reference specifications.

Supplemental written agreements and approved revisions to plans and specifications by the appropriate jurisdictions will take precedence over documents listed above. Detailed plans shall have precedence over general plans. In any event, the determination of the city engineer shall be final. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 110.2, 2003)

Article II. Submittal Requirements


18.08.030 General.

(1)(a) Submittal requirements consist of design plans, grading plans (where required), erosion control plans (where required), drainage calculations, and other information as required. An engineer’s estimate shall be included with the plan submittal.

(b) The Oregon Standard Specifications and Standard Drawings for Construction are hereby adopted and incorporated as part of this title by reference except as modified herein.

(c) The plans shall be submitted in entirety for review. No portion of a full set of plans will be accepted. 

(2) Phased Development Submittal. Submittal for a phased development shall include all items under subsection (1) of this section for each phase of the development. No multiple phase submittals will be accepted for review of a single phase. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 120.1, 2003)


18.08.040 Design plan format.

(1)(a) The plans shall be submitted on 24-inch by 36-inch sheets.

(b) Vicinity maps shall be located on the first sheet of all plans and shall show the location of the project in respect to the nearest major street intersection.

(c) A north arrow shall be shown on each plan view sheet of the plans and adjacent to any other drawing that is not oriented the same as other drawings on the sheet.

(d) Site development plans shall be organized as follows:

(i) Title sheet to include project name, vicinity map, name and mailing address of developer/owner and engineering firm, general notes, notice to excavators, index, space for city approval stamp (five-inch by five-inch) in the lower right quadrant, the city of St. Helens project numbers in the very bottom of the lower right-hand corner, and a summary of quantities of all public infrastructure.

(ii) Composite utility plan: include existing public and private utilities, and proposed public improvements.

(iii) Street and storm sewer plan and profiles, showing existing and finished contours at two-foot intervals. Profile views shall include shaded locations of all other proposed and existing utilities to verify potential conflicts.

(iv) Sanitary sewer and water plan and profiles. Profile views shall include shaded locations of all other proposed and existing utilities to verify potential conflicts.

(v) Grading and erosion control plan showing existing and finished contours with maximum contour intervals of two feet. Contours shall extend off site a minimum of 50 feet. This sheet shall also note the source of information, date of fieldwork, and location of original document.

(vi) Details may be listed by calling out the city of St. Helens standard detail number and title. If the detail drawings are to be included on the plan sheets, all city standard details shall be full size, 75 percent or 66 percent of original size. Any modifications to a city standard drawing or detail must be clearly marked and initialed by the engineer, along with the date of approval for modifications. Preapproval is required for modifications to city standard drawings and details.

(vii) Copy of the approved tentative plat.

(viii) Street lighting plan.

(e) The scale shall be one inch equals two feet, three feet, four feet, five feet, or 10 feet vertically and shall be one inch equals 10 feet, 20 feet, 30 feet, 40 feet, or 50 feet horizontally for all drawings except structural details. Scale shall be shown with north arrow and/or within a title block.

(f) Letter size shall not be smaller than one-tenth of an inch high.

(g) The location and elevation of a National Geodetic Survey, United States Geological Survey, Oregon State Highway, Columbia County, or city of St. Helens benchmark shall be shown. No other datum shall be used without permission of the city engineer. Temporary control benchmarks and elevations shall also be shown on the plans.

(h) A title block shall appear on each sheet of the plan set and shall be placed in the lower right-hand corner of the sheet, across the bottom edge of the sheet, or across the right-hand edge of the sheet. The title block shall include the names of the project, the engineering firm, the owner, the sheet title, and the sheet number.

(i) Below title block in bold text shall be the city of St. Helens project number on each sheet.

(j) The signed seal of the registered Oregon professional engineer (or architect as noted in SHMC 18.08.010) responsible for preparation of the plans shall appear on each sheet.

(k) The description and date of all revisions to the plans shall be shown on each sheet affected, and shall be approved and dated by the registered professional engineer of record as evidenced by an original signature or initial.

(l) Through use of standard drafting symbols, indicate the location and direction of view for all sections.

(2) Plan View. Plan views shall show the following:

(a) Right-of-way, property, tract, and easement lines (existing and proposed).

(b) Subdivision name, lot numbers, street names, and other identifying labels. Subdivision and street names are subject to the approval of the city planning department, and the county surveyor.

(c) Location and stationing of existing and proposed street centerlines and curb faces.

(d) Horizontal alignment and curve data of street centerlines and curb returns.

(e) Existing underground utilities and vegetation within the construction limits.

(f) Location of existing buildings, wells, septic tanks, drain fields, fuel tanks, and any other buried structures.

(g) Location, stationing, and size of all mains and service lines for storm drainage, sanitary sewer and water. Stationing shall be located in relationship to the street stationing at all manholes or other key locations.

(h) Match lines with sheet number references.

(i) Provisions for cross-connection control must be clearly shown on the plans, including any retrofitting of existing water service connections and existing auxiliary water supplies, conversions to city of St. Helens water service that are required as a condition of development approval, upgrading of existing service connections by replacement of same, and any other cross-connection control required by state and local rules and codes.

(j) Street stationing to be noted at a minimum of 100-foot intervals.

(k) Top of curb elevations along curb returns at quarter-deltas, and at 100-foot stations. Top of curb elevations can also be shown at each property corner to aid in preparation of lot drainage plans.

(l) Location of the low points of street grades and curb returns.

(m) Sidewalk locations. This shall include ramps, transitions in location or width, and relationship with driveways.

(n) Crown lines along portions of streets transitional from one typical section to another.

(o) Centerline stationing of all intersecting streets.

(p) Location and description of existing survey monuments, including but not limited to: section corners, quarter corners, donation land claim corners, and city benchmarks.

(q) Location of proposed street intersection monument boxes.

(r) FEMA-designated 100-year floodplains and floodways, or areas of flooding during a 100-year storm event. 

(s) Wetland areas and storm water quality undisturbed corridors (buffer strips).

(t) Legend.

(u) Developer’s name, address and phone number.

(v) Any additional information that the city deems necessary.

(3) Profile View. Profile views shall show the following:

(a) Stationing, elevations, vertical curve data (including curve k factors), and slopes for center of streets or top of curbs. For offset or superelevation cross-sections, both curbs shall be profiled. Where curbs are not to be constructed, centerline of street and ditch inverts shall be shown. Where curb lines (left and right of centerline) have vertical grades not conforming to the standard street detail on plans, both curb lines and centerline profiles shall be drawn. 

(b) Original ground along the centerline and if necessary at the edges of the right-of-way if grade differences are significant.

(c) Centerline, top of curb, and gutter flow lines of existing streets for a distance of at least 300 feet each way at intersections with proposed streets. For stub streets that may be extended in the future, the vertical alignment shall be designed for at least 300 feet beyond the scope of the proposed construction. At the discretion of the city engineer, additional design information concerning the vertical and horizontal alignment of future street extensions may be required.

(d) Vertical alignment of streets, including existing centerline monumentation.

(e) The top of curb for all cul-de-sacs, eyebrows and curb returns.

(f) All proposed drainage facilities, all invert and top elevations, slopes, materials, bedding, and backfill.

(g) Existing drainage facilities, including off-site facilities, upstream and downstream that affect the design (i.e., downstream restrictions that back water on to project site). In addition, base flood elevations shall be shown on the profile.

(h) Profiles for ditch and creek flow lines shall extend a minimum of 200 feet beyond the project, both upstream and downstream. Typical cross-sections at 50-foot intervals shall also be submitted.

(i) Designate structures using alpha or numeric labels on profiles to correspond to plan view notation.

(j) Profile for all existing and proposed storm drain, sanitary sewer, water mains, and other utilities.

(k) All existing and proposed sanitary, water, storm lines and other utilities crossing the profile shall be shown on each profile. The utilities not being emphasized on a particular profile shall be shown in a shaded manner. For example, on a profile view emphasizing water and sanitary sewer lines and grade, the storm drain, street finished grade, natural gas, and any other existing or proposed utility within the cross-section shall be shown at its proper depth and grade in a shaded or faded manner on the profile. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 120.2, 2003)


18.08.050 Site grading plan.

The city of St. Helens code requires a site grading plan as part of the application for any development that involves the excavation or fill of greater than 50 cubic yards of material. Grading contours (existing and proposed) shall be at no more than two-foot intervals, and shall extend off site a minimum of 50 feet. The site grading plan shall show how each lot in the development will be graded to avoid nuisance drainage on to adjacent properties. This sheet shall also note source of information, date of fieldwork, and location of original document.

The grading plan shall include notation depicting the intended discharge points and general drainage of each lot. A general note shall describe the intended discharge points for roof, foundation, and low point drains.

All soil-disturbing construction activity must adhere to the requirements of OAR 340-41-455. A detailed erosion control plan shall be shown in conjunction with the site grading plan. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 120.3, 2003)


18.08.060 Drainage calculations.

Drainage calculations shall be presented in a clear, concise and complete manner. These calculations shall address all runoff into the drainage system. The drainage calculations shall be included with the plan submitted for plan review.

Initial time of concentration calculation with assumptions listed and charts or nomographs used shall be included with drainage calculations. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 120.4, 2003)


18.08.070 Other requirements.

Other information to be shown on the construction drawings or the other submittals include:

(1) The design assumptions for each street (example: traffic coefficient, R-value).

(2) The design elements such as:

(a) Street classification;

(b) Design speed;

(c) Results of a traffic study, if necessary;

(d) Average daily traffic (ADT) or design hourly volume (DHV).

(3) Structural construction plans and the necessary calculations shall be submitted for proposed structures (example: walls, box culverts, bridges).

(4) Septic tank and/or septic field abandonment location(s). All septic tank and septic field abandonment shall follow the Uniform Building Code and the Uniform Plumbing Code as applicable.

(5) Any additional information that the city engineer deems necessary to review the plans and assure compliance with design standards. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 120.5, 2003)


18.08.080 Standard details.

The standard details required for the project shall be called out and identified by title and drawing number on the cover sheet of the submitted plans, or on another sheet if they are logically placed and easily located. The contractor will be responsible for assuring that a copy of the most recent “City of St. Helens Engineering Department Public Facilities Construction Standards Manual” is on site at all times. 

Any modifications to a city standard drawing or detail must be preapproved by the city engineer; see Article VI of this chapter. Modified drawings must be shown on the construction drawings along with the date of approval for the modification. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 120.6, 2003)


18.08.090 Review procedure.

Three sets, or as directed by the city engineer, of complete plans shall be submitted for review. Supporting information and documentation, such as drainage and water system calculations, shall also be submitted.

Upon completion of the detailed review by the city, the city will return one set of plans with “red line” comments. After the private engineer has completed all revisions, three revised plans and the original “red line” plans shall be returned to the city.

Plan review priority will be given to plans submitted for final review. This plan review and approval is valid for one year. 

“Plan approval” means that the plans have been reviewed for reasonableness and compliance with minimum city specifications and standards. This approval does not supersede those standards and specifications, unless specifically varied by the city. Plan approval does not relieve the developer and/or engineer from responsibility for errors, omissions, or deficiencies in the plans. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 120.7, 2003)


18.08.100 As-built drawings.

Following completion of construction, the engineer shall submit one complete set of mylar as-built drawings. As-built drawings shall contain any and all revisions to the previously approved construction plans, and shall be accompanied by a stamped and signed completion certification letter from the engineer. If specialists were required in the design of the project (soils engineer, surveyor, arborist, wetland scientist, engineering hydrologist, etc.), then a stamped and signed completion certification from those individuals shall be required relating to their specialty. In addition, upon acceptance by the city, the site must either have all vegetation/landscaping established or all erosion control measures as needed and in good working order. Each sheet of the as-constructed drawings shall be stamped “As-Built,” and signed and dated by the engineer. This signature constitutes a certification that the public improvements, grading, and other elements of the engineered drawings have been completed in accordance with the city-approved plans and to the standards of the city. As-builts shall be black ink on originals, fixed-line, four-mil opaque mylar, 24 inches by 36 inches in size and to engineering scale. Each sheet included in the construction plan shall be as-built. Sepia mylars or vellums will not be accepted. 

(1) All public utility easements will be shown and identified on the as-built.

(2) Distance between main lines in shared easements will be shown.

(3) Type of main line, size, and material will be shown.

(4) All laterals shall include length, plan stationing, size, material, and depths.

(5) A summary of quantities of all public infrastructure shall be included on the cover sheet.

(6) The city also shall receive a copy of all as-built drawings and documents as printed in AutoCAD dwg R14 or higher format, on disk.

The city shall receive a copy of the surveyed plat, as recorded, on paper and on disk in AutoCAD dwg R14 or higher format. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 120.8, 2003)

Article III. Street Design


18.08.110 Functional classification.

The functional classification of existing and proposed roads is established by the transportation master plan. Where the functional classification of a street is not defined by the transportation master plan, the existing land use and existing operational characteristics shall be used by the city to determine the functional classification of the street in question.

Transportation master plan classifies roads and streets as follows:

(1) Principal Routes. This system provides the backbone for the roadway network. It serves through trips entering and leaving the urban area, as well as the majority of movements bypassing the central city. This system includes interstates, freeways, expressways and other principal arterials.

(2) Major Arterials. These facilities are the supporting elements of both the principal routes and collector systems. Major arterials, in combination with principal routes, are intended to provide a high level of mobility for travel within the region. All trips from one subarea through an adjacent subarea traveling to other points in the region should occur on a major arterial or principal route. Access to major port facilities should be provided by major arterials.

(3) Minor Arterials. The minor arterial system complements and supports the principal and major systems, but is primarily oriented toward travel within and between adjacent subareas. An adequate minor arterial system is needed to ensure that these movements do not occur on principal routes or major arterials. These facilities provide connections to major activity centers and provide access from the principal and major arterial systems into each subarea.

(4) Collectors. The collector system is deployed nearly entirely within subregions to provide mobility between communities and neighborhoods or from neighborhoods to the minor and major arterial systems. An adequate collector system is needed to ensure these movements do not occur on principal routes or major arterials. Land is directly accessible with emphasis on collection and distribution of trips within an arterial grid.

(5) Local Streets. The local street system is used throughout developed areas to provide for local circulation and direct land access. It provides mobility within neighborhoods and other homogenous land uses, and comprises the largest percentage of total street mileage. In general, local traffic should not occur on major arterials and principal routes. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 130.1, 2003)


18.08.120 Access.

Access to public streets shall conform to the requirements of the city of St. Helens transportation master plan and the Development Code. The city engineer shall have the authority to limit access and designate access locations on public streets under the jurisdiction of the city. Access to streets and highways under Columbia County or state of Oregon jurisdiction must be formally approved by those entities at the applicant’s initiative and expense. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 130.2, 2003)


18.08.130 Width.

The city of St. Helens Community Development Code contains a summary of road width standards by the functional classification of the road. It should be noted that public utility easements beyond the right-of-way are typically required. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 130.3, 2003)


18.08.140 Number of lanes.

The number of lanes for each class of road is defined by the city of St. Helens transportation master plan. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 130.4, 2003)


18.08.150 Easements.

(1) The minimum public utility and drainage easements for residential subdivisions shall be as follows:

(a) A six-foot public utility easement along all front lot lines and adjacent to all public rights-of-way.

(2) Public water, sanitary sewer, and storm drainage lines on private property shall be centered within a permanent easement granted to the city, with a minimum width of 15 feet along its entire length. Such easements, when directed by the city, shall be accompanied by temporary easements granted to the city of adequate width to allow construction of water and sewer. The engineer of record or developer’s surveyor shall provide the city with documents necessary to record the easements. The width of combination easements is evaluated at the site development permit stage on a case-by-case basis, but is generally required to be seven and one-half feet from the center or the furthest outside utility. It is within the authority of the city engineer and/or city planner to refuse to approve or sign any land partition, partition plat, or subdivision plat for a development that has not installed or completed the construction of the necessary public infrastructure to serve the proposed and affected existing lots. Such approval may be withheld until it can be verified that the location and width of proposed rights-of-way and easements are adequate for the completed infrastructure.

(3) Easements are subject to the approval of the city attorney prior to recording. Variation from the city standard form of conveyance shall be allowed only when extraordinary circumstances warrant, as determined by the city engineer and city attorney.

(4) All recording costs for easements created by private development shall be borne by the developer unless specifically agreed to by the city.

(5) Easements for the purpose of any public utility shall allow the city reasonable access to construct, reconstruct, maintain, and repair the facility. No building or structure shall be constructed or maintained on or within the easement that would interfere with the right of reasonable access. 

(6) The engineer should check building code requirements for required setbacks from buried utilities. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 130.5, 2003)


18.08.160 City maps/plans not guaranteed.

From time to time the city may provide property owners, engineers, contractors, and other members of the public with information from the city’s archives. The city cannot guarantee and makes no representation that it has verified the accuracy of the measurements, locations, or other information on such maps and plans. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 130.6, 2003)

Article IV. Surveying


18.08.170 General.

All boundary surveys shall be tied to two GPS monuments and rotated around their basis of bearing.

This title, Part 100 of the Oregon Standard Specifications, and ORS 209.140 through 209.150 define the requirements for protection of existing survey monuments during any construction and setting new survey monuments following construction of new streets, sewers, water and related works.

The city engineer may not approve or sign any land partition, partition plat, or subdivision plat until the necessary public infrastructure to serve the proposed and affected existing lots has been installed or has been guaranteed by a security acceptable to the city attorney. It is within the authority of the city engineer to refuse to approve or sign any land partition, partition plat, or subdivision plat for a development that has not installed or completed the construction of the necessary public infrastructure to serve the proposed and affected existing lots. Such approval may be withheld until it can be verified that the location and width of proposed rights-of-way and easements are adequate for the completed infrastructure. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 140.1, 2003)


18.08.180 Existing survey monuments.

Whenever an existing section corner, one-quarter section corner, or donation land claim corner monument or accessory, appears to be in danger of damage or destruction by any construction, the county surveyor shall be notified in writing, not less than 10 working days prior to construction. The county surveyor shall reference the monument prior to construction and replace it following construction. The county surveyor shall be reimbursed for all expenses from said replacement by the party responsible for the construction.

As per ORS 209.150, no person shall willfully or negligently remove, destroy, or deface any existing survey monument. If damage cannot be avoided, the monument shall be referenced and replaced, under the direction of a registered professional land surveyor, according to state law. A copy of the field notes referencing such monuments shall be provided to the city engineer. Failure to comply with this provision is subject to penalty according to ORS 209.990. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 140.2, 2003)


18.08.190 New survey monuments.

All monuments within and adjacent to the public right-of-way shall not be offset unless prior approval from the city engineer is received in writing. Centerline monuments, as shown on Standard Drawing 266, shall be installed as required by Oregon Revised Statutes. The monuments shall be set by an Oregon-registered professional land surveyor. When monuments are set by a registered professional land surveyor, a record of survey shall be filed complying with ORS 209.250 and any additional requirements set forth by the city. If a monument box is used, or required to be used by the city, it shall not be less than eight inches inside diameter and shall be approved by the city engineer before its installation. 

Other centerline monumentation shall be installed in accordance with current survey practices, and if within a hard-surfaced area shall have metallic caps stamped with the registered business name or the letters “L.S.” followed by the registration number of the surveyor in charge. Public street intersections or private street/public street intersections shall be monumented in a city standard monument box.

See SHMC 18.12.040(2) for monumentation for new streets. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 140.3, 2003)


18.08.200 Global positioning system (GPS) specifications.

The following are the minimum requirements for work done utilizing global positioning system (GPS) surveying techniques:

All work shall conform to ORS 93.320, 93.330(1)(c) and 93.350 and to the use intended in ORS 92.050(9).

All work shall be performed under the direct supervision of a surveyor registered to practice in the state of Oregon.

All work shall conform to the guidelines set forth in the latest version of the “Geometric Geodetic Accuracy Standards and Specifications for Using GPS Relative Positioning Techniques,” Federal Geodetic Control Committee.

All values shall be based on the North American Datum of 1983 (1991 Adjustment) (NAD 83(91)) and expressed both as geodetic coordinates and state plane coordinates and both in meters and international feet.

The minimum relative positional accuracy between all monuments established and the city of St. Helens horizontal control network, after the constrained adjustment, shall be what is generally referred to as second order, Class I; more specifically, a maximum of 20 parts per million (20 ppm). (First order accuracy requires a maximum of 10 ppm.)

All horizontal values shall be based on National Geodetic Survey (NGS) first order (or better) control monuments, equivalent monuments accepted by and recorded with the Columbia County surveyor. All vertical values shall be based on control points supplied by the city. A minimum of two horizontal and two vertical control monuments shall be used.

All monuments shall be a standard city of St. Helens “GPS monument” (Standard Drawing 265), unless an existing monument is specified at a certain location or an exception is granted by the city engineer. If the proposed location of a monument is in the same position as a monument that is to be set as a part of another aspect of the project, the work shall be coordinated so that the “standard GPS monument” is the physical monument used at that location. All monuments shall have a name designation provided by the city. All monuments are to be set by the contracting surveyor unless otherwise specified or arranged with the city.

Prior to commencement of fieldwork, the GPS surveyor shall visit each proposed monument location and perform those field and office checks required to ensure the acceptability of the monument locations. If any adverse conditions exist that might compromise the quality of the fieldwork, they shall be reported to the city engineer and corrective action discussed. These locations must be accepted by the city engineer.

The GPS surveyor shall file with the Columbia County surveyor a survey, separate from any others required on the project, showing the following minimum information:

(1) Description of the monuments set or utilized on the project.

(2) Location descriptions of the monuments set or utilized on the project.

(3) A network diagram.

(4) Values of all monuments established or utilized on the project.

(5) A statement of relative positional accuracy (in relation to the city of St. Helens horizontal control network) for each monument established, expressed in parts per million (ppm).

(6) All information that might be required by future work to conform to this specification.

(7) City of St. Helens standard eight-and-one-half-inch by 11-inch GPS point detail sheet.

(8) Any additional information that might affirm the integrity of the survey.

(9) Any additional information required or requested by the county surveyor.

The city engineer shall be provided with a digital and paper copy of the document filed and its assigned Columbia County survey number. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 140.4, 2003)

Article V. Structural Design


18.08.210 General.

Structures not included in the standard drawings of this title shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of the Structural Design Section of the Oregon State Highway Division or ODOT. These standards are referenced in ODOT’s “Bridge Design Manual and Accompanying Standard Drawing,” “Standard Specifications for Highway Construction,” and “Standard Drawings for Design and Construction.”

The project special provisions shall specify the Oregon Standard Specifications for Construction requirements for bridges and other structures that apply to the specific project. The Uniform Building Code (UBC) and/or the American Concrete Institute Codes, Specifications, and Guidelines (ACI) shall govern those structures not addressed by the above. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 150.1, 2003)

Article VI. Design Modifications


18.08.220 Modification process.

(1) Submittal. Requests to modify city standards shall be submitted in writing by the engineer to the city engineer. This written request shall state the desired modification(s), the reason(s) for the request(s) and a comparison between the specification(s), standard(s), and the modification(s).

Any request for modification or variance of city standards should be documented with reference to nationally accepted specifications/standards.

(2) Review. The request to modify shall be reviewed by the city engineer, who shall consult the appropriate review authorities and make one of the following decisions:

(a) Approve as is;

(b) Approve with changes; or

(c) Deny with an explanation.

The modification, if approved, is for project specific use. Approval of a request shall not constitute a precedent.

(3) Appeal. The applicant may appeal the city engineer’s decision to the city council.

(4) Criteria for Modification of Specification Standards. The city engineer may grant a modification to the adopted specifications or standards when any one of the following conditions are met:

(a) The specification or standard does not apply in the particular application.

(b) Topography, right-of-way, or other geographic conditions impose an economic hardship on the applicant and an equivalent alternative which can accomplish the same design is available that does not compromise public safety or accessibility for the disabled.

(c) A change to a specification or standard is required to address a specific design or construction problem which if not enacted will result in an undue hardship.

(5) Amendments to This Title.

(a) Minor Modifications. Additions, deletions, or minor modifications to the details and/or engineering specifications may be made with the written approval of the engineering manager or designee. The justification will be attached to the back of the master manual and kept on file at the city engineering department. Changes made by the engineering manager can be appealed to the city council in writing. No notice of change is required for engineering manager changes or exceptions. The city council can rule on an appeal of the engineering manager’s decisions in a regular meeting at their discretion with or without cause. All decisions of the engineering manager have a 14-day maximum appeal time limit from the date the written decision or change is made.

(b) Major Modifications. Substantive changes to this title shall be made as with all amendments to the code. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 160.1, 2003)

Article VII. Construction Specifications


18.08.230 General.

All public improvements shall be inspected by an Oregon-registered professional engineer or a qualified individual under the supervision of an Oregon-registered professional engineer (exceptions to this are as noted in SHMC 18.08.010). The city will not authorize work to begin on public improvements, site grading, or parking lot construction without designation of an engineer’s inspector at the city’s preconstruction conference. All inspection costs, including required testing, shall be paid by the owner or developer.

Engineering firms, and all employees of such firms, must be financially independent of the owner or developer and have no actual or perceived financial interest that is contingent on the outcome of its work. The engineer’s relationship to the project must be solely that of an independent, professional service nature.

It shall be the policy of the city of St. Helens engineering and public works departments to provide “spot check only” inspection services for privately funded public improvements.

One set of plans shall be kept on site at all times during construction. Any changes or modifications to the approved plans shall be noted and kept as “red line” drawings to be submitted to the city at the completion of the project.

(1) Work Hours. The work hours for all items covered by the site development permit shall be from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday. The city engineer may allow longer or require shorter work hours depending on site-specific conditions. The city shall observe the following holidays: New Year’s Day, Martin Luther King, Jr. Day, President’s Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Veteran’s Day, Thanksgiving Day, day after Thanksgiving, and Christmas Day. 

(2) Substitution of Materials. It is not the intent of this title to exclude other equipment or materials of equal value, quality, or merit. Whenever a product is designated, or manufacturer’s name, brand, or item designation is given or described, it shall be understood that the words “or approved equal” follows such name, designation, or description, whether in fact they do so or not. Determination of quality in reference to the project design requirement will be made by the city engineer. A contractor shall not use an “equal” product without prior written approval of the city engineer. A similar process as outlined in Article VI of this chapter will need to be followed. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 170.1, 2003)


18.08.240 City inspector’s activities.

Inspecting services provided by the city shall include, but are not limited to:

(1) Acting as a liaison between the inspecting engineer and the city.

(2) Monitoring both work progress and performance testing results.

(3) The performance of administrative and coordination activities as required to support the processing and completion of the project.

(4) The issuance of a stop work order by notice to the engineer’s inspector to stop the work at the direction of the building official, the city attorney, or the planning administrator. If the engineer’s inspector is not available, the city’s project inspector, at the discretion of the city engineer, may post a stop work order.

(5) Maintaining a completion file containing the following:

(a) The original of the project completion certification;

(b) A complete copy of the log book initialed by the engineer’s inspector;

(c) The results of material tests, compaction tests, and soil analysis as detailed in the log book.

(6) Inform the city engineer of all proposed plan changes, material changes, stop work orders, or errors or omissions in the approved plans or specifications as soon as practical. Any revision to approved plans must be under the direction of the engineer. It shall be at the discretion of the city’s project inspector as to whether the revision is significant enough to warrant review by the city engineering plan review/permits unit. If so, the engineer shall submit three copies of the proposed revision; no work affected by the revision shall be done until approval by the city engineer. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 170.2, 2003)


18.08.250 Inspecting engineer’s activities.

The following minimum activities are required of the designated inspecting engineer:

(1) Maintain a project log book of daily inspection reports which contain the following information:

(a) Job number and name of engineer and designees.

(b) Date and time (arrival and departure) of site visits.

(c) Weather conditions, including temperature.

(d) A description of construction activities.

(e) Statements of directions to change plans, specifications, stop work, reject materials, or other work quality actions.

(f) Public agency contacts which result in plan changes or other significant actions.

(g) Perceived problems and action taken.

(h) Final and staged inspections.

(i) Record all material and soil types and conditions.

(j) Test results.

(k) Record all pavement grade and depth measurements by street stationing.

(l) General remarks including citizen contact or complaints.

(m) Maintain an on-site red line set of plans noting changes to plan for as-builts. This shall include rock depths.

All active site development projects will be required to turn in daily inspection reports to the city on a weekly basis containing information as outlined above. If the compiled reports become more than two weeks in arrears, or are significantly deficient as determined by the city engineer, a stop work order may be posted on the project site.

(2) Obtain and use a copy of city-approved construction plans, specifications, and a copy of this title.

(3) Review and approve all pipe, aggregate, Portland cement concrete, asphaltic concrete, and other materials to ensure their compliance with city standards.

(4) Approve all plan or specification changes in writing and obtain city approval (see SHMC 18.08.240, City inspector’s activities). All changes to the approved plans or specifications must be with the approval of the city engineer, or his representative, prior to the commencement of work affected by the revision.

(5) Monitor construction activities to ensure end products meet city specifications.

(6) Perform (or have performed) material, composition, and other tests required to ensure city specifications are met.

(7) For pavement construction, perform the following stage inspections and record date of each:

(a) Curbs are built to line and grade.

(b) Subgrade meets grade and compaction specifications.

(c) Base rock meets depth/thickness, grade, and compaction specifications.

(d) Leveling course meets depth/thickness, grade, and compaction specifications.

(e) Wearing course meets depth/thickness, grade, and compaction specifications. 

(f) Provide the city with 24-hour notice of impending stage inspections.

(g) Complete a prepaving meeting with the contractor and the city.

(8) Prior to requesting any building occupancy, the engineer shall certify that all necessary public improvements have been installed and accepted in compliance with the city-approved site development plan. The engineer shall indicate what items, if any, have been bonded for in lieu of completion (i.e., sidewalks, wearing course of asphalt, etc.). This certification shall also indicate that all items required (at or before occupancy of the first building) through the land use process have been completed, including the recording of all easements. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 170.3, 2003)


18.08.260 Safety requirements.

The contractor is responsible for observing the safety of the work and of all persons and property coming into contact with the work. The contractor shall conduct his work in such a manner as to comply with all the requirements prescribed by OSHA. Traffic control in work zones shall conform to the MUTCD. At the city’s discretion, a traffic control plan shall be submitted and approved prior to construction.

The city project inspector’s role is not one of supervision or safety management, but is one of observation only. Nothing contained in this section or elsewhere in this title shall be interpreted to obligate the city to act in any situation, nor shift the owner’s responsibility for safety compliance to the city. No responsibility for the safety of the work or for construction means, methods, techniques, sequences, or procedures shall attach to the city by virtue of its action or inaction under this section. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 170.4, 2003)


18.08.270 Scheduling.

(1) Sequence of Operations. The contractor shall plan construction work and execute his operations with a minimum of interference with the operation of the existing public facilities. It may be necessary to do certain parts of the construction work outside normal working hours in order to avoid undesirable conditions, and it shall be the obligation of the contractor to do this work at such times. This scheduling, however, is subject to the city’s approval and does not relieve the contractor from making work available for inspection.

The contractor shall notify the city at least 48 hours (two full working days) prior to any city inspection. Connections between existing work and new work shall not be made until necessary inspection and tests have been completed on the new work and it is found to conform in all respects to the requirements of the plans and specifications.

(2) Progress of Construction. Construction shall proceed in a systematic manner that will result in a minimum of inconvenience to the public.

In the case of a pipe-laying job for sanitary sewer, storm drainage, and water improvements the trenching equipment at no time shall be greater than 300 feet ahead of the pipe-laying crew, unless given permission by the city engineer. The trench shall be backfilled so that no section of the trench or pipe is left open longer than 24 hours. Trenches located in a right-of-way or public street shall be completely backfilled or plated before the contractor leaves the site each day. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 170.5, 2003)


18.08.280 Testing.

It is the responsibility of the contractor to complete all testing required throughout construction. The contractor shall provide all necessary equipment and materials to perform such tests properly. If testing is provided by a subcontractor, the subcontractor shall be licensed and qualified to certify the test results for the services provided. The inspecting engineer or their designee shall be witness to all required testing and provide copies of all test results to the city. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 170.6, 2003)


18.08.290 Preservation, restoration, and cleanup.

(1) Site Restoration and Cleanup. The contractor shall keep the premises clean and orderly at all times during the work and leave the project free of rubbish or excess materials of any kind upon completion of the work. During construction, the contractor shall stockpile excavated materials so as to do the least damage to adjacent lawns, grassed areas, gardens, shrubbery, trees, or fences, regardless of the ownership of these areas. All excavated materials shall be removed from these areas, and these surfaces shall be left in a condition equivalent to their original condition and free from all rocks, gravel, boulders, or other foreign material. Stockpiling of construction materials shall not be allowed on existing sidewalks or the driving surface of existing streets.

All existing storm systems shall be cleaned and flushed, and original drainage restored. Sediment, rock, and other debris shall be collected and disposed of in a proper manner. In no case shall debris be flushed down a storm or sanitary sewer for disposal. All damaged irrigation and house drainage pipe, drain tiles, sewer lateral, and culverts shall be repaired expeditiously.

All areas disturbed by the contractor’s operations inside dedicated rights-of-way or easements shall be restored to original condition. Areas outside of the easements or rights-of-way which are disturbed by the contractor’s operations shall be graded and reseeded in a method acceptable to the property owner. The contractor shall obtain a written release from such property owners for any claims of injury or property damage prior to final acceptance of the work by the city.

(2) Street Cleanup. The contractor shall clean all spilled dirt, gravel, or other foreign material caused by the construction operations from all streets and roads at the conclusion of each day’s operation. Cleaning shall be by grader and front-end loader, supplemented by power brushing, and hand labor, unless otherwise approved by the city. The contractor shall follow the city’s control procedures.

As soon as practical after completion of all paving and gravel shoulder resurfacing, the contractor shall remove all dirt, mud, rock, gravel, and other foreign material from the paved surface and storm drainage system.

(3) Dust Prevention. During all phases of the work, the contractor shall take precautions to abate any dust nuisance by cleaning up, sweeping, sprinkling with water, or other means as necessary to accomplish results satisfactory to the city. Dust prevention measures shall be continuous until final acceptance by the city. Obtaining water from a hydrant will require specific authorization from the public works department.

(4) Stream and Creek Crossings. The contractor shall comply with all provisions of the permits required by the Oregon Division of State Lands, Department of Fish and Wildlife, and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.

Before any work may be performed in any stream, the method of operation and the schedule of such work shall be approved in writing by the engineer. Work within major streams shall be scheduled to take place as specified in the applicable permits for such work and, once started, shall be completed without interruption of the work. Mechanized equipment shall enter streams only when necessary and only within the immediate work area as approved by agencies having jurisdiction. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 170.7, 2003)


18.08.300 Interferences and obstructions.

(1) General. Various obstructions may be encountered during the course of the work. Although maps and information regarding underground utilities should be obtained from the utility owning and operating such utilities, the location of such utilities is not guaranteed. A minimum of 48 hours’ notice shall be given to all utility operators which may be affected by the construction operation. Should services of any utility be interrupted due to the construction operation, the proper authority shall be notified immediately.

(2) Protection. The contractor shall exercise all due care in protecting property along the route of the improvement. This protection shall include, but not be limited to, trees, yards, fences, drainage lines, mailboxes, driveways, shrubs, lawns, and survey monuments. If any of the above have been disturbed, they shall be restored to as near their original condition as possible.

(3) Survey Monuments. Any property corner, right-of-way monument, centerline monument, or other legal corner disturbed by the contractor (moved from its original position) shall be reset by a licensed surveyor in the state of Oregon at the contractor’s expense. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 170.8, 2003)


18.08.310 Railroad crossings.

(1) General. Crossings of railroad rights-of-way shall be done in a manner which conforms with the requirements of the railroad having jurisdiction. If any bonds and/or certificates of insurance protection are required, they shall be furnished by the contractor or owner to the railroad company with the city as an additionally named insured.

(2) Permits or Easements. Crossing agreements, permits, and/or easements for such crossings will be obtained by the applicant and all the terms of such permits or easements shall be met by the owner and contractor. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 170.9, 2003)


18.08.320 Building permits.

The minimum requirements of public improvements in a new development to be completed before a building permit can be issued are, but may not be limited to:

(1) Public utilities are installed, tested as required, and accepted by the city.

(2) Curb and gutter is installed.

(3) Minimum street section has been constructed, including a hard surface.

(4) All improvements must be approved by the city.

(5) Any uncompleted public improvements must be protected by a surety to ensure completion of items, including, but not limited to, sidewalks, street lights, and/or the second lift of asphalt pavement. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 170.10, 2003)

Article VIII. Environmental Protection During Construction


18.08.330 General policy and requirements.

(1) It is the policy of the city of St. Helens to require temporary and permanent measures for all construction projects to lessen the adverse effects of construction on the environment.

The contractor shall properly install, operate, and maintain both temporary and permanent works as provided in this section or in an approved plan, to protect the environment during the term of the project.

The city may, in addition, require that a construction project be scheduled so as to minimize erosion or other environmental harm.

Nothing in this section shall relieve any person from the obligation to comply with the regulations or permits of any federal, state, or other local authority.

(2) For any project having slopes equal to or greater than 10 percent, or where any portion of the work will occur within 200 feet of a lake, stream, river, or riparian area, an environmental protection plan shall be required. The plan shall be submitted together with construction plans.

(3) The plan shall describe all areas of the subject property affected by the project, and shall include all measures to be taken by the contractor to prevent or minimize erosion, loss of vegetation, water pollution, loss of fish or wildlife habitat, or other damage to the environment. The plan shall include all schedules, construction methods, structures, revegetation, and other actions affecting environmental quality, and shall address the criteria of SHMC 18.08.350 through 18.08.410.

(4) For all projects, whether or not an environmental protection plan is required, the prohibitions and regulations of this section shall apply. Notwithstanding the terms of any approved environmental project plan, the city may temporarily suspend the work or require additional protection measures if it appears, based upon observed conditions of the project, that the approved plan is insufficient to prevent environmental harm, and that such suspension or additional measures will prevent or minimize such harm. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 180.1, 2003)


18.08.340 Air pollution control.

(1) Dust. Dust shall be minimized to the extent practicable, utilizing all measures necessary, including, but not limited to:

(a) Sprinkling haul and access roads and other exposed dust-producing areas with water. Obtaining water from a hydrant will require specific authorization from the public works department.

(b) Applying DEQ-approved dust palliatives on access and haul roads.

(c) Establishing temporary vegetative cover.

(d) Placing wood chips or other effective mulches on vehicle and pedestrian use areas.

(e) Maintaining the proper moisture condition on all fill surfaces.

(f) Prewetting cut and borrow area surfaces.

(g) Use of covered haul equipment.

(2) Fumes, Smoke, and Odors.

(a) Tires, oils, paints, asphalts, coated metals, or other such materials will not be permitted in combustible waste piles, and will not be burned at the construction site.

(b) Open burning shall not be permitted unless approved by the Department of Environmental Quality and the city fire marshal’s office.

(c) Open burning shall not be permitted within 1,000 feet of a structure or within 250 feet of the drip line of any standing timber or flammable growth.

(d) Open burning shall not be permitted during a local air inversion or other climatic conditions that may result in a smoke pall hanging over a built-up area or community.

(e) Open burning shall not be permitted when climatic and moisture conditions are contributing to high danger of forest or range fires as determined by city, state, or federal authorities.

(f) All open burning shall be constantly attended by a crew with a supply of fire fighting tools and equipment. The number and size of fires shall be limited such that the burning crew can adequately control them. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 180.2, 2003)


18.08.350 Erosion control.

(1) Measures to prevent erosion at construction sites shall be incorporated into the construction drawings and specifications.

(2) All earth and soft or broken rock areas that have been disturbed by construction operations such as during stripping, excavation, and by traffic shall be protected from erosion by the action of concentrated runoff, by the impact of falling rain, by wind action, by vehicular tracking, or a combination of actions.

(3) The concentration of runoff on or across slopes shall be prevented.

(4) Sections of bare earth and the length of time of their exposure to potential erosion shall be minimized by proper scheduling, limiting the work areas, and placement of appropriate cover.

(5) Precautions shall be taken in the use of construction equipment to prevent operations that increase the potential for erosion. Wheel tracks or ruts, particularly down slopes, that permit concentration of surface flows, shall be avoided. Fording of live streams that accelerate erosion and damage aquatic animal habitat shall be avoided. Where frequent stream crossings are necessary, temporary bridges shall be installed.

(6) Areas for borrow pits and waste disposal shall be selected with full consideration of erosion control needs during and after borrow operations. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 180.3, 2003)


18.08.360 Maintaining surface water quality.

(1) Construction between stream banks shall be kept to a minimum.

(2) Pollutants such as fuels, lubricants, bitumens, raw sewage, and other harmful materials shall not be discharged into or near rivers, streams, or impoundments. Sterilizing water from water line construction activities shall not be directly discharged into the public storm drainage system. Activities and construction practices must comply with all Oregon DEQ rules and regulations regarding discharge of chlorinated water.

(3) The use of water from a stream or impoundment shall not result in altering the temperature of the water body enough to affect aquatic life. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 180.4, 2003)


18.08.370 Fish and wildlife habitat preservation.

(1) The construction shall be done in a manner to minimize the adverse effects on wildlife and fishery resources.

(2) The requirements of local, state, and federal agencies charged with wildlife and fish protection shall be adhered to by the entire construction work force. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 180.5, 2003)


18.08.380 Control of noise levels.

Noise levels shall conform to the current city of St. Helens nuisance ordinance regarding noise.

Construction noise shall be minimized by the use of proper engine mufflers, protective sound-reducing enclosures, and other sound barriers as necessary. Construction activities producing excessive noise that cannot be reduced by mechanical means shall be restricted to locations where their sound impact is reduced to a minimum at the edge of the work area. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 180.6, 2003)


18.08.390 Natural vegetation.

(1) As far as is practicable, the natural vegetation shall be protected and left in place. Work areas shall be carefully located and marked to reduce potential damage. Trees shall not be used as anchors for stabilizing working equipment.

(2) During clearing operations, trees shall not be permitted to fall outside the work area. In areas designated for selective cutting or clearing, care in falling and removing trees and brush shall be taken to avoid injuring trees and shrubs to be left in place. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 180.7, 2003)


18.08.400 Historical and archaeological areas.

When burial sites, buried camp areas, village sites, and other distinctive archaeological or historical items are uncovered, or other items suspected of being of historical or archaeological significance are encountered, the contractor shall report the matter to the city and the State Liaison Officer. Construction operations shall be stopped until the appropriate authorities can examine the area and give clearance to proceed with the work.

Under the Natural Historical Preservation Act, State Liaison Officers shall be notified when historical or archaeological items are unearthed.

The Oregon Criminal Code prohibits disinterment of a corpse without permission of the appropriate authorities. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 180.8, 2003)


18.08.410 Use of pesticides.

(1) The use of pesticides, including insecticides, herbicides, defoliants, soil sterilants, and so forth, must strictly adhere to federal, state, county, and local restrictions. Time, area, method, and rate of application must be approved by all relevant authorities and their requirements followed.

(2) All materials delivered to the job site shall be covered and protected from the weather. None of the materials shall be exposed during storage. Waste material, rinsing fluids, and other such material shall be disposed of in such a manner that pollution of ground water, surface water, or the air does not occur. In no case shall toxic materials be dumped into drainageways.

(3) All personnel shall stay out of sprayed areas for the prescribed time. All such areas should be fenced, appropriately signed, or otherwise protected to restrict entry. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 180.9, 2003)

Article IX. Revisions


18.08.420 Revisions.

Any revisions to the city-approved plans shall come from the engineer of record. The submittal shall include three copies of the 24-inch by 36-inch revised pages with the revisions clearly identified, along with a copy of any revised calculations. Applicants are cautioned that revisions must be reviewed for coordination with the entire plan set and that such review will be conducted in the order they are received, on a first-come, first-served basis. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 190, 2003)


Chapter 18.12 STREETS

Sections:

Article I. Street Design

18.12.010    Street section design.

18.12.020    Subgrade evaluation.

18.12.030    Structural section.

18.12.040    Horizontal alignment.

18.12.050    Vertical alignment.

18.12.060    Intersection sight distance policy.

18.12.070    Angles between intersecting streets.

18.12.080    Cul-de-sacs, eyebrows, turnarounds.

18.12.090    Driveway approaches.

18.12.100    Curbs and grading.

18.12.110    Sidewalks and clustered mailboxes.

18.12.120    Guardrails.

18.12.130    Transitions.

18.12.140    Superelevation cross-sections.

18.12.150    Stub streets.

18.12.160    Private streets, parking lots, and common driveways.

18.12.170    Utilities.

18.12.190    Temporary parklets – In on-street parking spaces.

Article I. Street Design


18.12.010 Street section design.

All street sections shall be designed by the engineer or a geotechnical engineer based on the on-site soil conditions and shall meet the minimum standards as outlined in SHMC 18.12.030. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 210.1, 2003)


18.12.020 Subgrade evaluation.

Soil testing to obtain the strength of the soil may be required in order to analyze and design the structural section for streets and roads. Soil tests are needed on undisturbed samples of the subgrade materials that are expected to be within three feet of the planned subgrade elevation. Samples are needed for each 500 feet of roadway and for each visually observed soil type. Soil tests are required from a minimum of three locations.

The selected design structural strength of the soil needs to be consistent with the subgrade compaction requirements. The strength and compaction moisture content, at optimum to slightly over optimum, needs to be specified. The soils report shall address subgrade drainage and ground water considerations for year-round conditions. Recommendations for both summer and winter construction shall be included. The required density of treated and untreated subgrade materials shall not be less than 95 percent maximum density as determined by AASHTO T-99. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 210.2, 2003)


18.12.030 Structural section.

(1) Streets may be constructed of the following:

(a) Full depth asphaltic concrete.

(b) Asphaltic concrete with crushed rock base or treated bases.

(c) Portland cement concrete with cushion course of crushed rock or on a base of crushed rock or treated base.

(2) Aggregate Base. All aggregate shall meet OSHD specifications for base rock.

The minimum aggregate section, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer, shall be an eight-inch base course of one-and-one-half-inch to zero-inch with a two-inch leveling course of three-fourths-inch to zero-inch. This equals a total minimum section of 10 inches of aggregate. 

During compaction, materials shall be maintained within two percent of the optimum moisture content. The contractor shall begin compaction of each layer immediately after the material is spread, and continue until a density of not less than 95 percent of the maximum density has been achieved. Maximum density will be determined by AASHTO T-180, or OSHD TM-106.

(3) Asphalt Pavement Design. If asphalt pavement is to be placed in a single lift, the wearing course shall be no less than three inches of OSHD Class “C.”

If asphalt pavement is to be placed in two lifts, the street section including the aggregate base and first lift of AC pavement must be designed to support the loads expected throughout all construction and/or building phase(s) until permanent wearing course is installed. The base course of asphalt concrete (AC) streets may be a minimum of two inches of OSHD Class “B” or Class “C” and the wearing course shall be one and one-half inches of OSHD Class “C” for a total minimum thickness of three and one-half inches in two lifts. For asphalt thickness greater than three and one-half inches, the Oregon Standard Specifications for Construction guidelines shall be followed.

The compaction shall be at least 91 percent based on a Rice theoretical maximum density, as determined in conformance with AASHTO T-209, as modified by OSHD. 

Asphalt pavement may be designed using any nationally recognized procedure; both the OSHD and the Asphalt Institute methods are discussed below:

(a) Oregon State Highway Division Method.

(i) Test the soil to determine the R-value by AASHTO T-190. 

(ii) Determine the 18 kip equivalent axle load (EAL) constant. Use a traffic analysis worksheet (see Figure 2-1) to calculate 18 kip EAL and the traffic coefficient. The two-way traffic should be based on vehicle classification counts and functional classification of the street. The expansion factor for a 20-year period and the daily traffic for each project shall be determined by a traffic study or provided by the city.

(iii) Calculate the total structural thickness for the roadway section in terms of the crushed aggregate base. This is the crushed base equivalent in inches (CBE).

CBE = 0.03546 (TC) (100-R)

(iv) Choose the structural section for the street using Table IIa.

(b) Asphalt Institute Method. Design of asphalt concrete pavement structures by this method shall conform to the guidelines of the Asphalt Institute publication, “Thickness Design – Asphalt Pavements for Highways and Streets, Manual Series No. I.”

(i) AASHTO T-193 (CBR Method); or

(ii) AASHTO T-190 (R-Value Method); or

If the CBR value of the subgrade exceeds 20 or the R-value of the subgrade exceeds 60 then CBR and R-value methods shall not be used.

(4) Design Example.

AC STRUCTURAL SECTIONS EXAMPLE (OSHD METHOD) 

	FIND:	STRUCTURAL SECTION (Asphaltic Concrete)

	Given:	24-HOUR TRAFFIC MIX (90 2-axle trucks, 45 3-axle trucks, 5 4-axle trucks, 90 5-axle trucks, 0 6-axle trucks)

	R = 6	(OSHD Method)

	STEP I.	Complete the traffic analysis worksheet, Figure 2-1, as shown in Figure 2-2

	STEP II.	TC = 8.9 (from Step I)

	STEP III.	Go to Table II, with R = 6, and TC = 8.9, find CBE = 28.2″

	STEP IV.	Using CBE factors from Table II, go to CBE factors Table II and find that:

	 	 

	Alternative I	 

	4-inch AC x 2 =	8.0-inch CBE

	2-inch 3/4-inch-0 x 0.8 =	1.6-inch CBE

	11-inch CTB x 1.8 =	19.8-inch CBE

	 	29.4-inch CBE

	 	 

	or we find an alternate structural section could be:

	 	 

	Alternate II	 

	8-inch AC x 2 =	16.0-inch CBE

	2-inch 3/4-inch-0 x 0.8 =	1.6-inch CBE

	14-inch 2-inch-0 x 0.8 =	11.2-inch CBE

	 	28.8-inch CBE

FIGURE 2-1 TRAFFIC ANALYSIS WORKSHEET 

	PRESENT ADT:	__________	STREET:	__________

	PRESENT NUMBER OF:	 	FROM:	__________

	2-Axle trucks	__________	TO:	__________

	3-Axle trucks	__________	 	 

	4-Axle trucks	__________	D = B x C	 

	5-Axle trucks	__________	E = B + D	 

	6-Axle trucks	__________	2	 

	 	 	F = One-Way Annual

	 	 	G = E x F	 

	 	 	TC = 9 x (20-Year 18 kip EAL) 0.119 

	 	 	1,000,000 

	A	B	C	D	E	F	G

	2	 	1.48	 	 	36.5	 

	3	 	1.48	 	 	119.5	 

	4	 	1.48	 	 	157.0	 

	5	 	1.48	 	 	296.0	 

	6	 	1.48	 	 	325.0	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	TOTAL – AVG. ANNUAL 18 kip EAL =	___________

	18 kip EAL/day =	___________

	20-Year 18 kip EAL =	___________

	Traffic Coefficient, TC =	___________

FIGURE 2-2 – TRAFFIC ANALYSIS WORKSHEET (EXAMPLE) 

	PRESENT ADT:	3800	 	STREET:	A Street

	PRESENT NUMBER OF:	 	 	FROM:	X Road

	2-Axle trucks	90	 	TO:	Y Road

	3-Axle trucks	45	 	 	 

	4-Axle trucks	5	 	D = B x C	 

	5-Axle trucks	90	 	E = B + D	 

	6-Axle trucks	0	 	2	 

	18 kip EAL	 	 	F = One-Way Annual

	 	 	 	G = E x F	 

	TC = 9 x (20-Year 18 kip EAL) 0.119 	 	 

	    1,000,000	 	 

	A	B	C	D	E	F	G

	2	90	1.48	133.2	111.6	36.5	4,073.4

	3	45	1.48	66.6	55.8	119.5	6,668.1

	4	5	1.48	7.4	6.2	157.0	973.4

	5	90	1.48	133.2	111.6	296.0	33,033.6

	6	0	1.48	0	0	325.0	0

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	 	 	 	 	 	 	44,748.5

	TOTAL – AVG. ANNUAL 18 kip EAL	= 44,748.5

	18 kip EAL/day	= 122.6

	20-Year 18 kip EAL	= 894,970.0

	Traffic Coefficient, TC	= 8.9

TABLE IIa – CRUSHED BASE EQUIVALENT ALL ROADS  

	MINIMUM TRAFFIC COEFFICIENT	R=4 MIN. “CBE” REQRMNT	R=8 MIN. “CBE” REQRMNT	R=12 MIN. “CBE” REQRMNT	R=18 MIN. “CBE” REQRMNT	R=22 MIN. “CBE” REQRMNT	R=26 MIN. “CBE” REQRMNT	R=30 MIN. “CBE” REQRMNT

	12.0 – 13.0	42.5″	41.0″	39.0″	36.5″	34.5″	33.0″	31.0″

	11.0 – 12.0	39.0″	37.5″	36.0″	33.5″	32.0″	30.0″	28.5″

	10.0 – 11.0	36.0″	34.5″	33.0″	30.5″	29.0″	27.5″	26.0″

	9.0 – 10.0	32.5″	31.0″	29.5″	27.5″	26.5″	25.0″	24.0″

	8.0 – 9.0	29.0″	27.5″	26.5″	24.5″	23.5″	22.5″	21.0″

	7.0 – 8.0	25.5″	24.5″	23.5″	22.0″	21.0″	20.0″	18.5″

	6.0 – 7.0	22.0″	21.0″	20.0″	19.0″	18.0″	17.0″	16.0″

	4.8 – 6.0	18.5″	17.5″	17.0″	15.5″	15.0″	14.0″	13.5″

	Below 4.8	16.5″	15.5″	15.0″	14.0″	13.5″	12.5″	12.0″

	CBE FACTORS	 

	1.0″ Asphaltic Concrete Wearing Surface or Base	=2.0″ Aggregate Base

	1.0″ Emulsion Treated Wearing Surface or Base	=2.0″ Aggregate Base

	1.0″ Cement Treated Base*	=1.8″ Aggregate Base

	1.0″ Plant Mix Bituminous Base	=1.8″ Aggregate Base

	1.0″ Oil Mat	=1.8″ Aggregate Base

	1.0″ Cement Treated Existing Roadway Material	=1.5″ Aggregate Base

	1.0″ Lime or Cement Treated Subgrade	=1.0″ Aggregate Base

	1.0″ Aggregate Subbase	=0.8″ Aggregate Base

    Above factors apply to materials that comply with Columbia County standard specifications and special provisions.

    Use fabric mat where moisture is present in the subgrade, or use fabric mat plus excavate an additional 12 inches and replace with rock for unusually wet subgrade conditions.

*    Lime treated base is to be considered to have the same aggregate base equivalent as cement treated base (1.8 inch).

(5) Portland Cement Concrete Pavement. The design of Portland cement concrete streets shall be governed by the guidelines and requirements of the Portland Cement Association (PCA) design procedures found in the below-listed publications:

“Concrete Streets: Typical Pavement Sections and Jointing Details.” Portland Cement Association (1S211.01P), Skokie, Illinois: 1980.

“Thickness Design for Concrete Highway and Street Pavements.” Portland Cement Association (EB109.01P), U.S.A.: 1984, p.7.

“Joint Design for Concrete Highway and Street Pavements.” Portland Cement Association (1S059.03P), Skokie, Illinois: 1980.

(a) All field testing shall follow ACI and OSHD procedures.

(b) All other design criteria shall follow ACI and the Oregon Standard Specifications for Construction, including revisions. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 210.3, 2003)


18.12.040 Horizontal alignment.

(1) Alignments shall meet the following requirements:

(a) Centerline alignment of improvements should follow the centerline of the right-of-way. If this is not practical, then the alignment should parallel the centerline of the right-of-way.

(b) Centerline of a proposed street extension shall be aligned with the existing street centerline.

(c) Horizontal curves in alignments shall meet the minimum radius requirements as shown in Table IIb.

(d) Reversing horizontal curves shall be separated by no less than 50 feet of tangent, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. On arterials, the separation shall be no less than 100 feet.

TABLE IIb – CENTERLINE RADIUS – MINIMUMS  

	Minimum Centerline Radii

	Street Classification	Minimum Radius, Ft.

	Arterials	300

	Collectors	200

	All Other Classifications	100

(2) Monumentation. Monuments shall be set in accordance with the standard details. See SHMC 17.140.110 (centerline monumentation).

Centerline monuments shall be set at the PI if it falls within the paved section of roadway. If the PI falls outside of the paved section, then the PC and PT of the curve shall be monumented. On tangent sections where sight between monuments is not possible, a POT shall be set. All intersections shall be monumented including intersections of the project on existing roadways. These monuments shall be set at the intersection of the surveyed right-of-way centerlines. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 210.4, 2003)


18.12.050 Vertical alignment.

Alignments shall meet the following requirements:

(1) Minimum tangent street gradients shall be one-half percent along the crown and curb.

(2) Maximum street gradients shall be six percent for arterials, 10 percent for collectors, and 12 percent for all other streets. Grades in excess of 12 percent may be allowed on local or residential streets for short segments of no greater than 250 feet as approved by the city engineer. In no case shall grades be allowed to exceed the State Fire Marshal’s maximum grade guidelines.

(3) Local streets intersecting with a minor collector or greater functional classification street or streets intended to be posted with a stop sign shall provide a landing averaging five percent or less. Landings are that portion of the street within 20 feet of the projected curb line of the intersecting street at full improvement.

(4) Grade changes of more than one percent shall be accomplished with vertical curves.

(5) At street intersections, the crown of the major (higher classification) street shall continue through the intersection. The roadway section of the minor street will flatten to match the longitudinal grade of the major street at the projected curb line.

(6) Street grades, intersections, and superelevation transitions shall be designed to not allow concentrations of storm water to flow across the travel lanes.

(7) Streets other than arterials shall be constructed with a minimum crown of two percent from the centerline to the flow line, and a maximum crown of three percent, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer.

(8) Offset crowns shall be allowed only with the specific prior approval of the city engineer and must conform to the standard drawing for offset crowns.

(9) Slope easements shall be dedicated or obtained for the purposes of grading outside of the right-of-way.

(10) Streets intersected by streets not constructed to full urban standards shall be designed to match both present and future (as far as practicable) vertical alignments of the intersecting street. The requirements of this title shall be met for both present and future conditions.

(11) Curbs shall be placed as monolithic curb and gutter unless otherwise approved by the city engineer.

When new streets are built adjacent to or crossing drainageways, the following standards shall govern the vertical alignment:

	Functional Classification	Vertical Standard

	Principal routes and arterials	Travel lanes at or above the 100-year flood elevation.

	Major collectors	Travel lanes at or above the 50-year flood elevation but not lower than six inches below the 100-year flood elevation.

	Minor collectors and local streets (residential)	Travel lanes at or above the 25-year flood elevation but not lower than six inches below the 100-year flood elevation.

	Local streets (nonresidential)	Travel lanes at or above the 25-year flood elevation but not lower than six inches below the 50-year flood elevation.

If alternate access is available for properties served by a particular local street, a design could be considered for approval by the city engineer that would set the travel lanes at or above the 10-year flood elevation but not lower than six inches below the 25-year flood event.

Vertical curves shall conform to the values found in Tables IIc and IId.

TABLE IIc – DESIGN CONTROLS FOR CREST VERTICAL CURVES BASED ON STOPPING SIGHT DISTANCE  

	Design Speed	Minimum k

	25	20 – 20

	30	30 – 30

	35	40 – 50

	40	60 – 80

	45	80 – 120

	50	110 – 160

	55	150 – 220

	k =    L = feet

    A    percent	A = Algebraic difference in grades, percent

	 	L = Length of vertical curve, feet.

TABLE IId – DESIGN CONTROLS FOR SAG VERTICAL CURVES BASED ON STOPPING SIGHT DISTANCE  

	Design Speed	Minimum k

	25	30 – 30

	30	40 – 40

	35	50 – 50

	40	60 – 70

	45	70 – 90

	50	90 – 110

	55	100 – 130

	k =    L = feet

    A    percent	A = Algebraic difference in grades, percent

	 	L = Length of vertical curve, feet.

(Ord. 2875 Appx. § 210.5, 2003)


18.12.060 Intersection sight distance policy.

It is the policy of the city of St. Helens to have the engineer evaluate safe intersection sight distance using the principles and methods recommended by AASHTO. The following minimum standards shall apply:

(1) Intersection (and Driveway) Sight Distance. The following table is for intersection and driveway sight distances:

TABLE IIe – CORNER SIGHT DISTANCE  

	Design Speed (MPH)	Minimum Corner Sight Distance (Feet)

	20	210

	30	310

	40	415

	50	515

	60	650

For purposes of this calculation, the driver’s eye is assumed to be 15 feet from the near edge of the nearest lane of the intersecting street, and at a height of three and one-half feet above the approach street pavement. The top of the vehicle on the intersecting street is assumed to be four and one-fourth feet above the cross-street pavement. There shall be nothing to block observation of objects between six inches and four and one-fourth feet above grade in both directions. The only exceptions should be for luminaire or utility poles, conforming traffic control devices, and fire hydrants. Cumulative effects must be considered by the engineer, and all efforts taken to minimize sight obstructions.

In some locations, maintenance of the required sight distance may require restrictions to potential development outside the public right-of-way. If so, the project engineer shall demonstrate that adequate restrictions are in place (and enforceable by the city) to ensure that the required sight distance can be maintained in the future.

Modifications or exceptions to these standards shall be approved by the city engineer. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 210.6, 2003)


18.12.070 Angles between intersecting streets.

The following specifies the minimum requirements for intersections:

(1) The interior angle at intersecting streets shall be kept as near to 90 degrees as possible and in no case shall it be less than 60 degrees. A tangent section shall be carried a minimum of 25 feet each side of intersecting right-of-way lines.

(2) Intersections which are not at right angles shall have a minimum corner radius of 20 feet along the right-of-way lines of the acute angle. The right-of-way radii at intersections shall be sufficient to maintain at least the same right-of-way to curb spacing as the lower classified street.

(3) Minimum radius at the curb line for any intersection shall be 20 feet. Larger curb line radii may be required when intersecting a higher classified street.

(4) Sidewalk access ramps shall be provided at all corners of all intersections, regardless of curb type, and shall conform to the standard drawings. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 210.7, 2003)


18.12.080 Cul-de-sacs, eyebrows, turnarounds.

The following specifies the minimum requirements for cul-de-sacs, eyebrows, and turnaround areas. Other turnaround geometrics may be used when conditions warrant and city engineer approves the design and application of its use.

(1) Cul-de-sacs, eyebrows, and turnaround areas shall be allowed only on local streets and commercial/industrial streets.

(2) Cul-de-sacs shall not be more than 400 feet in length, except as approved by the fire marshal. The length of a cul-de-sac shall be measured along the centerline of the roadway from the near side right-of-way of the nearest through traffic intersecting street to the farthest point of the cul-de-sac right-of-way. 

(3) Minimum radius for cul-de-sac and turnaround right-of-way in residential zones is 42 feet. Minimum roadway radius is 35 feet.

(4) Minimum radius for cul-de-sac and turnaround right-of-way in commercial and industrial zones is 50 feet. Minimum roadway radius is 42 feet.

(5) The minimum curb radius for transitions into cul-de-sac bulbs shall be 20 feet, and the right-of-way radius shall be sufficient to maintain the same right-of-way to curb spacing as in the adjacent portion of the road.

(6) An eyebrow corner may be used on a local street where expected ADT will not exceed 500 vehicles per day or as otherwise approved by the city engineer. Minimum curb radius on the outside of an eyebrow corner is 36 feet; minimum right-of-way radius is 45 feet. Eyebrow geometry shall be evaluated on the basis of turning requirements for fire department vehicles. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 210.8, 2003)


18.12.090 Driveway approaches.

The city engineer has the authority to limit access and access locations. Access to streets and highways under Columbia County or state of Oregon jurisdiction must be formally approved by those entities at the applicant’s initiative and expense.

The following specifies the minimum requirements for driveways:

(1) Driveways shall not be permitted on streets with existing or proposed nonaccess reserve strips.

(2) Driveways shall be located a minimum of 25 feet from any intersection, measured from the flow line of the intersecting street when fully improved to the nearest side of the driveway. 

(3) Driveway width shall be a minimum of 12 feet and a maximum of 18 feet. Wider driveways may be allowed under special circumstances if approved by the city engineer.

(4) The spacing requirements shall conform to the requirements of the city of St. Helens Development Code.

(5) Concentrated surface runoff shall not be allowed to flow over any driveway or sidewalk into the street.

(6) Driveways shall meet the minimum intersection sight distance requirements.

(7) Water meter boxes shall not be located in a driveway or the driveway wing. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 210.9, 2003)


18.12.100 Curbs and grading.

When new curbing is being placed, a stamp or tag shall be placed to mark where each water and sanitary sewer service crosses the curb line. An imprinting stamp shall be used and the impression left for a water service shall be the letter “W”; for a sanitary service, it shall be the letter “S.” These impressions shall be two inches high, placed on the top of the curb.

(1) The following specifies the requirements for curbs and cross-slope grading for streets:

(a) All streets shall include monolithic curb and gutters on both sides. 

(b) Mountable curb and gutter shall be used only in cul-de-sacs with a radius less than 45 feet.

(c) Cross-slope of the street section shall be no less than two percent and no greater than five percent. 

(2) Grading outside the improved areas shall be as follows:

(a) Minor collectors or higher functional classifications shall have a maximum two percent upward grading to the right-of-way line, and no steeper than one and one-half to one up, or two to one down, outside the right-of-way.

(b) Local street and commercial/industrial functional classifications shall have a maximum two percent upward grading to the right-of-way line, a four to one upward or downward grading within the public utility easement, and no steeper than one and one-half to one up, or two to one down outside the public utility easement.

(c) Retaining walls shall be used if slopes are greater than the one and one-half to one requirement in subsections (2)(a) and (b) of this section or where slope stability is a problem. If slopes are to be maintained (mowed) by the city, a maximum of four to one slope will be required. Retaining walls shall be constructed to a height where the slope is no more than one and one-half to one. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 210.10, 2003)


18.12.110 Sidewalks and clustered mailboxes.

(1) The location of neighborhood mailboxes, or clustered mailboxes, must be determined before installation of the sidewalk. Where clustered mailboxes or other objects larger than single mailboxes are within a sidewalk, the walk shall be widened to provide clearance equal to the required sidewalk width in accordance with the standard details.

(2) In no case shall the sidewalk clear space be smaller than 36 inches. 

(3) Ramps, landings, changes in level, and protruding objects along the accessible route to the clustered mailbox shall comply with the applicable ANSI standards.

(4) Edge protection along an accessible route to the clustered mailbox shall be in accordance with the applicable ANSI standards. 

(5) At least one turning space shall be provided at the front of each clustered mailbox unit. The turning space shall conform to the applicable ANSI standards and shall either be:

(a) A circular space having a 72-inch (1,829 mm) minimum diameter; or

(b) A T-shaped space within a 72-inch (1,829 mm) minimum square, with arms and base 48 inches minimum (1,219 mm) in width. Each arm of the T shall be clear of obstructions 24 inches (610 mm) minimum in each direction, and the base shall be clear of obstructions 36 inches (914 mm) minimum.

(6) The sidewalk clear space and turning space may overlap. (Ord. 3164 § 3 (Att. B), 2012; Ord. 2875 Appx. § 210.11, 2003)


18.12.120 Guardrails.

(1) The decision of whether to install a guardrail or not shall be based on information found in AASHTO publication, “Guide for Selecting, Locating, and Designing Traffic Barriers.”

(2) Guardrails shall be designed and constructed per ODOT’s “Standard Drawings for Design and Construction.” (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 210.12, 2003)


18.12.130 Transitions.

(1) Street width transitions from a narrower width to a wider width shall be designed with a 10 to one taper. 

(2) For street width transitions from a wider width to a narrower width, the length of transition taper shall be designed with a 30 to one taper.

(3) Delineators, as approved by the city engineer, may be installed to define the configuration. Maximum spacing of delineators shall be the numerical value of the design speed, in feet (i.e., 35-foot spacing for 35 mph).

(4) In situations where a tapered transition cannot be provided, a barricade shall be installed at the end of the wider section of the street and a taper shall be appointed and delineated as approved by the city engineer. The barricade shall conform to the standard drawings. If the wider section does not provide an additional travel lane, only a barricade is required without the transition. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 210.13, 2003)


18.12.140 Superelevation cross-sections.

(1) Offset crown cross-sections are not acceptable as superelevation sections.

(2) Superelevation sections shall be designed using AASHTO guidelines.

(3) Superelevation transitions shall be designed to not allow concentrations of storm water to flow over the travel lanes. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 210.14, 2003)


18.12.150 Stub streets.

Stub streets that are to allow for future extensions shall be barricaded and signed as per the standard drawings. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 210.15, 2003)


18.12.160 Private streets, parking lots, and common driveways.

Streets, parking lots, and driveways on private property shall meet the requirements of the Development Code. The engineer shall provide a pavement section design which provides a minimum loading capacity of 12,500 pounds per tire (considered to be one-half square feet). This design must meet or exceed the following minimum standards:

Areas used for required parking or maneuvering of vehicles shall have a durable, hard surface. In all residential areas, a minimum of two and one-half inches asphalt over four inches of aggregate base will be provided or four inches of Portland cement concrete over two inches of aggregate base. In commercial and industrial areas, either three inches of asphalt over four inches of aggregate base or five inches of Portland cement concrete over two inches of aggregate base is required. The parking surface shall be placed on a well-compacted subgrade. All required parking spaces shall be striped. 

The elevation for short-term parking will be no lower than one foot below the 10-year floodplain. The elevation for long-term parking will be no lower than the 100-year floodplain. Long-term parking is defined as an unoccupied vehicle being left in one location for a period of greater than 12 hours.

Private streets serving residential areas shall be designed with travel lanes at or above the 25-year flood elevation but not lower than six inches below the 100-year flood elevation.

Access drives in excess of 150 feet in length shall be provided with approved provisions for the turning around of fire apparatus. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 210.16, 2003)


18.12.170 Utilities.

Utilities shall be located outside of the paved area of the street if at all possible to avoid future street cuts. On all phased street improvements, the necessary utilities shall be stubbed across the interim improvement to ensure that cuts are not necessary when the road is expanded to its full width.

Except for sanitary sewer, storm sewer, and water, underground utilities intended to provide direct service to adjacent properties with future connections shall not be located in the full-width paved section of a street to be constructed. If all service connections are existing and extend beyond the full-width section of a partially improved street, underground utilities can be located in the future paved section of the street, if approved by the city engineer.

Underground utilities being constructed along existing paved streets shall not be located under the existing pavement unless approved by the city engineer. 

Utilities other than public water, public sanitary sewer, and public storm drain, shall be buried in a designated public utility easement.

Underground utilities within the public right-of-way shall be buried a minimum depth of 30 inches as measured from finished grade to top of utility.

When new curbing is being placed, a stamp shall be placed to mark where each water and sanitary sewer service crosses the curb line. The impression left for a water service shall be the letter “W”; for a sanitary sewer service, it shall be the letter “S.” These impressions shall be two inches high, placed on the top of the curb.

Street cuts must have the final pavement repair (matching existing material type) completed within 30 days from the date the pavement is cut unless an extension is approved by the city engineer. The use of “cold patch” and steel plates will be allowed for up to the first 30 days after the pavement is cut, provided a daily inspection by the applicant is made and any necessary repairs are made on a timely basis. If the temporary patch is not monitored and maintained, the city engineer may shorten the 30-day time limit. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 210.17, 2003)


18.12.190 Temporary parklets – In on-street parking spaces.

The following are procedures for establishing a temporary parklet in an on-street parking space in the city. Applications are received and processed by city administration. The city administrator, or his or her designee, issues a temporary parklet application permit upon review and approval by the city public works, engineering, planning and building departments. The city administrator, or his or her designee, may revoke an approved temporary parklet permit if it is being conducted contrary to this section or any condition of the temporary parklet permit approval, or if the temporary parklet and associated use or activities are otherwise found to be contrary to public health, safety and welfare. The temporary parklet application steps and regulations are as follows:

(1) The maximum duration for a temporary parklet permit is six months; permits can be renewed subject to city approval. The maximum renewal duration is six months per renewal. If a temporary parklet permit becomes void due to revocation, expiration or otherwise, the related improvement shall be immediately removed and the location restored to its original condition.

(2) The applicant selects a location according to location criteria.

(a) Temporary parklets shall only be allowed along nonresidential uses. Temporary parklets along and/or associated with residential uses are prohibited.

(b) Temporary parklets are not permitted on streets where parking lanes become tow-away zones during morning or afternoon hours, in front of fire hydrants, in active bus zones, across driveways, or over manholes or public utility valves or covers.

(c) The proposed site should be located at least one standard-size parking space in from a corner. Otherwise, a protected bollard, curb extension, or other similar feature as approved by the city must be present if located at the corner.

(d) The proposed site should be located on a street with a speed limit of 25 MPH or less. Locations on streets with higher speeds will be considered on a case-by-case basis.

(e) The location of the proposed site shall be generally consistent with potential locations and guidance provided in the St. Helens US 30 and Columbia Boulevard/St. Helens Street corridor master plan.

(f) The street grade shall be less than five percent.

(3) The applicant develops a preliminary conceptual design, using the general design guidelines, design criteria, and design elements below.

(a) General Design Guidelines.

(i) Design for Easy Removal. Because the temporary parklet sits on top of critical infrastructure and utilities, it needs to be designed for easy removal in case of emergency or other needed access to the infrastructure. Some applicants elect to remove the temporary parklet during colder months.

(ii) No Advertising. Logos, advertising, or other branding is prohibited.

(iii) Be Creative. There are possibilities beyond the standard tables and chairs on a platform.

(b) Design Criteria.

(i) Design Quality. What is the level of quality and creativity of the design?

(ii) Public Seating. Does the proposal provide open public use of the space and is not just an extension of a business?

(iii) Streetscape Enhancement. How will the proposal enhance the aesthetic quality of the streetscape?

(iv) Quality of Materials. What is the quality and durability of proposed materials and furniture?

(v) Appropriateness of Location. Is the proposed temporary parklet likely to be well-used and active?

(vi) Community Support. Is there demonstrated neighborhood support for proposal at the proposed location (including neighboring businesses and properties)?

(c) Design Elements.

(i) Platform should be on the same plane as and flush with the sidewalk height. At least 12 feet of the platform must be flush with the adjacent sidewalk for wheelchair access.

(ii) Platform must be designed to accommodate the crown and cross slope of the street surface. Close attention must be paid to existing curb condition and height to ensure platform is flush with curb.

(iii) The use of high quality, durable materials capable of withstanding the elements of any season and extended use (with proper permit renewals) is required.

(iv) The design should not include any bolts/anchors or other elements that require disturbing the street surface or sidewalk. No temporary parklet component may weigh more than 200 pounds per square foot.

(v) The platform may not extend beyond six feet from the curb line where there is parallel parking to allow some separation from vehicle travel lanes. Angled or perpendicular parking locations and associated dimensions may be approved on a case-by-case basis, but still must allow some separation from vehicle travel lanes.

(vi) The maximum length of the platform must not be longer than the frontage of the applicant’s/permit holder’s establishment. A platform may be located along the frontage of multiple properties/businesses provided all applicable parties are applicants/permit holders.

(vii) Design must maintain a minimum six-foot clear pedestrian through zone in the sidewalk corridor.

(viii) Platform must be designed to allow for curbline stormwater drainage.

(ix) Platform design must include a physical barrier along the street while maintaining clear visual sightlines to the street. Vertical elements, such as planters and umbrellas, should be included so that the facility is visible to vehicles.

(x) A setback on either end of the platform, adjacent to parallel parking, will need to be reserved for wheel stops with embedded reflective candlesticks or other similar features that reflect light and protect the platform from parking maneuvers. These may be installed by the public works department as deemed necessary after facility construction is complete. Additional features may be added to the final design by city staff for safety.

(xi) Temporary parklet furniture shall be subject to city approval. Furniture must be able to accommodate those with disabilities, wheelchairs, or mobility devices.

(xii) Proposed covers or shelters may be subject to additional structural engineering requirements.

(xiii) Loose surface materials, such as sand or loose stone, are not permitted in the temporary parklet.

(xiv) Public temporary parklets must be clearly posted with signs to differentiate them from private business temporary parklets and restaurant/cafe seating. Such signage shall not conflict with the city sign regulations.

(4) The applicant begins gathering and documenting community support (meetings, letters, petitions, site posting, etc.) to be submitted as part of the application package.

(5) The applicant prepares a detailed design document and plan package. It is recommended to contract or consult with professional design assistance.

(a) Parklet location and context plan;

(b) Detailed site plan;

(c) Elevations;

(d) Sections (profile drawings);

(e) Renderings and perspectives (optional).

(6) An application package consists of the following:

(a) A completed right-of-way encroachment permit application form;

(b) Design document and plan package;

(c) Community support documentation. The applicant shall provide written support of the proposed temporary parklet from adjacent businesses and/or property owners.

(7) The applicant completes the application package and submits for review by the city.

(8) Business and property owners within the immediate vicinity of the proposed temporary parklet will be notified and will have the opportunity to submit comments within 14 days to be included in the evaluation of an application.

(9) If the application is approved, the applicant will finalize and submit construction drawings.

(10) The city will schedule a preconstruction site visit.

(11) The applicant submits payment and provides proof of liability insurance, and the public works department issues a right-of-way encroachment permit, which includes conditions for maintenance.

(a) Fees. The applicable fees, as set by resolution of the city council, may include but not be limited to addressing the following components:

(i) Application/encroachment permit fee.

(ii) Cafe seating permit fee, if applicable.

(iii) Additional costs (e.g., changing/removing loading zone sign), if applicable.

(b) Insurance. Evidence of at least $1,000,000 in liability insurance naming the city as additional insured must be provided. Most businesses already carry this insurance.

(c) Encroachment Permit and Maintenance Terms. The permit requires that the facility is swept daily and debris is removed from under and around the platform a minimum of once a week.

(12) The applicant must install the temporary parklet within 90 days of permit issuance. Failure to do so voids any temporary parklet permit approval.

(13) The applicant must notify the city within 48 hours of completing construction to schedule a post-construction site inspection.

(14) Post-construction, the city will monitor the temporary parklet for compliance with the permit, design guidelines, and maintenance agreement as applicable. (Ord. 3181 § 4 (Att. C), 2015)


Chapter 18.16 STORM DRAINAGE

Sections:

Article I. General

18.16.005    General.

18.16.010    Scheduling.

18.16.020    Preservation, restoration, and cleanup.

18.16.030    Interferences and obstructions.

18.16.040    Permanent survey monuments.

Article II. Trench Excavation and Backfill

18.16.050    Trench excavation and backfill.

Article III. Pavement Restoration

18.16.060    Pavement restoration.

Article IV. Drainage Report

18.16.070    Drainage report.

Article V. Drainage Plans

18.16.080    Drainage plans.

Article VI. Water Quantity Standards

18.16.090    General.

18.16.100    Hydrologic analysis.

18.16.110    Water quantity facility design.

Article VII. Water Quality

18.16.120    General concepts and principles.

18.16.130    Dual-use facilities.

18.16.140    Pollution reduction facilities.

Article VIII. Engineering

18.16.145    Generally.

18.16.150    Extension of public storm sewer systems.

18.16.160    Surveying.

18.16.170    Railroad crossings.

18.16.180    Hydrologic analysis.

18.16.190    Hydraulic analysis.

18.16.200    Storm manhole and pipe design standards.

18.16.210    Inlet design standards.

18.16.220    Constructed channel design standards.

18.16.230    Culvert design standards.

18.16.240    Outfall design standards.

Article IX. Technical Specifications

18.16.245    Generally.

18.16.250    Manholes and structures.

18.16.260    Catch basins and inlets.

18.16.270    Pipe and fittings.

18.16.280    Testing and acceptance.

Article I. General


18.16.005 General.

The city of St. Helens Municipal Code, and the Development Code (SHMC Title 17, Ordinance 2875), have established the requirements for the design of facilities intended to protect the public health, safety, and welfare from damage due to flooding. Beyond that level of protection, additional measures are specified in this chapter that are intended to minimize any potential flooding damage and allow for efficient operation, repair, and maintenance of the storm drainage system.

Provisions must be made for gravity drainage of roofs and foundation (footing) drains for all new buildings and structures in accordance with the Uniform Building Code (UBC) and Council of American Building Officials (CABO). For multifamily, residential, commercial, or industrial developments, these drains shall be piped directly to the storm drain system. In single-family residential developments, these drains shall be piped to the street gutter or directly to the public storm drain system. The connection to the street gutter must be through a three-inch plastic pipe set in the curb during construction or bored through an existing curb (see standard drawings). In single-family residential developments where topography prevents connecting foundation and roof drains as required above, drains for each lot shall be directly piped to the public storm drain system; pipe and easement requirements shall conform to SHMC 18.08.150.

These requirements shall apply to all storm drainage facilities in existing and proposed public right-of-way, public drainage easements, and tracts of common ownership in the city. Storm drainage systems include, but are not limited to: inlets, pipes, ditches, creeks, rivers, wetlands, and storm water quality and quantity facilities. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 310, 2003)


18.16.010 Scheduling.

As specified in SHMC 18.24.010. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 310.1, 2003)


18.16.020 Preservation, restoration, and cleanup.

As specified in SHMC 18.24.020. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 310.2, 2003)


18.16.030 Interferences and obstructions.

As specified in SHMC 18.24.030. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 310.3, 2003)


18.16.040 Permanent survey monuments.

As specified in SHMC 18.24.040. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 310.4, 2003)

Article II. Trench Excavation and Backfill


18.16.050 Trench excavation and backfill.

As specified in Chapter 18.24 SHMC, Article II. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 320, 2003)

Article III. Pavement Restoration


18.16.060 Pavement restoration.

As specified in Chapter 18.24 SHMC, Article III. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 330, 2003)

Article IV. Drainage Report


18.16.070 Drainage report.

The drainage report shall be prepared by and bear the seal and original signature of a professional engineer registered in the state of Oregon and shall contain the following information:

(1) Project name, developer’s name, address, and telephone number, project engineer, and date.

(2) Vicinity map.

(3) Project description: size and location of project, address or tax lot number, zoning, proposed land use, proposed site improvements, and any special circumstances.

(4) Existing conditions: hydrological conditions, topography, land use, off-site drainage to property, natural and constructed channels, sensitive areas, wetlands, creeks, ravines, gullies, steep slopes exceeding 20 percent, springs or other environmentally sensitive areas on or adjacent to the project site.

(5) General soils conditions present within the site, using SCS soil classifications.

(6) Points of discharge for existing drainage from the project site.

(7) References to relevant reports such as flood studies, ground water studies, wetland designation, storm water master plans, sensitive area designation, environmental impact statements, water quality reports, or other relevant documents. Where such reports impose additional conditions on the proponent, those conditions shall be included in the report.

(8) Soils report(s), where applicable.

(9) Hydrologic analysis.

(10) Basin maps, showing boundaries of the project, any off-site contributing drainage basins, on-site drainage basins, and approximate locations of all major drainage structures within the basin(s).

(11) Describe the drainage basin(s) to which the project site contributes runoff, and identify the receiving waters for each of these drainage basins.

(12) Describe the land cover resulting from the proposed project; describe the potential storm water quantity and quality impacts resulting from the proposed project; describe the proposal for the collection and conveyance of site runoff from the project site, for the control of any increase in storm water quantity resulting from the project, and for the control of storm water quality.

(13) Description of upstream basins, identifying any sources of runoff to the project site. This should be based on field investigation. Any existing drainage or erosion issues upstream that may have an impact on the proposed development should be noted.

(14) Downstream analysis.

(15) Hydraulic design computations, supporting the design of the proposed storm water conveyance, quantity and quality control facilities, and verifying the capacity of existing and proposed drainage facilities. These computations may include capacity analysis required either as part of the proposed drainage design or as part of the downstream drainage investigation, and flood routing computations required for the design of detention/retention storage facilities, for wetland impact analysis, or for floodplain analysis. Maintenance and operation manual: required for privately owned and maintained storm water quantity and quality control facilities. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 340, 2003)

Article V. Drainage Plans


18.16.080 Drainage plans.

It is the responsibility of the design engineer to ensure that engineering plans are sufficiently clear and concise to construct the project in proper sequence, using specified methods and materials, with sufficient dimensions to fulfill the intent of the design guidelines contained in this title.

All engineered drainage plans shall be stamped and signed by a professional engineer registered in the state of Oregon. The drainage plan can be submitted as part of the construction drawings and shall contain the following:

(1) At least one sheet will contain a plan view of the entire project site. In the event the project site is sufficiently large that detailed drainage plans on any given sheet do not encompass the entire project site, then a sheet containing the plan view of the entire site must serve as an index to subsequent detailed plan sheets.

(2) Plans shall include a topographic map showing existing conditions for the site, including:

(a) Existing topography for the site.

(b) Adjacent streets, including street names.

(c) Existing utilities, including franchised utilities located above or below ground and drainage facilities that transport surface water onto, across, or from the project site. Existing drainage pipes, culverts, and channels shall include the invert or flow line elevations.

(d) Existing environmentally sensitive areas (e.g., ravines, swales, steep slopes in excess of 20 percent, springs, wetlands, creeks, lakes, etc.). For natural drainage features, show direction of flow, drainage hazard areas, and 100-year floodplain boundary (if applicable).

(3) Plans for proposed drainage improvements shall include the following:

(a) Finished grades. Show the extent of cut and fill by existing and proposed contours, profiles, or other designations.

(b) Proposed structures including roads and road improvements, parking surfaces, walkways, landscape areas, etc.

(c) Proposed utilities, showing exact line and grade of all proposed utilities at crossing with the proposed drainage system.

(d) Setbacks from environmentally sensitive areas.

(e) Proposed drainage structures, including pipes, open channels, culverts, ponds, vaults, biofiltration swales, detention/retention facilities, outfalls, riprap treatment, energy dissipaters, etc.

(f) Plan and profile of drainage conveyance facilities will include the following information: pipe sizes, pipe types and materials, lengths, slopes, location and type of structures, invert elevations in and out of structures, and top elevations of structures.

(g) Indicate any proposed phasing of construction.

(4) A detailed grading plan will be provided for all open storm water quantity and/or quality control facilities. This plan shall include the following:

(a) Existing ground contours and proposed ground contours at a minimum of a two-foot contour interval. Slopes steeper than six horizontal to one vertical shall be identified.

(b) Location of top and toe of slope.

(c) Limits of embankment designed to impound water.

(d) Location of all drainage structures as well as any other piped utilities in vicinity.

(e) Flow route of the secondary/emergency overflow system.

(f) Maintenance access, as applicable.

(5) Cross-sections shall be provided for at least the following:

(a) Detention/retention ponds, wet ponds, and sediment ponds. This cross-section shall graphically illustrate:

(i) The design maximum water surface for the 10-year and 25-year storm.

(ii) The proposed dead storage water surface.

(b) Proposed ditches and swales, including vegetated swales and privately maintained drainage or cut-off ditches. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 350, 2003)

Article VI. Water Quantity Standards


18.16.090 General.

All development on sites within the McNulty Creek Drainage Basin that are one-half acre or greater in area shall be required to provide on-site detention. For sites smaller than one-half acre in area or where storm detention would have an adverse effect upon the receiving storm drainage system, as determined by the city engineer, a system development charge will be assessed in lieu of a constructed facility. Detention for sites within the Milton Creek Drainage Basin or other basins shall be provided when proposed development will cause increased flows that could overwhelm downstream facilities in a large storm event. A complete drainage report is required for all proposed developments greater than one-half acre in area addressing the existing and proposed conditions and any detention requirements.

Storm detention facilities shall be designed to provide storage using a 25-year event, with the safe overflow conveyance of the 100-year storm. Calculations of site discharge for both the existing and proposed conditions shall be required. Approved software programs for calculating storm conditions include the King County Hydrograph (HYD), Hec-1, Hydraflow, SWMM, or other approved software. 

If a site is proposed to be constructed in phases, the first phase shall have a storm water quantity facility designed and built to accommodate the ultimate development of the site if only one facility is planned for all phases. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 360.1, 2003)


18.16.100 Hydrologic analysis.

This section presents acceptable methodology for estimating the quantity and characteristics of surface water runoff, as well as the assumptions and data required as input to the methods. These methods should be used to analyze existing and design proposed drainage systems and related facilities.

(1) Rational Method. The rational method for analyzing small drainage basins is allowed with the following limitations:

(a) Only for use in predicting a conservative peak flow rate to be used in determining the required capacity for conveyance elements.

(b) Drainage subbasin area cannot exceed 25 acres for a single calculation.

(c) The time of concentration shall be five minutes when computed to be less than five minutes.

(d) Rainfall intensities shall be from the Oregon Department of Transportation Rainfall Intensity-Duration-Frequency Curves, Zone 8.

(2) Unit Hydrograph Methods. To obtain a realistic and consistent hydrologic analysis for each development site, the hydrograph analysis method for drainage planning and design shall be used. The physical characteristics of the site and the design storm shall be used to determine the magnitude, volume and duration of the runoff hydrograph. The Santa Barbara Urban Hydrograph (SBUH) will be the primary acceptable unit hydrograph method. 

The “HYD” computer program, developed by King County, Washington, in its “Surface Water Design Manual,” January 1990, uses these methods to generate, add and route hydrographs. 

(3) Runoff Parameters.

(a) The physical drainage basin characteristics listed below shall be used to develop the runoff hydrograph:

(i) Area.

(ii) Curve number.

(iii) Time of concentration.

(b) Selection of Area. To obtain the highest degree of accuracy in hydrograph analysis requires the proper selection of homogenous basin areas. Significant differences in land use within a given basin must be addressed by dividing the basin area into subbasin areas of similar land use and/or runoff characteristics. Hydrographs should be computed for each subbasin area and superimposed to form the total runoff hydrograph for the basin.

(c) Selection of Curve Number. The National Resource Conservation Service (NRCS, formerly referred to as the Soil Conservation Service (SCS)) has developed “curve number” (CN) values based on soil type and land use. The combination of these two factors is called the “soil-cover complex.”

The soil-cover complexes have been assigned to one of the four hydrologic soil groups, according to their runoff characteristics. The following are important criteria and considerations for selection of CN values:

(i) Many factors may affect the CN value for a given land use. For example, the movement of heavy equipment over bare ground may compact the soil so that it has a lower infiltration rate and greater runoff potential.

(ii) CN values can be area-weighted when they apply to pervious areas of similar CN (within 20 CN points). However, high CN areas should not be combined with low CN areas (unless the low CN areas are less than 15 percent of the subbasin).

(d) Time of Concentration. Time of concentration (Tc) is the time for runoff to travel from the hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point where the hydrograph is to be calculated. Travel time (Tt) is the time it takes water to travel from one location to another in a watershed. Tt is a component of Tc. Tc is computed by summing all the travel times for consecutive components of the drainage conveyance system. Tc influences the shape and peak of the runoff hydrograph.

(i) Sheet Flow. “Sheet flow” is flow over plane surfaces. It usually occurs in the headwater of streams. For sheet flow up to 300 feet, the kinematics solution below can be used to directly compute Tt:

	Tt = 	(0.93L0.6 x n0.3)

	 	(I0.4 x S0.3)

Where:

Tt = travel time (min)

n = Manning’s effective roughness coefficient for sheet flow

L = flow length (ft)

I = rainfall intensity in inches per hour

S = slope of hydraulic grade line (ft/ft)

Sheet flow shall not be used for distances exceeding 300 feet.

(ii) Shallow Concentrated Flow. After a maximum of 300 feet, sheet flow usually becomes shallow concentrated flow. The average velocity for this flow can be determined from Figure 3.1 (see the standard details), in which average velocity is a function of watercourse slope and type of channel. Figure 3.1 was taken from the 1972 “Soil Conservation Service Handbook.”

(iii) Channel Flow. When concentrated flow reaches an identifiable conveyance system (pipe, ditch, stream, etc.) it becomes channel flow. A commonly used method of computing average velocity of flow, once it has measurable depth, is the following equation:

V = (1.486/n) x R2/3 x S0.5

Where:

V = velocity (ft/s)

n = Manning’s roughness coefficient

S = slope of flow path (ft/ft)

R = Hydraulic radius, area/wetted perimeter.

(Ord. 2875 Appx. § 360.2, 2003)


18.16.110 Water quantity facility design.

(1) Mitigation Requirement for Quantity. Each new development is responsible for mitigating its impacts on the public storm water system. One of the following techniques may be used to satisfy this mitigation requirement:

(a) Construction of permanent on-site storm water quantity detention facilities; or

(b) Enlargement or improvement of the downstream conveyance system.

(2) Criteria for Requiring On-Site Detention. Some criteria for requiring on-site detention facilities include, but are not limited to: 

(a) There is an identified downstream deficiency, and detention rather than conveyance system enlargement is determined to be the more effective solution.

(b) There is an identified regional detention site within the boundary of the development.

(c) There is a site within the boundary of the development, which would qualify as a regional detention site under criteria or capital plan adopted by the city.

(d) Water quantity facilities are required by city-adopted storm water management master plans.

(3) Hydraulic Design.

(a) Detention design shall be assessed by dynamic flow routing through the basin. Documentation of the proposed design shall be included in the drainage report. Acceptable analysis programs include:

(i) HYD.

(ii) HEC-1.

(iii) HEC-HMS.

(iv) SWMM.

(v) HYDRA.

(vi) Others as approved.

(b) Peak release rates shall not exceed predevelopment rates for the 10-year, 24-hour storm.

(c) A pond overflow system shall provide for discharge of the 100-year storm event without overtopping the pond embankment or exceeding the capacity of the emergency spillway.

(d) Provide an emergency spillway sized to pass the 100-year storm event. Emergency spillway to be located in existing soils when feasible and armored with riprap or other approved erosion protection extending to the toe of the embankment.

(4) Design Criteria. The following are minimum requirements for detention facility design. For more complete guidelines to design criteria, refer to the King County, Washington, “Surface Water Design Manual.”

(a) The facility can be a combined water quality and quantity facility provided it meets all relevant criteria.

(b) Maximum interior side slopes up to the maximum water surface shall be three horizontal to one vertical.

(c) If interior slopes need to be mowed, maximum side slope shall be four horizontal to one vertical.

(d) Maximum exterior side slopes shall be two horizontal to one vertical, unless analyzed for stability by a geotechnical engineer.

(e) Retaining walls may serve as pond walls if the design is prepared and stamped by a registered professional engineer and a fence is provided along the top of the wall. At least 25 percent of the pond perimeter will be vegetated.

(f) Overexcavate to allow one-half foot of dead storage for sediment deposition.

(g) Minimum freeboard shall be one foot from the 25-year design water surface elevation.

(h) Provide an approved outlet structure for all flows. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 360.3, 2003)

Article VII. Water Quality


18.16.120 General concepts and principles.

As an area is developed, impervious area and surface runoff increase. This runoff collects and transports pollutants to downstream receiving waters. Pollutants of concern include:

(1) Suspended solids (sediment).

(2) Heavy metals such as lead, copper, zinc, and cadmium.

(3) Nutrients such as nitrogen and phosphorus.

(4) Bacteria and viruses.

(5) Organics such as oil, grease, hydrocarbons, and pesticides.

Pollution reduction facilities can greatly improve the quality of runoff collected and released to our waterways. Several water quality facility concepts are described further in this article. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 370.1, 2003)


18.16.130 Dual-use facilities.

Many facilities may be designed and used as dual-use facilities, which are used to meet both pollution reduction and flow control requirements. Common examples are a pond for flow control with a swale at the bottom for pollution reduction, or a wet pond with additional capacity for flow control. Dual-use facilities are encouraged. The design standard for such facilities is that the dual-use facility must meet the design standards for both pollution reduction and flow control. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 370.2, 2003)


18.16.140 Pollution reduction facilities.

(1) Constructed Wetlands. Constructed wetlands, like natural wetlands, remove pollutants through sedimentation, filtration, and biologic processes. Wetlands typically have shallower water depths than ponds. Wetlands also provide plant and animal habitat. 

(a) General Requirements. The detention time of the storm water volume shall be no less than 36 hours. A design team comprising a hydrologist, wetlands specialist, wetlands plant specialist, and an engineer may be needed to develop a successful wetland pollution reduction facility. A water balance analysis should be performed with the design of the facility.

The configuration of a constructed wetland shall be tailored to each site, rather than limited to one design. Major elements of a wetland can include channels or trenches, shallow marshes, and deeper ponded areas. These elements shall be combined to take advantage of the site topography. All wetland design shall address habitat, planting, and aesthetic issues.

General design requirements include, but are not limited to:

(i) Soils requirement: C, D (A and B with liners).

(ii) Maximum maintained side slopes: four horizontal to one vertical.

(iii) Where wetland vegetation is to be planted, side slopes shall be no steeper than five horizontal to one vertical. Wetland plant selection shall be consistent with anticipated soil hydrology. Other side slopes shall be no steeper than four horizontal to one vertical.

(iv) Flow velocity through the wetland shall average less than 0.01 feet per second for the design storm event. If natural slope does not allow for this velocity, berms shall be used to create ponded benches.

(v) Flow through the wetland shall be distributed as uniformly as possible across the marsh and ponded section.

(2) Storm Water Filters. Storm water filters include grassy swales and sand filters. Filters work by settling and straining water, which allows the capture of sediments and the pollutants that adhere to them. Swales also remove pollutants through nutrient uptake and soil absorption.

(a) Grassy Swales. Grassy swales are vegetated open channels that trap pollutants through filtration. General design requirements include, but are not limited to:

(i) Shall serve an area less than 10 acres in size.

(ii) Maximum maintained side slopes shall be four horizontal to one vertical.

(iii) The swale cross-section and grade shall be designed to convey the required storm event at:

(A) Maximum design depth of 0.33 feet, unless swale is part of dual-use facility.

(B) Maximum design velocity of 1.0 feet per second.

(C) Hydraulic residence time (time for Qmax to pass through swale) of nine minutes.

(D) Minimum longitudinal slope of 1.5 percent, maximum slope of five percent. For slopes greater than five percent, check dams shall be used.

(E) Designed using a Manning “n” value of 0.25.

(F) Four horizontal to one vertical or flatter side slopes in the treatment area.

(G) Minimum length of 100 feet, maximum bottom width of eight feet.

(iv) A minimum of one foot of freeboard above the standard storm design water surface shall be provided for facilities not protected by high-flow storm diversion devices.

(v) Woody or shrubby vegetation shall not be planted in the active treatment area of the swale.

(vi) The swale shall incorporate a flow-spreading device at the inlet. The flow spreader shall provide a uniform flow distribution across the swale bottom. In swales with a bottom width greater than six feet, a flow spreader shall be installed at least every 100 feet.

(vii) To minimize flow channelization, the swale bottom shall be smooth, with uniform longitudinal slope, and with a minimum bottom width of two feet. Check dams may need to be installed to reduce flow channelization.

(viii) Grasses shall be established as soon as possible after the swale is completed. The native seed mix described below is recommended, but not required:

	NATIVE SEED MIX	 

	Blue Wild Rye	47%

	Native Red Fescue	40%

	Tufted Hairgrass	10%

	Western Mannagrass	 2%

	American Sloughgrass	 1%

(ix) Biodegradable erosion control matting appropriate for low velocity flows shall be installed in the flow area of the swale prior to allowing water to flow through the swale.

(b) Sand Filters. “Sand filters” are a layer of sand in a sedimentation chamber used to trap pollutants. The water runs into an underdrain system that conveys the filtered storm water to the discharge point. The sand filter consists of an inlet structure, sand bed, underdrain piping, and basin liner. The design of sand filters is based on Darcy’s Law:

	A = Q / (k x i)	 	where	A = area of sand filter

	 	 	 	Q = peak flow rate from hydrograph

	 	 	 	k = sand permeability (= 3.5 feet/day)

	 	 	 	i = hydraulic gradient

	i = (h + L) / L	 	where	h = height of water column over sand filter

	 	 	 	L = thickness of sand filter

General design requirements include, but are not limited to:

(i) Maximum area to be served is 80 acres.

(ii) Sand filters are appropriate for any soil classification.

(iii) Maximum maintained side slopes are three horizontal to one vertical.

(iv) No drainage shall be allowed directly to the filter; it must first go through a catch basin, inlet, sedimentation manhole, or similar large debris collection device. 

(v) The sand filter shall infiltrate the entire design storm without overflow.

(vi) The drawdown period for sand filters shall not exceed 24 hours.

(vii) The inlet structure shall spread the flow of incoming water uniformly across the surface of the filter medium during all anticipated flow conditions. This flow shall be spread in a manner that prevents roiling or otherwise disturbing the filter medium.

(viii) The filter bed medium shall consist of clean medium to fine sand with no organics, frozen pieces, or other deleterious materials. Sand used as a filter medium shall be certified by a certified testing laboratory as meeting or exceeding the following gradation:

	Sieve Size	Percent Passing

	3/8″	100

	#4	95 – 100

	#8	80 – 100

	#16	45 – 85

	#30	15 – 60

	#50	3 – 15

	#100	<4

(3) Storm Water Ponds and Settling Basins. Ponds include wet ponds and extended wet ponds. They work primarily through settling of pollutants; some biological processes also help remove pollutants. 

(a) Wet Ponds. “Wet ponds” are constructed ponds with a permanent pool of water called pool storage or dead storage. Pollutants are removed from storm water through gravitational settling and biologic processes.

Design requirements include, but are not limited to:

(i) Wet ponds can serve areas from five to 50 acres in size.

(ii) Requires group C or D classified soils (A and B with liners).

(iii) Maximum ground slope shall be eight percent.

(iv) Maximum maintained side slopes shall be three horizontal to one vertical.

(v) The pond configuration, as well as the inlet and outlet locations, shall maximize water travel time through the facility.

(vi) The maximum depth of the permanent pool shall be six feet.

More specific design criteria can be found in the King County, Washington, “Surface Water Design Manual.”

(b) Extended Wet Ponds. “Extended wet ponds” are constructed ponds that have both a permanent pool of water and extended detention.

The general requirements and design parameters are the same as for wet ponds in subsection (3)(a) of this section, with the following additional criteria:

(i) Permanent pool volume shall be no less than 50 percent of the design storm volume.

(ii) The remainder of the volume shall be released through an orifice. 

(4) Infiltration Facilities. Infiltration facilities include infiltration trenches and infiltration basins. These facilities rely on the percolation of storm water into the existing soils for water quality improvement. As such, infiltration facilities are dependent on the ability of the native soil to drain the storm water. Ground water protection issues need to be evaluated when considering infiltration facilities.

The Oregon Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ) has identified drywells, sumps, and other infiltration-type facilities that inject untreated storm water below the ground surface as “Class V Injection Wells” under the federal Underground Injection Control (UIC) Program. Since the UIC Program states that these types of wells have a direct impact on ground water, storm water pollution controls will apply. More information about the UIC program can be obtained from DEQ.

(a) Infiltration Trenches. An “infiltration trench” is a shallow trench in permeable soil that is backfilled with sand and coarse stone and lined with filter fabric. The trench surface may be covered with grating, stone, gabion, sand, or a grassed cover with a surface inlet.

General design requirements include, but are not limited to:

(i) The maximum area to be served shall not exceed 15 acres.

(ii) Maximum ground slopes shall be five percent for surface trenches, 16 percent for buried trenches.

(iii) Maximum maintained side slopes shall be three horizontal to one vertical.

(iv) The infiltration trench shall infiltrate the entire design storm without overflow.

(v) Infiltration facilities shall not be accepted in soils with a tested infiltration rate of less than 0.50 inches per hour.

(b) Infiltration Basins.

(i) The maximum area to be served shall not exceed 50 acres.

(ii) Maximum ground slope shall be five percent.

(iii) Maximum maintained side slopes shall be three horizontal to one vertical.

(iv) The infiltration basin shall infiltrate the entire design storm without overflow.

(v) Infiltration facilities shall not be accepted in soils with a tested infiltration rate of less than 0.50 inches per hour.

(vi) There shall be no less than three feet of undisturbed depth of infiltration medium between the bottom of the facility and any impervious layer (i.e., solid rock, high ground water levels, impervious clay, etc.). (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 370.3, 2003)

Article VIII. Engineering


18.16.145 Generally.

All storm water system elements shall be designed and constructed in accordance with all applicable rules and regulations of the city, and any city interpretations thereof, and with all applicable federal, state, and local statutes and rules. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 380, 2003)


18.16.150 Extension of public storm sewer systems.

Public storm sewer systems shall be extended to the most distant upstream parcel boundary(ies) to accommodate current and future storm flows entering the property. Except as otherwise provided, the extension of the public storm water systems to serve any parcel or tract of land shall be done by and at the expense of the property owner, developer, or applicant. The city may require that a storm pipeline that serves or may serve more than one property be a public system. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 380.1, 2003)


18.16.160 Surveying.

The owner’s engineer or surveyor shall be responsible for establishing the location of the storm sewer system by means of construction stakes offset along the centerlines prior to commencement of construction. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 380.2, 2003)


18.16.170 Railroad crossings.

Crossing of railroad rights-of-way shall be done in a manner that conforms to the requirements of the railroad having jurisdiction. If any bonds and/or certificates of insurance protection are required, they shall be furnished by the contractor or owner to the railroad company concerned naming the city as an additional insured.

Actual permits or easements for such crossing shall be obtained by the owner and all the terms for such permits or easements shall be met by the owner and contractor. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 380.3, 2003)


18.16.180 Hydrologic analysis.

The hydrologic analysis shall be consistent with the guidelines outlined in this chapter. The engineer may use various computer models or formulas for the hydrograph analysis but the city may verify the design flows and volumes based on King County’s SBUH program “HYD.” (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 380.4, 2003)


18.16.190 Hydraulic analysis.

The method of hydraulic calculations shall be consistent with the guidelines outlined in this chapter.

(1) System Design Considerations. Site development improvement projects shall address on-site and off-site drainage concerns, both upstream and downstream of a project, including but not limited to the following:

(a) Modifications to the existing on-site storm drainage facilities shall not restrict flows creating backwater onto off-site property to levels greater than the existing situation.

(b) Storm drainage facilities shall be designed and constructed to accommodate all future full build-out flows generated from upstream property based upon the most recent approved city and/or county comprehensive land use plan and applicable storm water master plan.

(c) The design of storm drainage facilities shall analyze the impact of restrictions downstream of the project site. 

(d) If the projected increase in surface water runoff leaving a proposed development will cause or contribute to damage from flooding to existing buildings or dwellings, the developer must construct an on-site detention facility.

(2) Review of Downstream System. The design engineer for each development constructing new impervious surface of more than 5,000 square feet shall submit documentation of the downstream capacity of any existing storm facilities impacted by the proposed development.

(3) Conveyance System Hydraulic Standards. The conveyance system shall be designed to convey and contain at least the peak runoff for the 25-year design storm. Open channel systems shall be designed for minimum one-foot freeboard from top of bank provided no structures are impacted by the design water surface elevation.

(4) Catch Basin System Standards. Catch basins and area drains collect water from an adjacent ditch, gutter line, or pavement and convey the water to a storm sewer system or culvert. Inlet systems shall be designed to catch and convey a 25-year storm event. For methodology for locating catch basins, refer to the ODOT “Hydraulics Manual.”

(a) Spacing. Maximum spacing between catch basins shall be 300 feet.

(b) Standard System. All catch basins shall be sumped. The main storm line shall not pass through any catch basin unless approved by the city. No more than three catch basins may be connected in series before connecting to the main storm line. A ditch inlet or field inlet may be connected in the same manner as a catch basin.

(c) Series System. Unsumped catch basins are allowed, provided a sumped manhole is constructed below the unsumped catch basins before the flow enters the main storm line. No more than three unsumped catch basins may be constructed above a sumped manhole. The main storm line may not pass through the catch basins or sumped manhole(s). No ditch inlet or field inlet may be part of a series of unsumped catch basins. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 380.5, 2003)


18.16.200 Storm manhole and pipe design standards.

For pipe systems which convey flows from or through water quality sensitive areas, a local representative of Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife (ODFW) or other applicable state or federal agency shall be contacted to determine if fish passage is required and to identify site-specific design criteria. All culverts shall be designed for fish passage in accordance with ODFW guidance for fish passage unless otherwise exempted by ODFW and the city.

(1) Manhole Design.

(a) Manholes shall be provided at least every 500 feet, at every grade change, and at every change in alignment. Unless an exception is approved by the city, manhole lids shall have a minimum of six inches of clearance from the edge of a curb and/or gutter.

(b) All manholes shall be a minimum of 48 inches in diameter.

(c) All piped inside drop manholes shall be at least 60 inches in diameter.

(d) Detail(s) shall be submitted with the plans where pipes into or out of a manhole are larger than 24 inches or where more than four main line connections are made.

(e) Connections to an existing manhole, elevation of the existing ledge, location of steps, and elevations of existing inlets and outlets shall be submitted with the plans.

(f) All manhole bases shall be properly channelized. There shall be a minimum of eight inches separating connections as measured from the outside diameter of the pipe.

(g) Standard or oversize gutter or curb and gutter catch basins will not be allowed in lieu of manholes in any system.

(h) A manhole may have a maximum free fall of two feet.

(2) Water Quality Manholes. Water quality manholes shall be as shown in the standard detail drawings.

(3) Pipe Size. The design size shall be based on hydraulic calculations provided by the design engineer. The minimum diameter of public storm pipe is identified as follows:

(a) Pipe from the catch basin to the main line in the public right-of-way shall be a minimum 10-inch diameter pipe.

(b) Main line pipe shall be a minimum 12-inch diameter pipe. 

(c) Storm pipes located out of a public street right-of-way, with no reasonable need to be extended, and with roof drains and/or area drains connected, shall be a minimum 10-inch diameter pipe.

(4) Location of Pipe. When storm drain pipes are located within a local public street right-of-way with curbs, the storm pipe shall be located between the curbs but no closer than five feet to either curb unless an exception is approved by the city. 

Storm pipes in easements shall be located in the center of the easement unless an exception is approved by the city. The centerline of a storm pipe shall be at least seven and one-half feet from an easement side line.

(5) Alignment. Public storm pipe shall be laid on a straight alignment and at uniform grade unless an exception is approved by the city.

(6) Grade. All storm lines shall have sufficient slope to maintain a minimum flow velocity of three feet per second when flowing full.

(7) Steep Slopes. Storm pipes on slopes in excess of 20 percent shall be secured with approved anchor walls.

(8) Pipe Cover. Minimum pipe cover shall be in compliance with this section unless an exception is approved by the city.

In paved areas, pipe cover shall be measured from the bottom of the subbase to the upper surface of the pipe barrel. In pavement areas, the pipe bell shall not intrude in to the subbase. In areas without pavement, pipe cover shall be measured from finish grade to the upper surface of the pipe barrel. Minimum cover requirements are as follows:

	Type of Pipe	Cover (in)

	Nonreinforced Pipe	36

	Ductile Iron	18

(9) Headwalls. Pipe end protection shall be required where pipe material other than ductile iron is exposed in design of an outlet or inlet pipe or where required to stabilize slope.

(10) Trash Racks/Debris Barriers. Trash racks/debris barriers are required over all pipe inlets over 12 inches in diameter and outlets over 18 inches in diameter. The engineer shall submit the trash rack/debris barrier system design to the city for approval. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 380.6, 2003)


18.16.210 Inlet design standards.

(1) Inlet and Catch Basin Capacity. All inlets and catch basins shall be designed to accept a 25-year storm event. Grates shall, as far as practical, be designed to avoid failure due to accumulation of debris.

(2) Design Criteria.

(a) Precast and poured in place catch basins and gutter inlets are allowed.

(b) All catch basins shall be constructed with an 18-inch minimum sump unless part of a series catch basin system with a sumped manhole.

(c) A main storm line shall not pass through a sumped catch basin.

(d) The spacing of catch basins shall be determined by the capacity of each catch basin to pass a 25-year storm event. Maximum spacing shall be 300 feet. In addition, catch basins shall be provided just prior to curb returns on streets with a centerline gradient of three percent or more and a street gutter drainage run of 100 feet or more.

(e) Catch basins shall be a maximum depth of six feet from the top of grate to flow line of the lowest pipe invert.

(f) The maximum length of pipeline between the inlet and main line structure shall be 40 feet for 10-inch pipe and 60 feet for 12-inch pipe.

(g) Blind tee connections to the main line are not allowed.

(3) Area Drains and Ditch Inlets.

(a) The standard area drain and ditch inlet shall be as shown in the standard details, unless an exception is approved by the city.

(b) A main storm line shall not pass through an area drain or ditch inlet. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 380.7, 2003)


18.16.220 Constructed channel design standards.

Open channels may be constructed to convey runoff to the existing public storm system. Open channels are not allowed in the public right-of-way. They may be used as cut-off or diversion ditches along lot lines to prevent runoff from spilling on to an adjoining lot. Open channels must be privately maintained.

(1) Design Criteria.

(a) All constructed channels located on private property must be within an easement.

(b) Open channels that ultimately drain in to the public storm system must show line, grade, and a typical cross-section on the construction drawings.

(c) Constructed open channels shall be sized to pass the required flows and have side slopes no steeper than two horizontal to one vertical.

(d) Channels and connections shall be designed to prevent scouring. All pipe connections shall match side slopes and incorporate a headwall. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 380.8, 2003)


18.16.230 Culvert design standards.

Culverts provide for passage of water under or through obstructions placed across streams and drainageways. Culverts shall be designed to pass the required flows without compromising public safety or causing new or additional flooding.

Culverts within FEMA floodplains shall be reviewed and approved by the local FEMA-designated authority.

For culverts which convey flows from or through water quality sensitive areas, a local representative of Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife (ODFW) or other applicable state or federal agency shall be contacted to determine if fish passage is required and to identify site-specific design criteria. All culverts shall be designed for fish passage in accordance with ODFW guidance for fish passage unless otherwise exempted by ODFW.

(1) Design Criteria.

(a) Culverts will be designed to safely pass the 25-year flow.

(b) For culverts 18 inches in diameter and larger, the embankment around the culvert inlet shall be protected from erosion by lining around inlet with rock or other protection. The lining shall extend upstream from the culvert a minimum of five feet.

(c) For culverts 12 inches in diameter and larger, the receiving channel of the outlet shall be protected from erosion by rock lining, bioengineering, or other approved energy dissipater.

(d) For culverts 18 inches in diameter and larger, the inlet and outlet shall require grating. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 380.9, 2003)


18.16.240 Outfall design standards.

Outfalls shall be above the mean low-water level unless an exception is approved by the city.

All outfalls shall be provided with a rock splash pad or other approved erosion control measure. Outfalls will be designed to prevent scouring at the outfall discharge and provide velocity reduction prior to discharge to the receiving channel. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 380.10, 2003)

Article IX. Technical Specifications


18.16.245 Generally.

The technical specifications contained in this chapter, together with the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality, the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, and the American Public Works Association standards and any other applicable requirement(s) of the city, shall govern the character and quality of material, equipment, installation, and construction procedures for gravity flow portions of public storm sewer systems. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 390, 2003)


18.16.250 Manholes and structures.

Refer to SHMC 18.24.140. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 390.1, 2003)


18.16.260 Catch basins and inlets.

(1) Materials.

(a) Aggregate, cement, and concrete shall meet the requirements set forth in SHMC 18.16.250.

(b) Frame and grate shall be as shown in the standard details.

(2) Workmanship.

(a) Excavation and backfill will conform to the requirements of SHMC 18.24.060.

(b) Bedding. The contractor shall remove all water and debris from ditch area and provide eight inches minimum layer of compacted three-fourths-inch minus crushed rock for a base.

(c) Cast-in-place catch basins shall have a minimum of six inches of concrete between the compacted gravel and the lowest invert. The forms used for cast-in-place catch basins shall be tight and well braced. The storm pipe material being used shall extend into the poured concrete of the catch basin. All corners shall be chamfered. Immediately after placement, the concrete shall be consolidated with an approved vibrator. The top surface shall be screed and exposed surfaces troweled to a smooth finish free from marks or irregularities. After forms are removed, the contractor shall patch any defects in the concrete with approved material.

(d) Precast. After the base is prepared, the contractor shall set the precast catch basin to the proper line and grade. The storm pipe material being used shall connect to the precast catch basin.

(e) Contractor shall clean the ends of all pipes and sections that come in contact with the catch basin. All inverts, stub outs and sections shall be installed according to the details using a nonshrinking grout, making sure all sharp edges or rough sections are removed, to prevent obstruction of the flow. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 390.2, 2003)


18.16.270 Pipe and fittings.

All pipe and culverts shall have a minimum design service life of 75 years per Oregon Department of Transportation standards.

(1) Materials. Materials shall be the following types or approved equal:

(a) High density polyethylene (HDPE), SDR-26, ASTM F-667, D-1245.

(b) Ductile iron pipe (DIP).

(2) Pipe Installation. Refer to SHMC 18.24.160. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 390.3, 2003)


18.16.280 Testing and acceptance.

All gravity storm systems shall pass a deflection test for plastic pipes. All details of testing procedures shall be subject to approval of the city.

(1) Deflection Test for Flexible Pipe. Storm systems constructed of flexible pipe materials shall be deflection-tested. The test shall be conducted by pulling an approved mandrel through the completed pipeline. The diameter of the mandrel shall be 95 percent of the nominal pipe diameter. The mandrel shall be a rigid, nonadjustable, odd-numbering leg (nine legs minimum) mandrel having an effective length of not less than its nominal diameter.

Testing shall be conducted after the line has been completely balled and flushed out with water, and compaction tests have been completed and accepted.

The contractor will be required to locate and repair any sections failing the test and to retest the section. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 390.4, 2003)


Chapter 18.20 TRAFFIC DEVICES AND STREET ILLUMINATION

Sections:

18.20.010    Traffic signs.

18.20.020    Street name signs.

18.20.030    Traffic signals.

18.20.040    Traffic marking.

18.20.050    Street illumination.


18.20.010 Traffic signs.

Traffic signs shall be furnished and erected in conformance with MUTCD and the standard specifications supplemented by the state of Oregon, and/or modified as follows. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 410, 2003)


18.20.020 Street name signs.

(1) Sign Placement. In business districts and on major arterials, street name signs should be placed in diagonally opposite corners so that they will be on the right-hand side of the intersection for traffic on the minor street.

In residential districts, at least two sets of street name signs will be mounted at each intersection.

On T-intersections, the street name signs will be designated at two locations. One set of street name signs shall be placed at end of a T-intersection, and the second set placed at the right-hand corner of the intersecting street.

(2) Signs. Street name signs shall be ordered through the public works department. To ensure compliance with current city standards, the contractor or developer shall order all necessary signs by contacting public works. 

Contractor will provide V-locks per the standard details, verifying that the V-lock is installed plumb. City crews will install signs and contractor shall be billed for time and materials. Final approval will not be given until all street signs are ordered, paid for, and properly installed unless bonded for or otherwise satisfied. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 420, 2003)


18.20.030 Traffic signals.

(1) Design and Installation Requirements. Traffic signal installation shall conform with MUTCD and the Oregon State Department of Transportation revisions.

Manuals to consider as text are:

(a) MUTCD.

(b) Oregon amendments.

(c) “Standard Specifications for Highway Construction” (ODOT).

(d) “Standard Specifications for Microcomputer Signal Controller” (ODOT).

(e) “Standard Drawings for Design and Construction” (ODOT).

(f) “Field Inspector’s Manual for Signal Construction” (ODOT). (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 430, 2003)


18.20.040 Traffic marking.

Traffic marking shall follow the MUTCD and TCDH as revised by ODOT.

Material specifications shall conform to ODOT standard specifications for construction.

(1) Stencils. Contact public works for correct stencil applications.

(2) Materials. All thermoplastic material shall conform to state specifications. All hot thermoplastic shall be alkyd based.

(3) Application. Existing surfacing which is to receive the thermoplastic material shall be mechanically wire brushed to remove all dirt and contaminants. Surfaces of new Portland cement concrete pavement to receive the thermoplastic material shall be mechanically wire brushed or abrasive blast cleaned to remove all lattice and curing compound. 

Existing pavement markers which are damaged by blast cleaning or wire brushing shall be removed and replaced by the contractor at his expense.

Thermoplastic material shall be applied only to dry pavement surfaces and only when the pavement surface temperature is above 50 degrees Fahrenheit.

A primer, of the type recommended by the manufacturer of the thermoplastic material, shall be applied to all Portland cement concrete surfaces. The primer shall be applied immediately in advance of, but concurrent with, the application of thermoplastic material. The primer shall be applied at the application rate recommended by the manufacturer and shall not be thinned.

(4) Hot Thermoplastic Application. In addition to the applications listed above, the following shall apply to hot thermoplastic applications:

Preheaters with vertical mixers having 360 degree rotation shall be used to preheat granular form material.

The thermoplastic material shall be applied to the pavement at a temperature between 400 and 425 degrees Fahrenheit unless a different temperature is recommended by the manufacturer.

The thermoplastic material shall be applied by either spray or extrusion methods in a single uniform layer.

Stencils shall be used when applying thermoplastic material for pavement markings.

The pavement surface to which thermoplastic material is applied shall be completely coated by the material and the voids of the pavement surface shall be filled.

Unless otherwise specified in the special provisions, the thermoplastic material for traffic stripes shall be applied at a minimum thickness of 0.060 inch. Thermoplastic material for pavement markings shall be applied at a thickness of 0.100 inch to 0.150 inch. Glass beads shall be applied immediately to the surface of the molten thermoplastic material at a rate of not less than eight pounds per 100 square feet. The amount of glass beads applied shall be measured by stabbing the glass bead tank with a calibrated rod.

(a) Permanent marking shall consist of raised markers, cold or hot thermoplastic, the specific layout of which is to be approved by the city engineer.

(b) Painting or foil-back tape may be used for temporary marking.

(c) Hot thermoplastic shall be used for all permanent marking installed on all concrete streets.

(d) Cold thermoplastic 3M or equivalent tape rolled into the surface shall be used on new asphalt streets, including overlays.

(e) Raised markers (reflectors and buttons) shall be used in conjunction with permanent marking layouts.

(f) Approved striping material and layout shall be submitted to and approved by the city engineer prior to installation.

(g) Policies for marking patterns are detailed in the TCDH and in the city standard drawings. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 440, 2003)


18.20.050 Street illumination.

Street lighting shall be designed by Columbia River People’s Utility District (CRPUD), except within the Columbia Boulevard/St. Helens Street corridor master plan area; see SHMC 17.152.030(24). This shall be done at the applicant’s initiative and expense. The lighting plan shall be included with the submittals to the city. Lamp type used should be uniform. (Ord. 3181 § 4 (Att. C), 2015; Ord. 2875 Appx. § 450, 2003)


Chapter 18.24 SANITARY SEWERS

Sections:

Article I. General

18.24.005    General.

18.24.010    Scheduling.

18.24.020    Preservation, restoration, and cleanup.

18.24.030    Interferences and obstructions.

18.24.040    Permanent survey monuments.

Article II. Trench Excavation and Backfill

18.24.050    Materials.

18.24.060    Construction.

Article III. Pavement Restoration

18.24.070    General.

18.24.080    Materials.

18.24.090    Workmanship.

Article IV. Engineering

18.24.100    Sewage flows.

18.24.110    Pipe design.

18.24.120    Manhole design.

18.24.130    Clean outs.

Article V. Technical Specifications

18.24.135    Technical specifications.

18.24.140    Manholes and structures.

18.24.150    Sewer pipe and fittings.

18.24.160    Pipe installation.

18.24.170    Building sewers.

18.24.180    Testing and acceptance.

18.24.190    Prohibited activities.

Article I. General


18.24.005 General.

All sewers shall be designed and constructed so as to conform to the requirements of the Oregon State Department of Environmental Quality, the Oregon Standard Specifications for Construction, and the city of St. Helens. Public sewerage facilities shall be designed to allow the logical service of all parcels or tracts of land within the basin being considered. Sewer lines shall be extended to adjacent parcels to best facilitate future development. The extension of the public sanitary sewer systems to serve any parcel or tract of land shall be done by and at the expense of the property owner or developer. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 510, 2003)


18.24.010 Scheduling.

(1) Sequence of Operations. The contractor shall plan and execute construction work to cause a minimum of interference to the operation of existing city facilities. It may be necessary to do certain parts of the construction work outside normal working hours in order to avoid undesirable conditions, and it shall be the obligation of the contractor to make this change to the work schedule. This scheduling, however, is subject to city approval, and does not relieve the contractor from making its work available for inspection.

(a) Connection to Existing System. When installing a new manhole to make a connection to an existing system, the existing main line shall be diverted around the new structure until all testing of the new pipe and manhole(s) has been completed. This can be accomplished by installing a section of temporary pipe and 45 degree bends around the new manhole and backfilling until testing is completed to the city’s satisfaction.

Connections between existing work and new work shall not be made until necessary inspections and tests have been completed on the new work and it is found to conform in all respects to the requirements of the plans and specifications.

(2) Progress of Construction. Construction shall proceed in a systematic manner that will result in minimum inconvenience to the public. Construction staking for the work being performed shall be completed prior to the start of excavation. The contractor shall limit its operations to a small length of work area per crew. At no time shall the trenching equipment be farther than 300 feet ahead of the pipe laying crews, unless advance written permission is given by the city. The trench shall be backfilled so that no section of trench is left open longer than 24 hours. Trenches located in a right-of-way shall be completely backfilled before the contractor leaves the site for the day unless the trench is adequately secured with steel plates.

Cleanup of all construction debris, excess excavation, excess materials, and complete restoration of all fences, mailboxes, ditches, culverts, signposts, and similar items shall be completed immediately following the final backfilling of the trench.

Any area disturbed by the contractor’s operations inside dedicated easements shall be restored to its original condition. Any area that is disturbed by the contractor’s operations outside the dedicated easement shall be restored to the property owner’s satisfaction. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 510.1, 2003)


18.24.020 Preservation, restoration, and cleanup.

(1) Site Restoration and Cleanup. The contractor shall keep the premises clean and orderly at all times during the job and leave the project free of rubbish or excess materials of any kind upon completion of the work. During construction, the contractor shall stockpile the excavated trench materials so as to do the least damage to adjacent lawns, grassed areas, gardens, shrubbery, trees, or fences, regardless of the ownership of these areas. All excavated materials shall be removed from these areas, and these surfaces shall be left in a condition equivalent to their original condition and free from rock, gravel, boulders, or other foreign material. Stockpiles shall be removed or tarped during wet weather conditions throughout the entire construction process. The contractor shall replace topsoil areas over all trenches with a minimum finished depth of 12 inches of topsoil. All existing drainage ditches and culverts shall be reopened and graded, and original drainage restored. All damaged irrigation and house drainage pipe, drain tiles, sanitary sewer or storm laterals, and culverts shall be repaired expeditiously. The finished surface shall conform to the original surface and shall be free-draining, free from holes, rough spots, or other surface features detrimental to a seeded area.

(2) Preservation of Irrigation and Drainage Ditches. Following the backfill of the trenches, the contractor shall restore all public and private irrigation and storm drain ditches that have been destroyed, damaged, or otherwise modified during construction to the condition of the ditch before construction. Ditches shall be built in their original locations unless otherwise redesigned as part of the project.

(3) Stream and Creek Crossings. The contractor shall comply with all provisions of the permits required by the Oregon Division of State Lands, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Oregon Department of Environmental Quality, Department of Fish and Wildlife, Columbia County, and any other agencies having jurisdiction. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 510.2, 2003)


18.24.030 Interferences and obstructions.

(1) General. Various obstructions may be encountered during the course of the work. Maps and information regarding underground utilities shall be obtained from the utility owning and operating such utilities, but the location of such utilities is not guaranteed. At least two but not more than 10 business days shall be given to the Oregon Utility Notification Center prior to commencement of the construction operation. The contractor shall comply with the Oregon “locate law,” ORS 757.557. If services of any utility are interrupted due to the construction operation, the proper authority shall be notified immediately.

(2) Protection. The contractor shall exercise all due care in protecting property along the route of the improvement. This protection shall include, but not be limited to, trees, yards, fences, drainage lines, mailboxes, driveways, shrubs, and lawns. If any of the above have been disturbed, they shall be restored to as near their original condition as possible. (Ord. 3186 § 24, 2015; Ord. 2875 Appx. § 510.3, 2003)


18.24.040 Permanent survey monuments.

The contractor shall not disturb permanent survey monuments, property corners, stakes, or benchmarks without prior written consent of the appropriate county surveyor. It shall be the responsibility of the contractor to protect such survey markers. Survey markers that are disturbed or lost shall be replaced by a registered land surveyor. When a change is made in the finished elevation of the pavement, or any roadway in which a permanent survey monument is located, the monument cover shall be adjusted to the new grade. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 510.4, 2003)

Article II. Trench Excavation and Backfill


18.24.050 Materials.

(1) Pipe Bedding. Pipe bedding material shall be clean crushed rock with a maximum size of three-fourths inches, uniformly graded from coarse to fine or as approved by the city.

(2) Trench Backfill. Above the pipe zone will be divided into the following classifications:

(a) Class A Backfill. Class A backfill shall be native or common material, which in the opinion of the city meets the desired characteristics required for the specific surface loading.

(b) Class B Backfill. Class B backfill shall be three-fourths-inch to zero-inch granular grade of crushed rock material, unless otherwise approved. Class B backfill will be required in all public rights-of-way. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 520.1, 2003)


18.24.060 Construction.

(1) Excavation.

(a) Clearing the Right-of-Way. Clearing shall be completed prior to the start of trenching. The contractor shall observe all federal, state, and local laws relating to fire permits, burning materials, and other requirements. Under no condition shall brush be covered by excavated materials prior to being cleared and removed.

Excavated material shall be placed at locations and in such a manner that it does not create a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, nor interfere with the function of existing drainage facilities. During wet weather conditions, stockpiles shall be removed or tarped throughout the construction process.

(b) Open Trench Limit. The length of the open trench shall always be kept to a minimum. The city shall determine the amount of the open trench allowed based upon work conditions of the area. In normal cases, the open trench length shall not exceed 300 feet. 

(c) Trench Width. The trench width at the surface of the ground shall be kept to a minimum necessary to install the pipe in a safe manner. In all cases, trenches must be of sufficient width to allow for shoring, proper joining of the pipe, and backfilling of material along the sides of the pipe. The minimum trench width in the pipe zone must provide a clear working space of six inches outside the maximum outside diameter of the pipe.

Excavation for manholes and other structures shall be wide enough to provide a minimum of 12 inches between the structure’s surface and the sides of the excavation.

(2) Installation.

(a) Shoring. The contractor shall provide all materials, labor, and equipment necessary to adequately shore trenches to protect the work, existing property, utilities, pavement, etc., and to provide safe working conditions, in compliance with all OSHA requirements. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 520.2, 2003)

Article III. Pavement Restoration


18.24.070 General.

The stricter of the requirements of this article or the standards of the jurisdiction having authority over the road being repaired shall be followed.

If an existing street that is classified as a collector or an arterial has been paved within five years or any other classification of street has been paved within three years, the trench patch shall be made with a “T” cut and will be fog sealed from the lip of gutter to lip of gutter or flow line to flow line to ensure that the structural integrity of the existing street is maintained. The street shall be milled if necessary to maintain proper crown. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 530.1, 2003)


18.24.080 Materials.

(1) Crushed Rock. The following rock specifications shall be required unless modified by the local jurisdiction:

(a) Base course rock for the street shall be one and one-half inches and shall conform to the applicable portions of the “Standard Specifications for Highway Construction” of the Oregon Department of Transportation for course aggregate base material.

(b) Rock for the leveling course shall be three-fourths-inch minus, conforming to the applicable portions of the “Standard Specifications for Highway Construction” of the Oregon Department of Transportation for leveling course.

(2) Asphalt Concrete.

(a) Material for prime coat shall be emulsified asphalt-type CMS-2 or approved equal.

(b) Materials for tack coat shall be emulsified asphalt-type RS-1, CRS-1, or approved equal.

(c) When more than three inches of asphalt concrete is required, the asphalt concrete shall be placed in two or more courses. The base course may be Class B asphaltic concrete mix conforming to the “Standard Specifications for Highway Construction” of the Oregon Department of Transportation in lieu of Class C mix.

(d) Asphaltic concrete for the surface course shall be Class C mix conforming to the Standard Specification of the Oregon Department of Transportation. All surface course mix design is subject to final approval by the city.

(e) If multiple lifts are used, the base course shall be a minimum thickness of two inches, and the wearing course shall be Class C OSHD mix with a minimum thickness of one and one-half inches. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 530.2, 2003)


18.24.090 Workmanship.

(1) Subgrade. The contractor shall:

(a) Bring the trench to a smooth, even grade at the correct distance below the top of the existing pavement surface, allowing for base rock, leveling rock and asphalt concrete.

(b) Trim existing pavement so that the trench width plus 12 inches of asphalt is removed creating a “T” cut section as shown in the standard drawings.

(c) Remove any pavement that has been damaged or that is broken and unsound and provide a smooth, neat cut with a sound edge for joining the new pavement.

(d) Compact the top four feet of pavement subgrade to 95 percent relative density, ASTM D2049.

(e) Accomplish supplementary compaction where required with approved mechanical vibrating or power tampers.

(2) Base Aggregate Course and Leveling Course. The contractor shall obtain certification of the subgrade material prior to placing any base course material on the subgrade.

(3) Tack Coat. After the leveling course has been compacted, the contractor shall apply the tack coat to the edges of all surfaces being paved at a rate of 0.06 to 0.12 gallons per square yard. The surface upon which the tack coat is applied shall be dry and clean of dirt, dust, and other matter inhibiting asphalt adherence.

(4) Weather Conditions. Asphaltic concrete placement shall conform to Part 700 of the Oregon Standard Specifications for Construction and in no instance shall be placed when the surface temperature is lower than 40 degrees Fahrenheit, during rainfall, or when the surface is frozen or wet. 

(5) Protection of Structures. The contractor shall provide whatever protective coverings may be necessary to protect the exposed portions of bridges, culverts, curbs, gutters, posts, guard fences, road signs, and any other structures from the paving operations. All oil, asphalt, dirt, or other undesirable matter that may come upon these structures by reason of the paving operations shall be removed.

Existing and new water valve boxes, manholes, catch basins, or other underground utility appurtenances shall be made level with the finish asphalt grade. The city or other appropriate authority shall be contacted prior to any facility adjustments for guidance as to the appropriate procedures, standards and materials to be used. All covers shall be protected during asphalt application.

Existing monuments shall have paving rings for monument boxes placed over each monument to allow for ease of future access as shown in the standard details. The contractor shall be responsible for all costs associated with this work. 

(6) Rock Surfacing. Where so directed by the city, the contractor shall place a minimum of two inches of level course rock, as specified in this chapter, for the full width of all streets, driveways, parking areas, street shoulders, and other areas disturbed by the construction.

(7) Contractor’s Responsibility. The contractor shall repair all settlement of pavement over trenches within the warranty period at no charge to the city.

(8) Driveways. Driveways shall be replaced to original conditions following the work. Such replacement shall be done in accordance with all applicable legal standards for road shoulders within the limits of the work.

Existing drainage patterns shall not be altered unless approved by the city engineer to correct a drainage problem. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 530.3, 2003)

Article IV. Engineering


18.24.100 Sewage flows.

The Manning’s coefficient value (“n”) to be used in calculating sewage flows is 0.013. Sewers of sizes that are obviously larger than are necessary for satisfactory carrying capacity, but that are specified in order to meet grade requirements, are not allowed. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 540.1, 2003)


18.24.110 Pipe design.

No public sanitary sewer shall be less than eight inches in diameter unless otherwise approved by the city. Six-inch sanitary sewer may be approved by the city if the line is no more than 250 feet long and is located at the end of a system with no possibility of being extended. Building sewers shall have a minimum of four-inch inside diameter.

(1) Location. Sanitary sewers, whenever possible, shall be installed within five feet of the centerline of the public right-of-way or on the centerline of easements unless otherwise approved by the city. Sewers shall be installed no closer than five feet to an easement side line or 10 feet to the edge of a public right-of-way. The city may require maintenance access easements.

(2) Alignment. Sanitary sewer lines shall be laid on a straight alignment and uniform grade between manholes.

(3) Grade. All sanitary sewers shall be laid on a grade which will produce a minimum velocity of two feet per second when flowing full or half-full. The minimum grades for various sizes of pipe are listed below:

	Inside Pipe Diameter (inches)	Grade

(feet per 100 feet)

	6	0.60

	8	0.40

	10	0.28

	12	0.22

	15	0.15

	18	0.12

	21	0.10

	24	0.08

	27	0.07

	30	0.06

(4) Steep Slopes. Sanitary sewers on slopes in excess of 20 percent shall be secured through the use of concrete anchor walls. Spacing for anchors shall be as follows:

	Minimum Anchor Spacing

	Grade (%)	(Center to Center)

	20 – 34	35 feet

	35 – 50	25 feet

	51+	15 feet or concrete encasement

(5) Pipe Cover. Minimum pipe cover shall be in compliance with this section unless an exception is approved by the city.

In paved areas, pipe cover shall be measured from the bottom of the subbase to the upper surface of the pipe barrel. In pavement areas, the pipe bell shall not intrude in to the subbase. In areas without pavement, pipe cover shall be measured from finish grade to the upper surface of the pipe barrel. Minimum cover requirements are as follows:

	Type of Pipe	Cover (in.)

	Nonreinforced Pipe	36

	Ductile Iron	18

(6) Sanitary Sewer in Vicinity of Water Supplies. No sanitary sewer shall be less than 10 feet from any well, spring, or other source of domestic water supply. All sanitary sewers that are located within 50 feet from any such source of domestic water supply shall be constructed of ductile iron water pipe with watertight joints, C-900 PVC, or other city-approved pipe. Sanitary sewers and domestic water lines shall not be laid in the same trench. Parallel water and sanitary sewer lines shall be at least 10 feet apart horizontally. Wherever it is necessary for sanitary sewer and water lines to cross each other, the crossing should be at an angle of approximately 90 degrees. The sanitary sewer shall be located 18 inches or more below the water line or be constructed of ductile iron pipe, have a concrete encasement, or other city-approved pipe material. In such cases, the length of the sanitary sewer pipe shall be centered at the crossing. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 540.2, 2003)


18.24.120 Manhole design.

Manholes shall be provided at least every 400 feet, at every change in alignment, and at every grade change. A manhole shall be located at the upstream end of the pipe except as allowed in SHMC 18.24.130. Manholes shall not be closer than five feet to a curb line.

All manholes shall be a minimum of 48 inches in diameter. All manholes shall have a minimum 12-inch ledge in the base.

Building sewers are allowed to be connected directly into a manhole providing that they are properly channelized. No more than three building sewers are allowed to be connected to a manhole unless otherwise approved by the city. If any building sewer is connected into a manhole at an elevation more than 12 inches above the top of the ledge, it shall be constructed with an inside drop.

Manholes constructed on lines with 12-inch or smaller pipe shall have at least 0.2 foot of fall through the manhole or as allowed by Oregon DEQ and approved by the city. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 540.3, 2003)


18.24.130 Clean outs.

Clean outs shall be allowed only on pipelines where the sewer line has no possibility for future extension. The maximum distance between the clean out and a manhole is 150 feet, unless otherwise approved by the city. The standpipe shall be the same size as the pipeline up to a maximum of eight inches.

Temporary clean outs may be installed within the right-of-way at the end of a stub street where the street is expected to be extended in the future and the design of the sewer system does not warrant that a manhole be constructed at this location. When the sewer is extended, the temporary clean out shall be removed. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 540.4, 2003)

Article V. Technical Specifications


18.24.135 Technical specifications.

The technical specifications contained in this chapter, together with the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality, the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, and the American Public Works Association standards and any other applicable requirement(s) of the city, shall govern the character and quality of material, equipment, installation, and construction procedures for gravity flow portions of public sanitary sewer systems. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 550, 2003)


18.24.140 Manholes and structures.

(1) Materials.

(a) Aggregate and Portland Cement. Aggregate and Portland cement shall meet the standards set forth in Section 756 of the Oregon Standard Specifications for Construction.

(b) Concrete. Concrete shall conform to the requirement of ASTM C94, Alternate 2. Compressive field strength for manhole bases and miscellaneous concrete structures shall be not less than 3,000 psi at 28 days. Maximum size of aggregate shall be one and one-half inches. Slump shall be between two and four inches.

(c) Manhole Frames and Covers. Casting shall be tough, close-grained gray iron, smooth and clean, free from blisters, blowholes, and all defects, and conform to ASTM A48, Class 30. Covers shall be true and set within ring at all points. Frames and covers shall be standard or suburban, solid, depending upon the type and location of the manhole and as approved by the city. Watertight frames and covers shall be installed on manholes located within floodplain areas, along stream corridors, or where excess surface water may cause inflow problems. Tamper-proof frames and covers shall be installed on manholes in easement areas.

(d) Precast Manholes. Precast manholes shall be concrete. Materials shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C478. Minimum wall thickness shall be five inches. Cones shall have the same wall thickness and reinforcement as riser sections. Joints shall be tongue and groove, rubber ring, or keylock-type. Cones shall be eccentric.

(e) Precast Bases. Precast base sections or manhole bases may be used provided all the details of construction are approved prior to construction.

(f) Pipe Stub Outs for Future Connections. Pipe stub outs for future connections shall be of the same type as approved for use in the lateral, main, or trunk lines. Rubber-gasketed watertight plugs shall be furnished with each stub out and shall be adequately braced against air test pressures. 

(g) Manhole Steps. Manhole step material shall be plastic with reinforcing bar, a minimum one-half-inch Grade 60, meeting requirements of ASTM A615 encapsulated with injection-molded copolymer polypropylene with serrated surfaces.

(h) Nonshrink Grout. Nonshrink grout shall be Sika 212, Euco N-S, Five Star, or city-approved equal nonmetallic cementitious commercial grout exhibiting zero shrinkage. Grout shall not be amended with cement or sand and shall not be reconditioned with water after initial mixing. Nonshrink grout shall be placed or packed only with the use of an approved commercial concrete bonding agent. Unused grout shall be discarded after 20 minutes and shall not be used.

(i) Manhole Pipe Connector. Rigid pipe entering or leaving a manhole shall use a flexible connector that is designed to produce a positive watertight connection.

(2) Workmanship on Manholes.

(a) Foundation Stabilization. If unstable material exists that will not support the manhole or other structure, the contractor shall install geotextile fabric or excavate below grade and backfill with foundation stabilization material.

(b) Pipe Connections. Special care shall be taken to see that the openings through which sanitary sewer pipes enter the structure are completely watertight.

(c) Drop Manholes. The maximum fall without an inside drop as measured from the existing flow line to the new flow line is one and one-half feet and shall be constructed with a beaver slide as shown in the standard drawings. When the drop is more than two feet, an inside drop shall be used as shown in the standard drawings.

(d) Poured in Place Concrete Bases. The contractor shall remove water from the excavated area, provide 12 inches minimum layer of compacted three-fourths minus crushed rock for a base, and construct the concrete base so that the first precast manhole section has a uniform bearing throughout the full circumference. There shall be a minimum of eight inches of concrete between the compacted gravel and the lowest invert of the manhole. The contractor shall deposit sufficient concrete on the base to assure a watertight seal between base and manhole wall. Twenty-four hours shall be allowed to elapse before placing the remaining sections on the base.

(e) Placing Manhole Section. The contractor shall clean the end of sections of foreign materials and install the preformed plastic gasket in conformance with the manufacturer’s recommendations.

(f) Manhole Inverts. The contractor shall construct manhole inverts in conformance with details and with smooth transitions to ensure an unobstructed flow through the manhole, and remove all sharp edges or rough sections.

(g) Manhole Extensions, Rings, and Covers. The contractor shall install rings and covers on top of manholes to positively prevent all infiltration of surface or ground water into manholes. Rings shall be set in a bed of nonshrinking grout with the nonshrinking grout carried over the flange of the ring and shall be set so that tops of covers are flush with the surface of adjoining pavement, or one foot above natural ground.

(h) Manhole Taps. Taps into existing manholes shall be core drilled unless approved otherwise by the city. All nonconcrete pipe material used on a manhole tap shall be adapted with a watertight coupling compatible with concrete or approved equal (e.g., inserted manhole boot). The bonding material used to connect the pipe and/or coupling to the manhole must be nonshrink material to ensure no ground water infiltration occurs.

(3) Types of Connections.

(a) Connection to Existing Manholes. The contractor shall connect sanitary lines to existing manholes at locations indicated; provide all diversion facilities and perform all work necessary to maintain sanitary flow in existing sanitary systems during connection to the manholes; and break out existing manhole bases or grouting as necessary and regrout to provide smooth flow into and through existing manholes. The contractor shall allow no debris to enter the existing system while making the connection.

(b) Manholes over Existing Sanitary Sewer Systems. The contractor shall construct manholes over existing sanitary lines at locations shown on plans. Final connection to the existing sanitary sewer shall not be made until the system has been tested in accordance with the requirements of SHMC 18.24.180 and is ready for acceptance as outlined in this chapter. All broken edges shall be covered with nonshrinking grout and troweled smooth. The contractor shall prevent any debris from entering the manhole while breaking into the existing pipe. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 550.1, 2003)


18.24.150 Sewer pipe and fittings.

(1) General. Sanitary sewer pipe shall have flexible gasket joints. Joints on all fittings shall be the same as the joints used on the pipe. Caps or plugs shall be furnished with each fitting, outlet, or stub as required with the same type gasket and/or joint in the pipe.

(2) Materials.

(a) Polyvinyl Chloride Pipe (PVC). PVC pipe shall be as follows:

	Diameter	Type

	4″ – 15″	ASTM 3034 SDR 35

	18″ – 24″	ASTM F-679 SDR 35

	4″ – 12″	ASTM C-900; D-1784 DR

Gaskets shall conform to the requirements of ASTM 477 and ASTM 3212.

Fittings shall conform to the applicable portions of the following specifications: ASTM D1785, ASTM D2729, ASTM D2466, ASTM 2467, ASTM D3033, and ASTM D3034. Fitting joints shall be the same as the pipe joints.

(b) Ductile Iron Pipe. Ductile iron pipe shall conform to the requirements of ANSI A21.50-1 or AWWA C150-1, cement lined push-on joint. The minimum thickness class shall be Class 50 (up through 12-inch diameter pipe) and Class 51 (for 14-inch diameter and larger pipe).

Fittings shall be mechanical or push-on of the class as specified. Mechanical joint cast iron fittings shall conform to AWWA C110 and shall be of a class at least equal to that of the adjacent pipe. Push-on joint fittings shall be gray iron with body thickness and radii of curvature conforming to ANSI A21.10.

(c) Line Tap Fittings. Service laterals installed with new construction of main line(s) shall be manufactured tee connections and will be installed as shown in the standard detail drawings.

PVC tee saddle shall be in accordance with ASTM D-3034 with minimum cell classification of 1245B-C or 12364-C as defined in ASTM D-1784. Elastomeric seals meeting ASTM F-477 specifications, and located at both the lead and skirt ends of the saddle. Stainless steel band shall be a full nine-sixteenths inch wide. This saddle is allowed on PVC, clay, IPS, concrete, asbestos cement, and PE pipe.

Inserta Tee shall meet the same standards as the PVC tee saddle. This saddle is allowed only on thick wall pipe material, e.g., concrete, ductile iron, or rib-type plastic. 

(d) Grout. Grout shall be Sika 212, Euco N-S, Five Star, or approved equal nonmetallic cementitious commercial grout exhibiting zero shrinkage per ASTM C-827 and CRD-C-621. Grout shall not be amended with cement or sand and shall not be reconditioned with water after initial mixing. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 550.2, 2003)


18.24.160 Pipe installation.

(1) Workmanship.

(a) Line and Grade. The contractor shall establish line and grade for pipe by the use of lasers or by transferring the cut from the offset stakes to the trench at whatever intervals necessary to maintain the line and grade. The contractor shall check line and grade as necessary. In the event that the limits prescribed in this chapter are not met, the work shall be immediately stopped, the city notified, and the cause remedied before proceeding further with the work. Variance from the established line and grade shall not be greater than one-thirty-second inch per inch of pipe diameter and shall not exceed one-half inch for line and one-fourth inch for grade, providing that such variation does not result in a level or reverse-sloping invert. Variation in the invert elevation between adjoining ends of pipe shall not exceed one-sixty-fourth inch per inch of pipe diameter, or one-half-inch maximum.

(b) Pipe Handling. The contractor shall unload pipe only by approved means. Pipe shall not be dropped to the ground and shall not be dropped or dumped into trenches. The contractor shall inspect all pipe and fittings prior to lowering into trench to ensure no cracked, broken, or defective materials are used. The contractor shall clean ends of pipe thoroughly, remove foreign matter and dirt from inside of pipe, and keep it clean during laying and joining. The contractor shall lower pipe into the trench in such a manner as to avoid any physical damage to the pipe. The contractor shall remove all damaged pipe from the job site.

(c) Tying to Existing Sanitary Sewer. When a contractor ties into a “live” line, the contractor shall keep the new line plugged at the downstream end of the construction to prevent entry of ground water and debris into the city sanitary sewer system.

(d) Foreign Material. The contractor shall take all precautions necessary to prevent excavated or other foreign material from entering into the pipe during the laying operation. At all times, when laying operations are not in progress, the contractor shall use a mechanical plug at the open end of the last laid section of pipe to prevent entry of foreign materials or creep of the gasketed joints.

(e) Pipe Laying. Pipe laying shall proceed upgrade with spigot ends pointing in the direction of the flow. After a section of pipe has been lowered into the prepared trench, the contractor shall clean the end of the pipe to be joined, the inside of the joint, and the rubber ring (if required) immediately before joining the pipe, and make assembly of the joint in accordance with the recommendations of the manufacturer for the type of joint used. The contractor shall provide all special tools and appliances required for the jointing assembly. After the joint has been made, the pipe shall be checked for alignment and grade. The trench bottom shall form a continuous and uniform bearing and support for the pipe at every point between joints. Pipe should be rotated so that stenciling (pipe size, material, etc.) is on top and visible when pipe is exposed.

(f) Transition Fittings. When joining different types of pipes, the contractor shall use approved ridged fittings. No flexible fittings will be approved. Bell-type couplings are considered flexible and are not acceptable. 

(i) Shear ring/ridge transition couplings meeting the ASTM C564 or equal shall be used. 

(ii) PVC couplers or adapters shall meet the ASTM 3034-SDR 35/C-900-DR 18-D1784 specifications.

(iii) Ductile iron transition couplings shall meet the ASTM A536-80 for center and end rings, ASTM D2000 3 BA 75 for gaskets and AWWA C-111-80 for bolts and nuts.

(g) Pipe Bedding. The contractor shall install pipe zone material uniformly on both sides of the pipe up to the springline of the pipe. Material shall be compacted to ensure proper support within the haunching area. 

(h) Line Taps.

(i) Line taps shall be core drilled unless approved otherwise by the city. Core-drilled holes shall be done using a cylinder-style hole saw for plastic pipe material or a diamond core bit for concrete and ductile iron pipes.

(ii) Prior to installation of the saddle, the area around the saddle installation shall be clean and free of all rough edges.

(iii) While installing the saddle, no rock, dirt, or debris shall be allowed to enter the main sewer line.

(iv) The contractor shall install three-fourths-inch minus gravel in the pipe zone around the line tap, from four inches below the pipe or to undisturbed ground and to six inches above the pipe.

(v) Magnetic tape shall be installed on all building sewers per the standard details. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 550.3, 2003)


18.24.170 Building sewers.

(1) Service to Lots. Where streets or main line sewers are being constructed as part of a development, individual building sewers shall be constructed to serve each lot.

(a) Installation. All new building sewers being constructed as part of a development shall be installed with a permanent cap for testing purposes and to prevent migration of ground water and other unwanted materials from entering the line. The cap is to remain until the lateral is extended to new building.

Building sewers shall be installed in accordance with the Uniform Building Code (UBC) and Council of American Building Officials (CABO).

(b) Material. Pipes for building sewers shall be one of the following types:

(i) PVC (polyvinyl chloride), conforming to ASTM D3034 (green).

(ii) Ductile iron conforming to Class 50.

(c) Alignment and Grade. Building sewers shall be laid in a straight grade and alignment from the main sewer line to the edge of right-of-way or edge of permanent easement. The grade shall be a minimum of two percent. The pipe shall be laid on a pipe base of four inches of three-fourths-inch minus crushed rock. All plastic pipe shall have three-fourths-inch minus rock placed six inches over the top of the pipe.

(d) Markings. Building sewers shall be marked with a detectable underground magnetic tape. The magnetic tape shall be placed from the main pipeline to the end of the side lateral with 18 inches separation between the tape and pipe. The magnetic tape shall be green in color and have the following marking:

CAUTION SEWER BURIED BELOW

A two-by-four stake shall be installed at the end of the sanitary lateral from the invert of the pipe to three feet above the ground surface. The stake shall be of outdoor wood and marked for sanitary sewer. A magnetic tape shall be placed alongside the two-by-four. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 550.4, 2003)


18.24.180 Testing and acceptance.

(1) General. All gravity sanitary pipeline shall pass the required air tests, pass a deflection test, be video-inspected, and be free of visible leaks. All projects shall pass the required manhole tests. The contractor shall furnish all necessary testing equipment and perform the tests in a manner satisfactory to the city and Oregon DEQ.

(2) Line Cleaning. Prior to the internal pressure testing and inspection of the system, the contractor shall ball and flush and clean all parts of the system. The contractor shall remove all accumulated construction debris, rocks, gravel, sand, silt, and other foreign material from the system at or near the closest downstream manhole.

(3) Manholes.

(a) General. Sanitary sewer manholes shall be tested for acceptance after the trench has been backfilled, compaction requirements have been met, road base rock has been installed and the street paved, and concrete manhole closure collars have been installed. If the manholes have passed the tests and the castings have been disturbed by construction activities and need to be reinstalled, the manholes shall be retested.

(b) Vacuum Testing. The test will consist of plugging all inlets and outlets. A vacuum of 10 inches of mercury shall be drawn and the vacuum pump shut off. With the valves closed, the time shall be measured for the vacuum to drop to nine inches. Minimum time of test shall be 30 seconds. The manhole shall pass if the time for the vacuum reading to drop to nine inches meets or exceeds the values indicated in the table below:

	Depth of Manhole	Allowable Time (seconds)

	(feet)	48-inch	60-inch	72-inch

	8	20	26	33

	10	25	33	41

	12	30	39	49

	14	35	46	57

	16	40	52	65

	18	45	59	73

	20	50	65	81

	22	55	72	89

	24	59	78	97

	26	64	85	105

	28	69	91	113

	30	74	98	121

(c) Hydrostatic Testing. The test will consist of plugging all inlets and outlets and filling the manhole with water to the rim. Leakage in each manhole shall not exceed 0.2 gallons per hour per foot of head above the invert. Leakage will be determined by refilling to the rim using a calibrated or known volume container.

(4) Air Testing Pipeline.

(a) General. After construction of the system, including service connections, required compaction testing, and backfilling, the contractor shall conduct a low-pressure air test. The contractor shall provide all equipment and personnel for the test. Tests shall be conducted during normal working hours. Air tests for storm lines will not be required.

(b) Safety. Only qualified personnel shall be permitted to conduct the test. All plugs used to close the sewer for the air test must be capable of resisting the internal pressures and must be securely braced, if necessary. All air testing equipment must be placed above ground and no one shall be permitted to enter a manhole or trench where a plugged line is under pressure. All pressure must be released before the plugs are removed. 

(c) Method. All air testing shall be by the time pressure drop method. The test procedures are described as follows:

(i) Clean the lines to be tested and remove all debris.

(ii) The contractor has the option of wetting the lines prior to testing.

(iii) Plug all open ends with suitable test plugs; brace each plug securely.

(iv) Check the average height of ground water over the line. The test pressures required below shall be increased 0.433 psi for each foot of average water depth over the line.

(v) Add air slowly to the section of system being tested until the internal air pressure is raised to the test pressure specified below.

(vi) After the internal test pressure is reached, at least two minutes shall be allowed for the air temperature to stabilize, adding only the amount of air required to maintain pressure.

(vii) After the temperature stabilization period, disconnect the air supply.

(viii) Acceptance shall be based upon meeting or exceeding the requirements specified by Section 1140 of the Oregon Standard Specifications for Construction.

(ix) Record the diameter (inches), length (feet), end manhole number, time, pressure drop, and ground water level of the test on an inspection form. The recording form shall become a permanent record of the project.

(5) Deflection Test for Flexible Pipe. Sanitary sewers constructed of flexible pipe materials shall be deflection-tested. The test shall be conducted by pulling an approved mandrel through the completed pipeline. The diameter of the mandrel shall be 95 percent of the nominal pipe diameter. The mandrel shall be a rigid, nonadjustable, odd-numbering leg (nine legs minimum) mandrel having an effective length of not less than its nominal diameter.

Testing shall be conducted after the line has been completely balled and flushed out with water. The contractor will be required to locate and repair any section failing to pass the deflection test and to retest the section with air and deflection tests. Air test for storm lines will not be required.

(6) Video Inspection of Gravity Systems. All sanitary sewers shall be video-inspected and taped with an omni-view style camera prior to the city acceptance of the system(s). All pipes shall be thoroughly flushed immediately prior to the video inspection. A one-inch target ball shall be placed in format of the camera. A copy of the videotape and a written TV inspection report shall be supplied to the city. The videotape shall be recorded in color and on VHS format. Any and all problems, deficiencies, and imperfections discovered during the video inspection shall be noted on the videotape and the written report. 

(7) Video Inspection for Warranty Acceptance. The city shall conduct video inspection of all sanitary sewer lines after one year of service to determine any defects in the system. Problems found shall be corrected/repaired by the contractor at the contractor/developer’s expense. A new one-year warranty period will apply to all lines requiring repair.

If defects appear to be minor, an extended warranty period to be determined by the city will be required. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 550.5, 2003)


18.24.190 Prohibited activities.

The discharge, placement, deposit, dumping, or otherwise contributing a solid or liquid material into the public sanitary sewer system, either directly or indirectly, which may obstruct flow or otherwise interfere with the operation or function of a public sanitary sewer facility is prohibited. This shall include, but is not limited to, placing of soil or rock without an approved fill permit, or the dumping of debris, rubbish, trash, or other waste material. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 550.6, 2003)


Chapter 18.28 WATER SYSTEM

Sections:

Article I. Water System Design

18.28.005    Water system design.

18.28.010    Materials.

18.28.020    Pipeline installation.

18.28.030    Hydrostatic test of newly installed water line.

18.28.040    Sterilization of newly installed water line.

18.28.050    Tapping.

18.28.060    Cross-connection control and backflow assemblies.

Article II. Requirements for Water System Vault Installations – Vaults for Water Meters, PRVs, Fire Service and Domestic Backflow Devices

18.28.070    General requirements.

18.28.080    Water meter vaults.

Article I. Water System Design


18.28.005 Water system design.

The following section is intended as a guide for the design, installation, and testing of water system improvements. An approved water system capable of supplying required fire flow for fire protection shall be provided to all premises upon which buildings are to be constructed. The required fire flow must be available with a minimum residual pressure of 20 pounds per square inch (psi). Questions on required fire flow may be referred to the fire marshal’s office. The engineer may request that modifications be made for a specific project. In general, the following guidelines should be followed:

(1) All material shall be of new manufacture. No rebuilt, reconditioned, or used material will be allowed.

(2) Minimum size mains shall be six inches.

(3) Minimum pipe cover is 30 inches, measured from finish grade to the upper surface of the pipe barrel.

(4) Dead-end mains normally shall not be allowed. When they are permitted, a blow off assembly will be required. 

(5) Main extensions shall be installed through new developments to allow a logical extension of the city water line grid and to allow future development of adjacent undeveloped or underdeveloped properties.

(6) Valves shall be located, whenever possible, at intersections. In general, sufficient valves should be provided to permit shutting down any section of the line, not exceeding 500 feet, with valve operations in not more than three locations.

(7) Valves shall be installed in clusters at pipeline intersections.

(8) Valves 10 inches and smaller shall be gate valves. All gate valves shall be resilient wedge valves conforming to AWWA C-505. The city accepts Clow R.W., Mueller, and Kennedy valves, or city-approved equal. Two-inch or smaller valves shall be as specified by public works or the city engineer.

(9) Valves 12 inches and greater shall be butterfly valves. All butterfly valves shall be rubber-seated valves conforming to AWWA C-504. The city accepts Mueller and Kennedy AWWA valves, or city-approved equal.

(10) Fire hydrants shall not be connected to mains less than six inches in diameter. As per the UFC, fire hydrants shall be located to allow a 36-inch clear space surrounding the hydrant. For example, streetlights, signposts, protective posts, or retaining walls shall be no closer than 36 inches from the nearest portion of a hydrant. There shall also be no obstructions directly in line with any of the ports of the hydrant.

(11) For required fire hydrant location and spacing, contact the fire marshal’s office.

(12) All water system installation shall be designed to provide a pressure range of 50 psi to 90 psi at all times, including during peak demand.

(13) Pressure-reducing devices are to be approved on a per project basis to ensure compliance with the Uniform Plumbing Specialty Code. 

(14) Water service size shall be one-inch type K copper.

(15) Water services are to be single runs from the main line to each meter.

(16) At high points in the water system, combination air and vacuum release valves (CARV) shall be installed as required by the city engineer. All Air-Vac, air evacuation, and vacuum prevention valves of sizes two inches and larger shall vent to the outside of the vault. If construction of the valve does not permit the venting of leakage to the outside of the vault, a screened drain to daylight of at least the supply line size must be provided at a level that will prevent cross-connection and/or backflow problems. This decision will be made by the city engineer prior to the plan approval. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 610, 2003)


18.28.010 Materials.

(1) Water Pipes. Pipe shall be push-on joint ductile iron pipe. Fitting joints shall be mechanical joint ends. Push-on joint ductile iron pipe shall be cement-mortar lined and conform to ANSI/AWWA C104/A21.4 and ANSI A21.11, or city-approved equal. The type and thickness class shall be 50. The rubber ring gaskets shall conform to ANSI A21.11, be suitable for the specified pipe sizes and pressures, and shall be furnished with the pipe. A nontoxic vegetable soap lubricant shall be supplied with the pipe in sufficient quantities for installing the pipe furnished.

(2) Pipe Fittings.

(a) Mechanical Joint Fittings. Mechanical joint ductile iron fittings shall conform to ANSI/AWWA C104/A21.4 and shall be of class at least equal to that of the adjacent pipe. Mortar lining for fittings shall be the same thickness specified for pipe.

(b) Flanged Ductile Iron Fittings. Flanged fittings shall conform to ANSI B16.12 and shall be faced and drilled 125-pound ANSI. The fittings shall be cement-mortar lined to same thickness specified for pipe, and shall meet ANSI/AWWA C110/A21.11 for all other aspects.

(c) Gaskets. Gasket material for flanged joints in ductile iron pipe shall be cloth-inserted sheet rubber gaskets conforming to AWWA/ANSI C207/B16.21, one-eighth inch thick. The gasket shall be full-cut, with holes to pass bolts. Gasket material shall be free from corrosive alkali or acid ingredients.

(d) Mechanical Couplings. Mechanical couplings, not a part of the pipe itself, shall be ductile iron couplings with rubber rings and ductile iron bolts and nuts. Couplings shall be Mueller, Kennedy, or as approved by the city engineer. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 610.1, 2003)


18.28.020 Pipeline installation.

The work necessary to excavate, bed, and backfill water pipelines shall conform to the requirements of Articles VII and VIII of Chapter 18.08 SHMC, and the standard drawings of this title.

(1) Distributing Pipe. Distribute material on the job from the cars, trucks, or storage yard no faster than can be used to good advantage. In general, distribute no more than one week’s supply of material in advance of the laying.

(2) Handling Material. Provide and use proper implements, tools, and facilities for the safe and proper prosecution of the work. Lower all pipe, fittings, and appurtenances into the trench, piece by piece, by means of a crane, slings, or other suitable tools or equipment, in such a manner as to prevent damage or contamination to the pipeline materials and protective coatings and linings. Do not drop or dump pipeline materials into the trench.

(3) Cleaning Pipe and Fittings. Remove all lumps, blisters, and excess coal-tar coating from the bell and spigot ends of each pipe. Wire brush the outside of the spigot and the inside of the bell and wipe clean, dry, and free from oil and grease before the pipe is laid. Wipe the ends of mechanical joint pipe and fittings and of rubber gasket joint pipe and fittings clean of all dirt, grease, and foreign matter. Check interior of pipe for obstructions or debris and, if found, remove from pipe.

(4) Placing of the Pipe in the Trench. Do not allow foreign material to enter the pipe while it is being placed in the trench. If because of trench configuration or shoring detail it is necessary to place pipe in such a manner that bedding material may enter pipe, then engineer shall require tight woven canvas boots be used and removed when placing pipe.

(5) Push-On Joint Pipe. After the first length of push-on joint pipe is installed in the trench, secure pipe in place with approved backfill material tamped under and along sides to prevent movement.

(6) Cutting Pipe. Cut pipe for inserting valves, fittings, or closure pieces in a neat and clean manner without damaging the pipe or lining and so as to leave a smooth end at right angles to the axis of the pipe.

Cut pipe with milling-type cutter or saw. Do not flame cut.

(7) Dressing Cut Ends. Dress cut ends of push-on joint pipe by beveling, as recommended by the manufacturer.

(8) Bell End to Face Direction of Laying. Unless otherwise directed, lay pipe with bell end facing in the direction of the laying. For lines on steep slopes, face bells upgrade only.

(9) Installation of mechanical joint pipe shall be as specified in AWWA C111, including bolt torque ranges. Mechanical joint gaskets shall be vulcanized rubber and no more than three years old. 

(10) All material shall be of new manufacture. No rebuilt or reconditioned material will be allowed. 

(11) Permissible Deflection of Joints. Wherever it is necessary to deflect pipe from a straight line either in a vertical or horizontal plane, or where long-radius curves are permitted, the amount of deflection allowed shall not exceed the values in the following table:

	MAXIMUM DEFLECTION PERMITTED*

18-Foot Length Pipe

	MECHANICAL JOINT**

MAXIMUM DEFLECTION	PUSH-ON JOINT

MAXIMUM DEFLECTION

	DIAMETER INCHES	ANGLE DEGREES AND MINUTES	DEFLECTION INCHES	ANGLE DEGREES	DEFLECTION INCHES

	4	8-18	31	5	18

	6	7-07	27	5	18

	8	5-21	20	5	18

	10	5-21	20	5	18

	12	5-21	20	5	18

*    The maximum deflection shall be whichever is less, the table or that recommended by the pipe manufacturer.

**    Safe deflection for 150 pounds pressure. For higher pressure, reduce tabulated deflection proportionally 10 percent for each 150 pounds added pressure.

(12) Alignment. Pipelines intended to be straight shall not deviate from the straight line at any joint in excess of one inch horizontally or vertically.

(13) Unsuitable Conditions for Laying Pipe. Do not lay pipe in water or when, in the opinion of the engineer, trench conditions are unsuitable.

(14) Joining Push-On Joint Pipe and Mechanical Joint Fittings. Lay and join pipe with push-on-type joints in strict accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. Provide all special tools and devices, such as special jacks, chokers, and similar items required for the installation. Lubricant for the pipe gaskets shall be furnished by the pipe manufacturer, and no substitutes will be permitted under any circumstances.

Mechanical joint fittings vary slightly with different manufacturers. Install the particular fittings furnished in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. In general, the procedure shall be as hereinafter specified. Clean the ends of the fittings of all dirt, mud, and foreign matter by washing with water and scrubbing with a wire brush, after which, slip the gland and gasket on the plain end of the pipe. If necessary, lubricate the end of the pipe to facilitate sliding the gasket in place. Then guide the fitting onto the spigot of the pipe previously laid.

(15) Anchorage and Thrust Blocking. On all pipelines six inches in diameter or larger, securely anchor by suitable thrust blocking all tees, plugs, caps, and bends exceeding 11 and one-fourth degrees, and at other locations where unbalanced forces exist, as determined by the engineer.

Provide reaction or thrust blocking as directed. The concrete mix shall have a compressive strength of not less than 3,000 pounds per square inch. Place blocking between the undisturbed ground and the fitting to be anchored. The bearing surface shall be as shown on Standard Drawing 430. Place the blocking so that the pipe and fitting joints will be accessible to repairs.

(16) Additional Restraints. Meg-a-lugs are acceptable restraints under certain conditions as approved by the city engineer. Fire hydrants shall be installed with a fully restrained system using a combination of meg-a-lugs and field lock gaskets.

(17) Downtime Protection. When stopping work for the day, the contractor shall plug pipe ends to prevent rodents, other small animals, or debris from entering the pipe. Plugs used shall be tight-woven canvas, securely tied around outside of pipe end. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 610.2, 2003)


18.28.030 Hydrostatic test of newly installed water line.

The contractor shall make pressure and leakage tests on all newly laid pipe. The contractor shall furnish all necessary equipment and material, make all taps in the pipe as required, and conduct the tests. The engineer will monitor the tests, record the results, and provide a copy of those results to the city. The engineer shall also indicate that the thrusting blocks have obtained the needed strength to resist the pressures obtained during the hydrostatic test. 

The contractor shall furnish the following equipment and materials for the tests:

	AMOUNT	DESCRIPTION

	2	Approved graduated containers.

	2	Pressure gauges (maximum two psi increments).

	1	Hydraulic force pump approved by the engineer. Suitable hose and additional equipment as required.

Conduct the tests after the trench has been backfilled or partially backfilled. Where any section of pipe is provided with concrete reaction blocking, do not make the pressure tests until at least five days have elapsed after the concrete thrust blocking is installed. If high-early cement is used for the concrete thrust blocking, the time may be cut by two days or as permitted by the engineer.

Conduct pressure tests in the following manner, unless otherwise approved by the engineer. After the trench has been backfilled or partially backfilled as specified herein, fill the pipe with water, expelling all air during the filling. The minimum test pressure shall be 150 pounds per square inch (psi). 

(1) Duration. The duration of each pressure test shall be 60 minutes, unless otherwise directed by the engineer.

(2) Procedure. Fill the pipe with water and apply the specified test pressure by pumping, if necessary. Then valve off the pump and hold the pressure in the line for the test period. At the end of the test period, operate the pump until the test pressure is again attained. The pump suction shall be in a clean barrel or similar device approved prior to filling with clean water, or metered so that the amount of water required to restore the test pressure may be measured accurately.

(3) Leakage. “Leakage” shall be defined as the quantity of water necessary to restore the specified test pressure at the end of the test period. No pipe installation will be accepted if the leakage is greater than the number of gallons per hour as determined by the following formula: 

	L =	SD(P)1/2

	 	133,200

In the above formula:

L = Allowable leakage, in gallons per hour.

S = Length of pipe to be tested, in feet.

D = Nominal diameter of pipe, in inches.

P = Average test pressure during the leakage test, in pounds per square inch.

(4) Correction of Excessive Leakage. Should any test of pipe laid disclose leakage greater than that allowed, locate and repair the defective joints or pipe until the leakage of a subsequent test is within the specified allowance.

(5) Isolation of Existing Systems Prior to Testing. Existing water pipelines shall be protected from contamination during the testing process for new construction. Use of special “blind flanges” will be necessary if the line being tested cannot be adequately separated from existing systems. The engineer shall submit shop drawings and proposed procedures to the city prior to installing any special testing device. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 610.3, 2003)


18.28.040 Sterilization of newly installed water line.

Pipeline intended to carry potable water shall be sterilized before placing in service. Sterilizing procedures shall conform to AWWA C-651. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 610.4, 2003)


18.28.050 Tapping.

All tapping of four-inch and larger public water pipe shall be performed using an all stainless steel tapping sleeve.

If a live tap is required in order to extend a line over 10 inches in diameter a gate valve will be allowed. All valves shall be installed with valve boxes and lids per city standards.

Prior to tapping, all items that may come in contact with the public water shall be swabbed with a 300-mg/L chlorine solution. The following items shall be the minimum items swabbed: tapping machine bit and cutter, tapping valve, tapping sleeve, and the exterior section of pipe to be tapped after the pipe has been cleaned with a wire brush (to be extended a minimum of six inches outside the tapping area). (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 610.5, 2003)


18.28.060 Cross-connection control and backflow assemblies.

When required, backflow prevention assemblies for protection of the public water system shall meet the requirements set forth in the current OAR 333-61-070 and the Uniform Plumbing Code. 

The assembly shall be installed at the location normally established for water meters, usually at the property line. A water service shall not be turned on until all required backflow prevention assemblies are installed, inspected, tested, approved, and registered with the city of St. Helens. Costs of all installations, including all costs of inspection and testing fees, shall be the responsibility of the customer. The backflow prevention assembly will remain the property of the customer. The customer will be responsible for all maintenance and testing of the assembly and vault. 

There are three types of backflow prevention assemblies which the city will allow as protection of the public water system. The Oregon Health Division, Drinking Water Section, provides a list of approved assemblies.

The type of backflow prevention assembly required is determined by the aforementioned rules and codes, based on the type of premises to which water service is being provided. The approved types of assemblies are listed below with some of the types of premises that must be protected by each type of assembly. However, these lists are not complete, they are only intended to give you some basic guidelines. 

(1) Reduced Pressure Backflow Assembly. An approved reduced pressure backflow assembly shall be installed on the service connection above ground to the following:

(a) Any tax lot that has an auxiliary water supply on or available to it. This will include any above or below ground water source. (The most commonly encountered type of auxiliary water supply is a private well.)

(b) Commercial buildings which are located within an industrial zone.

(c) Hospitals, medical centers, and clinics.

(d) Mortuaries and nursing homes.

(e) Gas stations.

(f) Sewage pumps and lift stations.

(g) Dry cleaners and commercial laundries.

(h) Any water system which has a pump to supplement pressure.

(2) Double Check Assembly or Double Detector Check Assembly. An approved double check assembly or an approved double detector check assembly shall be required (provided that all internal plumbing is installed and maintained in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code) on the service connection to premises where there is:

(a) Any fire system or water line to a private fire hydrant.

(b) Shopping centers or large retail stores.

(c) Restaurants or fast food establishments.

(d) Any water service which is larger than two inches in diameter.

(3) Installation and Testing. Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed at the water service connection on the customer side of the meter. Backflow assemblies three-inch diameter and larger shall be installed in a vault in accordance with Article II of this chapter. Backflow prevention assemblies smaller than three inches shall be installed in a typical meter box, all-concrete construction, with a one-piece full traffic lid.

After installation, all backflow prevention assemblies that are installed must be tested by a state of Oregon certified tester. The results of the testing shall be received by the city prior to issuance of “final occupancy.” (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 610.6, 2003)

Article II. Requirements for Water System Vault Installations – Vaults for Water Meters, PRVs, Fire Service and Domestic Backflow Devices


18.28.070 General requirements.

To ensure proper operation and accessibility of all assemblies, the following requirements shall apply to installation of these assemblies, unless otherwise approved by the city of St. Helens:

(1) Provide approved ladder if the vault or chamber depth is five feet, zero inches or greater and entry is through the vault or chamber roof. 

(2) Adequate drainage for the vault or chamber shall be provided. (Drainage to piped storm systems allowed with check valve.)

(3) Vault must be equipped with a moisture-proof light fixture if adequate lighting is not available.

(4) Vault is to have no other use, except for use described by these standards.

(5) Vault shall be installed on undisturbed base or compacted three-fourths to zero gravel base.

(6) No piping shall be installed in excess of three feet above the vault floor.

(7) Assembly is to be adequately supported from the floor, and suitably restrained from movement. Supports shall consist of steel supports or approved equal; no wood supports shall be used.

(8) All electrical wiring shall be inspected by the Columbia County electrical inspector (permit is required).

(9) The assembly shall be readily accessible with adequate room for maintenance.

(10) All new services are to be pressure-tested and disinfected by the contractor and proven to be bacteriologically safe from the existing main to the vault.

(11) The assembly shall be protected from freezing and other severe weather conditions. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 620.1, 2003)


18.28.080 Water meter vaults.

The vault is to be provided and installed by the contractor, per Standard Drawing 405. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 620.2, 2003)


Chapter 18.32 BICYCLE/PEDESTRIAN FACILITIES

Sections:

18.32.010    General requirements.

18.32.020    On-street facilities.


18.32.010 General requirements.

Safe, convenient, and properly designed facilities are essential to accommodate and encourage bicycle riding and pedestrian movements. The purpose of these standards is to establish design criteria for the development of public bikeway and pedestrian facility construction. The following are selected city policy statements concerning bikeway and pedestrian facilities:

(1) All bikeway and pedestrian facility development and construction provided and intended for public use shall conform to these standard specifications.

(2) Bicycle facilities shall be constructed along routes identified in the adopted comprehensive plan and all addendums thereof. 

(3) For all biking and pedestrian facilities that fall within wetlands or stream corridors, the contractor and the city shall meet with the appropriate state and federal resource agencies to review and assess site-specific development compatibility issues prior to selecting any alternative for development.

(a) This review shall assess all potential and reasonable alternatives for these subject pathways in light of impacts to these affected areas.

(b) The review of the alternatives shall specifically consider the level to which impacts can (or cannot) be satisfactorily mitigated.

(4) Bikeways shall conform to the design guidelines set forth in the “Guide for Development of New Bicycle Facilities” as published by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) and adopted by the Oregon Transportation Commission.

(5) Bikeway signs shall be in conformance to the “Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices” (MUTCD), as supplemented and adopted by the Oregon Transportation Commission.

The minimum width of a one-directional bicycle path is five feet. The minimum width for two-way bikeways separated from the road is eight feet.

A two-foot-wide clear area is desirable to provide clearance from trees, poles, walls, fences, guardrails, or other lateral obstructions. A wider clear area on either side of the bicycle path can serve as a separate jogging path.

The vertical clearance to obstructions should be a minimum of 8.2 feet. (Ord. 3203 § 2 (Att. A), 2016; Ord. 2875 Appx. § 710, 2003)


18.32.020 On-street facilities.

(1) Drainage Grates. Drainage grate inlets and utility covers are potential problems to bicyclists. All grate covers shall be bicycle-friendly with a herringbone rib pattern as shown in the standard drawings. It is important that grates and utility covers be adjusted flush with the surface, including after a roadway is resurfaced.

(2) Traffic Control. The MUTCD and the Oregon Supplement should be consulted for guidance on signs and pavement markings. Where bicyclists are expected to use different patterns than motorists, direction signing should be used to advise bicyclists of this special routing.

(3) Bicycle Lanes. Bicycle lanes should always be one-way facilities and carry traffic in the same direction as adjacent motor vehicle traffic. Wrong-way riding is a major cause of bicycle accidents and violates the Rules of the Road stated in the Uniform Vehicle Code. Bicycle lanes on one-way streets should be on the right side of the street, except in areas where a bicycle lane on the left would decrease the number of conflicts.

Under ideal conditions, minimum bicycle lane width is five feet. However, certain edge conditions dictate additional desirable bicycle lane width. In the case where bike lanes are adjacent to monolithic curb and gutters, a minimum lane width of four feet should be maintained from the edge of the longitudinal joint between the pavement and the gutter. 

Where parking is permitted adjacent to a bicycle lane it is preferable to designate separate parking and bicycle lanes. Where parking volume is substantial and/or turnover is high, an additional one or two feet of width is desirable for safe bicycle operation.

Bicyclists do not generally ride near a curb because of the possibility of debris, of hitting a pedal on the curb, of an uneven longitudinal joint, or of a steeper cross-slope. Bicycle lanes in this location should have a minimum width of five feet from the curb face. If the longitudinal joint between the gutter pan and the roadway surface is uneven and falls within five feet of the curb face, a minimum of four feet should be provided between the joint and the motor vehicle lanes.

Bicycle lanes on a highway without curb or gutter: Bicycle lanes should be located between the motor vehicle lanes and the roadway shoulders. Bicycle lanes may have a minimum width of four feet where the shoulder can provide additional maneuvering width. A width of five feet or greater is preferable; additional widths are desirable where substantial truck traffic is present, on grades, or where motor vehicle speeds exceed 35 miles per hour.

At intersections, bicyclists proceeding straight through and motorist turning right must cross paths. Striping and signing configurations which encourage these crossings in advance of the intersection, in a merging fashion, are generally preferable to those that force the crossing in the immediate vicinity of the intersection. To a lesser extent, the same is true for left-turning bicyclists; however, in this maneuver, Oregon’s vehicle codes allow the bicyclist the option of making either a “vehicular style” left turn (where the bicyclist merges leftward to the same lane used for motor vehicle left turns) or a “pedestrian style” left turn (where the bicyclist proceeds straight through the intersection, turns left at the far side, then proceeds across the intersection again on the cross street). Where there are numerous left-turning bicyclists, a separate turning lane, as indicated in Part IX of the MUTCD, should be considered. General guidance for pavement marking of bicycle lanes is contained in the MUTCD.

Adequate pavement surface, bicycle-safe grate inlets, safe railroad crossings, and traffic signals responsive to bicycles should always be provided on roadways where bicycle lanes are being designated. Raised pavement markings and raised barriers can be dangerous obstacles for bicyclists and should not be used to delineate bicycle lanes.

(4) Widened Sidewalk. Widened sidewalks for bicycle use should only be considered where more preferred facilities, such as separated pathways, bike lanes, or shared roadway facilities are not possible due to street right-of-way constraints or within developed areas where independent rights-of-way cannot be provided. Widened sidewalks should be considered where pathways terminate at poor street crossing locations to lead bicyclists to safe crossing locations. Where widened sidewalks are used as a designated bikeway, they should be identifiable by striping, signing, or lighting – or a combination of these features. Ideally, widened sidewalks are used only where planter strips are also present. Widened sidewalks should not be encumbered by utility poles, hydrants, driveway aprons, street trees, signposts, and other obstacles which act to reduce the usable width of the facility. Alignment alternatives shall consider minimizing street and driveway crossings. Widened sidewalks should maintain a constant grade and minimize dips and rises associated with driveway crossings.

(5) Bikeway/Wheelchair Ramps. Intersection curb cuts or ramps, commonly referred to as wheelchair ramps, serve a multitude of user groups – these include, in addition to wheelchairs, bicyclists, the elderly (ranging from using walkers, canes, or adult tricycles), the visually impaired, or other handicapped persons. Due to this range of users and the variety of their needs when utilizing sidewalks, it is imperative that all intersections be equipped with an adequate system of ramps.

Design components for ramps must consider slope, width of the ramp, angle of approach, surface roughness, pavement appurtenances (i.e., catch basins, valve covers, etc.), and gutter smoothness. Curb ramps must meet the design criteria established by the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 720, 2003)


Chapter 18.36 ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION, EROSION PREVENTION, AND SEDIMENT CONTROL RULES

Sections:

18.36.010    Introduction.

18.36.020    General policy.

18.36.030    Enforcement.

18.36.040    Erosion prevention and sediment control.

18.36.050    Contaminated soils.


18.36.010 Introduction.

This chapter identifies requirements for erosion prevention and sediment control (EPSC). The provisions of this chapter are intended to prevent and reduce adverse impacts to the drainage system and water resources. In combination with other state, federal, and local laws and ordinances, these requirements are intended to protect the beneficial uses of waters within the greater St. Helens service district.

The city will follow the best management practices (BMPs) for EPSC as detailed in the “Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control Planning and Design Manual” issued through CleanWater Services of Washington County. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 810, 2003)


18.36.020 General policy.

(1) Erosion Prevention and Sediment Control Policy. This chapter specifies the use of erosion prevention techniques and sediment control measures. The use of erosion prevention techniques shall be emphasized, rather than sediment control measures. This shall be especially important on larger construction sites immediately before and during the rainy season. Erosion prevention techniques are designed to protect soil particles from the force of rain and wind so that they will not erode. These techniques include, but are not limited to, such things as construction scheduling, ground cover, and matting. Sediment control measures are designed to capture soil particles after they have been dislodged and attempt to retain the soil particles on site. These measures include, but are not limited to, silt fences, sediment barriers, and settling basins. Both erosion prevention techniques and sediment control measures have appropriate uses; however, numerous case studies have shown that sediment control measures are less effective in preventing soil movement than erosion prevention techniques.

(2) Existing Vegetation. As far as practicable, the existing vegetation shall be protected and left in place, in accordance with the clearing limits on the approved erosion prevention and sediment control plans. Work areas shall be carefully located and marked to reduce potential damage. Trees shall not be used as anchors for stabilizing working equipment.

Where existing vegetation has been removed, or the original land contours disturbed, the site shall be revegetated, and the vegetation established, as soon as practicable. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 820, 2003)


18.36.030 Enforcement.

Failure to comply with any provision of this chapter or with any term of an erosion prevention and sedimentation control plan shall be deemed a violation and subject to enforcement action pursuant to applicable city ordinances, resolutions and orders, including all implementing rules and regulations. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 830, 2003)


18.36.040 Erosion prevention and sediment control.

(1) Application and Purpose.

(a) It is a city requirement to reduce the amount of sediment and other pollutants reaching the public storm and surface water system resulting from development, construction, grading, excavating, clearing, and any other activity which accelerates erosion, to the limits prescribed in this chapter.

(b) It is the policy of the city to require temporary and permanent measures for all construction projects to lessen the adverse effects of construction on the environment. All projects shall include properly installed, operated, and maintained temporary and permanent erosion control measures as provided in this section and/or in an approved plan, designed to protect the environment during the term of the project. Additionally, compliance with the measures prescribed in this chapter and/or in an approved plan do not alleviate or diminish the necessity to provide effective and comprehensive erosion prevention and sediment control. These erosion control rules apply to all properties within the city limits, regardless of whether that property is involved in a construction or development activity.

(c) Nothing in this section shall relieve any person of the obligation to comply with the regulations or permits of any federal, state, or local authority.

(2) Erosion Prohibited.

(a) Visible or measurable erosion which enters, or is likely to enter, the public or private storm system or other properties, is hereby prohibited, and is a violation of these rules. The owner of the property, permittee under a construction permit, together with any person or persons, including but not limited to the contractor or the engineer causing such erosion, shall be held responsible for violation of these rules.

(b) No person shall create physical erosion by dragging, dropping, tracking, or otherwise placing or depositing, or permitting to be deposited, mud, dirt, rock or other such debris upon a public street or into any part of the public storm system, or any part of a private storm system which drains or connects to the public storm system. Any such deposit of material shall be immediately removed using hand labor or mechanical means. No material shall be washed or flushed into any part of the storm system until all mechanical means to remove the debris have been exhausted and preventative sediment filtration is in place. The owner of the property, permittee, together with any person or persons, including but not limited to the contractor or the engineer who causes such erosion, shall be held responsible for violation of these rules.

(c) Excess materials and/or stockpiles shall be removed or tarped during wet weather conditions throughout the entire construction process, including home or building construction.

(3) Maintenance. The permittee shall maintain the facilities and techniques contained in the approved erosion prevention and sediment control plan so as to continue to be effective during the construction phase, post-construction phase, establishment of permanent vegetation, or any other permitted activity. If the facilities and techniques approved in an erosion prevention and sediment control plan are not effective or sufficient as determined by the city site inspection, the permittee shall submit a revised plan within three working days of written notification by the city. Upon approval of the revised plan by the city, the permittee shall immediately implement the additional facilities and techniques included in the revised plan. In cases where erosion is likely to occur, the city may require the applicant to install interim control measures prior to submittal of the revised erosion prevention and sediment control plan.

(4) Inspection.

(a) City Initial Inspection. On a site development or any other type of project, the erosion prevention and sediment control measures shall be installed prior to the start of any permitted activity. 

(b) Owner Inspections and Inspection Logs. The owner shall be required to inspect erosion prevention and sediment control measures and provide information to the city. Inspections shall be completed on a daily basis or as required by the erosion prevention and sediment control plans. Logs are to be maintained on site and available to the city inspector(s) upon request.

(c) Final Inspection. A final erosion control inspection shall be required prior to the sale or conveyance to new property owner(s) or prior to the removal of erosion prevention and sediment control measures.

(5) Erosion Prevention Techniques and Methods. The engineer of record shall be held ultimately responsible for the design and functionality of the erosion prevention and sediment control plan. The following are minimum requirements of any plan submitted for city approval:

(a) A gravel construction entrance is required. If there is more than one vehicle access point, a gravel construction entrance shall be required at each entrance. The responsibility for the design and performance of the driveway remains with the permittee. Vehicles or equipment shall not enter a property adjacent to a stream, watercourse, storm facility, or wetlands unless adequate measures are installed to prevent physical erosion into the water or wetland.

(b) The use of straw bales as a sediment filter or barrier is not allowed.

(c) Plastic sheeting shall generally not be used as an erosion control measure for single-family house construction. Plastic sheeting may be used to protect small, highly erodible areas, or temporary stockpiles of material. If plastic sheeting is used, the path of concentrated flow from the plastic must be protected.

(d) The erosion prevention and sediment control measures shall remain in place and be maintained in good condition until all disturbed soil areas are permanently stabilized by installation and establishment of landscaping, grass, mulching, or otherwise covered and protected from erosion.

(e) On sites where vegetation and ground cover have been removed from more than one acre of land, vegetative ground cover shall be planted on or before September 1st with the ground cover established by October 15th. As an alternative, if ground cover is not established by October 15th, the open areas shall be protected through the winter with straw mulch, erosion blankets, or other approved method(s).

(f) Sediment barriers are not required on a site:

(i) Where there are no concentrated flows and the slope being protected has a grade of less than two percent.

(ii) Where flows are collected through the use of temporary or permanent grading or other means such that the flows are routed to an approved settling pond, filtering system, or sediment barrier.

(iii) Where there are no concentrated flows, slopes are less than 10 percent, and where the runoff passes through a grassed area which is either owned by the applicant, or such use is allowed, by written agreement, by the owner of the grassed area. The grass area shall be at least equal in dimensions to the project area.

(iv) Where the surface is protected by approved ground cover or matting.

(6) Dust. Dust shall be minimized to the extent practicable, utilizing all measures necessary, including, but not limited to:

(a) Sprinkling haul and access roads and other exposed dust-producing areas with water.

(b) Applying city-approved dust palliatives on access and haul roads.

(c) Establishing temporary vegetative cover.

(d) Placing wood chips or other effective mulches on vehicle and pedestrian use areas.

(e) Maintaining the proper moisture condition on all fill surfaces.

(f) Prewetting cut and borrow area surfaces.

(g) Use of covered haul equipment. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 840, 2003)


18.36.050 Contaminated soils.

In the event the construction process reveals soils contaminated with hazardous materials or chemicals, the contractor shall stop work immediately, ensure no contaminated material is hauled from the site, remove his work force from the immediate area of the contaminated area, leaving all machinery and equipment, and secure the area from access by the public until such time as a response team has relieved them of that responsibility. The contractor shall immediately notify an emergency response team, the city, and DEQ of the situation. (Ord. 2875 Appx. § 850, 2003)

STANDARD DETAILS INDEX

Sidewalk, Driveway, and Curb and Gutter Details 

	Drawing Number	Drawing Title

	199	Sample Drawing of Typical Lot Drainage Plan

	200	Standard Monolithic Curb and Gutter

	205	Mountable Curb

	210	Type ‘A’ Curb – (On Special Application)

	215	Concrete Valley Gutter

	220	Sidewalk Details

	221	Typical Mailbox and Signage Location

	225	Residential Street Wheelchair and Bicycle Ramps

	230	Arterial/Collector Street Wheelchair Access Ramps

	235	Wheelchair Access Ramp

	245	Commercial Driveway with Curbs

	250	Curb Knockout for Driveways

	252	Standard ADA Sidewalk Approach

	252-A	ADA Driveway Approach with Mountable Curb

	255	Sidewalk Details: Obstructions and Protruding Objects

Street and Pavement Details 

	Drawing Number	Drawing Title

	256	Street Utility Patch

	260	Offset Crown

	265	Geodetic Monument – Soft Soils

	266	Centerline Survey Monuments

	267	Monument Box

	284	Approved Fire Turn-Around Configurations

	286	Double Street Barricade – Type III

	286-A	Single Street Barricade – Type III

General Utilities and Trench Details 

	Drawing Number	Drawing Title

	295	Standard Utility Locations

	300	Typical Trench Detail

	301	Joint Utility Trench

	305	Concrete Cradle and Cap Detail

	310	Steep Slope Pipe Anchor Walls

Storm Water Details 

	Drawing Number	Drawing Title

	315	Typical 20″ x 24″ Catch Basin

	325	Ditch Inlet

	330	Subsurface Drain

	331	Figure 3.1 – Average Velocity

Sanitary Sewer Details 

	Drawing Number	Drawing Title

	335	Shallow Trench Service Connection, Blocking, and Marking

	336	Typical Deep Trench Service Connect Detail

	340	Cleanout Detail

Manhole Details 

	Drawing Number	Drawing Title

	345	Manhole Adjustment Rings for Resurfacing

	346	Manhole Cover and Frame Details

	347	Cam-Lock Manhole Cover and Frame

	350	Typical Manhole Detail

	351	Flat-Top Manhole

	352	Beaver Slide Manhole

	353	Typical Outside Drop Manhole Detail

	354	Inside Drop Manhole

	355	Pollution Control Manhole Inside Elbow

	356	Pollution Control Manhole Outside Elbow

	360	Manhole Base Section

	361	Large Manhole Base Section

	362	Large Cast-in-Place Concrete Manhole Base

Water Details 

	Drawing Number	Drawing Title

	400	Fire Hydrant Installation

	405	Single Water Service Installation

	406	Brooks 12″ x 20″ Meter Box for 1″ Water Meter

	410	Gate Valve Setting Detail

	411	18″ Flange Up Valve Box and Cover

	415	Air Release Valve

	420	Permanent 2″ Blowoff

	421	Elipse # 88 Sampling Station

	422	Temporary 2″ Blowoff

	425	Collar Thrust Block

	430	Thrust Blocking Details





[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]






[IMAGE]



Title 19 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN* 

Chapters:

19.04    Introduction

19.08    General Goals and Policies

19.12    Specific Land Use Goals and Policies

19.16    Amendments to the Comprehensive Plan

19.20    Maps

19.24    Economic Opportunities Analysis

19.28    Waterfront Development Prioritization Plan

19.30    Transportation Systems Plan

19.32    US 30 and Columbia Boulevard/St. Helens Street Corridor Master Plan

19.34    Parks and Trails Master Plan

*    Code reviser’s note: Ordinance 3052 amends the title and Section 5 of Ordinance 2980 to provide that Ordinance 2980 supersedes Ordinance 2615.


Chapter 19.04 INTRODUCTION

Sections:

19.04.010    Introduction.


19.04.010 Introduction.

This plan was first developed in 1978 in response to Oregon Revised Statute 197 and Senate Bill 100. The plan was acknowledged by the Department of Land Conservation and Development in 1984 and has had several minor amendments and one major update in 1991. This is the second major update since its inception.

The official Comprehensive Plan shall be the goals and policies and the maps. Supporting documents shall be history, background, data, surveys, and assumptions.

The basis for this plan is first the assumption that use of land requires order beyond that of simply economic determination. As such the federal government has encouraged land use planning and in particular land use comprehensive plans since 1928 with the passage of “A Standard City Planning Enabling Act.” The state of Oregon has refined the planning process with the passage of Senate Bill 100 in 1973.

The second basis for this plan is a continuation of the earlier versions which were built upon a great deal of data, citizen input, staff thought and legislative deliberations before it was presented to the state as the plan for the city of St. Helens to use as the guide for land use in the short and long term. This amendment adds to the 1978 Comprehensive Plan by updating it and modifying some of the goals and policies as befit the changes in facts, data, assumptions and desires of the community.

The definition of comprehensive plan is found in ORS 197.015. It means a generalized, coordinated land use map and policy statement of the governing body of a local government that interrelates all functional and natural systems and activities relating to the use of lands, including but not limited to sewer and water systems, transportation systems, educational facilities, recreational facilities, and natural resources and air and water quality management programs. “Comprehensive” means all-inclusive, both in terms of the geographic area covered and functional and natural activities and systems occurring in the area covered by the plan. “General nature” means a summary of policies and proposals in broad categories and does not necessarily indicate specific locations of any area, activity or use. A plan is “coordinated” when the needs of all levels of governments, semipublic and private agencies and the citizens of Oregon have been considered and accommodated as much as possible. “Land” includes water, both surface and subsurface, and the air.

Generally this plan shall follow the Oregon Statewide Land Use Planning Goals and Guidelines for Goals 1, 2, and 5 through 15. (Ord. 2980 § 2, 2006)


Chapter 19.08 GENERAL GOALS AND POLICIES

Sections:

19.08.010    Citizen involvement.

19.08.020    Economic goals and policies.

19.08.030    Public services and facilities goals and policies.

19.08.040    Transportation goals and policies.

19.08.050    Housing goals and policies.

19.08.060    Natural factors and local resources goals and policies.


19.08.010 Citizen involvement.

(Ref: Statewide Planning Goal 1)

(1) Preface. It is the intent of the city of St. Helens city council to have a program that ensures the opportunity for the citizens of the city to be involved in all phases of the land use planning process.

(2) Goals.

(a) Keep the citizens informed of opportunities for involvement.

(b) Develop programs to involve citizens in the land use planning process.

(3) Policies.

(a) Create a permanent committee to develop and implement programs to involve as many citizens as possible in the land use planning process.

(b) At least annually inform the citizens of the city of land use activities for the last year and proposed plans for land use activities for the coming year. (Ord. 2980 § 2, 2006)


19.08.020 Economic goals and policies.

(Ref: Statewide Planning Goal 9)

(1) Preface. Historically the city of St. Helens economy has been directly related to the Columbia River, forests and mineral aggregate resources. In the last decade there has been a significant shift in employment with over 50 percent of the residents commuting out of the county for employment. This is not a result of dying industries as much as it is a phenomenon of lower land costs, good quality of life, and reasonable commute times. Economic growth in the city of St. Helens is mostly due to population growth. New businesses are locating here to serve the growing population. Some new industrial growth is occurring but with very few jobs. 

The largest employers inside the city limits are government agencies, then forest/wood products manufacturers, and then retailers. The city has over two miles of water front and another mile of water front in the urban growth area. There are three marinas and about 2,700 feet of public docks. With the city’s history of being a very old town (relative to Oregon’s history) located on the largest river in the Northwest, tourism is a major target of the city leaders’ plans for increased economic development.

The city’s vision plan envisions a maximum of 50 percent commuters, increased tourism, and self sufficiency in several areas such as healthcare and jobs. The city’s leaders are working with business leaders in developing plans to encourage more businesses to locate in St. Helens. The city’s leaders are coordinating with state leaders to improve the attractiveness of St. Helens for businesses and industries to locate in St. Helens. 

(2) Goals.

(a) To maintain favorable conditions for a growing, healthy, stable and diversified business and industrial climate.

(b) To encourage the expansion of employment opportunities within the urban area so residents can work within their communities rather than commute to jobs outside the county.

(c) To promote industrial development necessary to provide a balanced tax base for the operation of local government services.

(d) To establish greater local control over the destiny of the local economic development.

(3) Policies. It is the policy of the city of St. Helens to:

(a) Develop program strategies with other agencies, groups and businesses in an effort to improve the local economy. Strategies should consider but not be limited to:

(i) Tax incentives and disincentives; 

(ii) Land use controls and ordinances; 

(iii) Preferential assessments;

(iv) Capital improvement programming; and

(v) Fee and less-than-fee acquisition techniques.

(b) Assist in programs to attract diverse businesses and industries.

(c) Work with applicable agencies at the state and federal levels in enacting controls and performance standards for industrial operators to reduce the possibility of adverse impacts on the environment.

(d) Encourage enterprises offering local residents a far greater selection of goods and services to locate here.

(e) Make waterfront development a high priority.

(f) Develop and implement public facility designs and development standards to revitalize businesses and business districts in the US 30 and Columbia Boulevard/St. Helens Street corridor master plan area.

(g) Create gateways and improve access and wayfinding signage to Houlton Business District and Historic Downtown.

(h) Improve the appearance, attractiveness, and safety of the Houlton Business District and Historic Downtown, through an enhanced street design that includes street trees, landscaping and more public spaces and pedestrian amenities.

(i) Develop the local tourist and recreation sectors of the economy.

(j) Allocate adequate amounts of land for economic growth and support the creation of commercial and industrial focal points.

(k) Identify special locations for industrial activities that will assist in energy conservation.

(l) Discourage the leapfrog development of industrial lands, unless there is a program to provide sewer and water to intervening properties. 

(m) Make commercial designation large enough to accommodate a large variety of commercial development with sufficient buffers.

(n) Encourage land uses that are compatible with the transportation facilities. (Ord. 3181 § 4 (Att. C), 2015; Ord. 2980 § 2, 2006)


19.08.030 Public services and facilities goals and policies.

(Ref: Statewide Planning Goal 11)

(1) Preface. Public facilities are water, sanitary sewer, storm water, and transportation systems. These systems are essential to land use. All land improvement is impacted by and impacts public facilities. Public services usually include police, fire, health, schools, recreation, and library. While public services are very important, they do not impede development but rather react to development. The city of St. Helens has master plans and a general public facilities plan for all the essential public facilities. The city also has plans or agreements with many providers of the public services.

(2) Goals.

(a) To provide the facilities, utilities and services which are necessary for the well-being of the community.

(b) To develop an orderly arrangement of public facilities and services to serve as a framework for urban development.

(c) To design and locate public facilities so that: capacities are related to future as well as present demands; ample land is available for building and plant expansion; and public works plants and utility structures reflect due regard for their environmental impact.

(d) To designate land development patterns which would permit the most economical extension of public utilities.

(e) To provide all residents of urban areas with a sewage system that effectively meets current and future needs while protecting public health.

(f) To provide a water system adequate for future domestic and industrial purposes.

(g) To integrate schools with land use, transportation and recreation in order to realize their optimum value for local residents.

(h) To create and maintain ample places and facilities for recreation in St. Helens.

(i) To provide an effective law enforcement system responsive to the needs of the public as well as the rights of the individual.

(j) To reduce loss of lives and property from fires. 

(k) To provide library services capable of meeting the needs of area residents.

(l) To work with the county in the effective management of the disposal of solid wastes.

(3) Policies. It is the policy of the city of St. Helens to:

(a) Ensure that urban facilities and services, particularly water and sewer systems, are properly designed to eventually serve the designated urban growth area; also, ensure that services are provided to sufficient vacant property to meet the anticipated needs.

(b) Prohibit the extension of municipal sewer or water service outside the urban growth boundary except in the following areas:

(i) Areas where an exception for Goals 11 and 14 has been taken to allow an urban level of service to be extended beyond the urban growth boundary; or

(ii) Areas designated as a “health hazard” according to the procedures required by state law; or

(iii) Areas zoned for rural industrial use, or a resource zone for a resource-related use, for which the following findings have been made:

(A) There is no feasible alternative for servicing the rural industrial or resource-related use, considering water availability, soil suitability for subsurface sewage disposal, costs of a subsurface system, the long term viability of a subsurface system to function successfully, or state or federal environmental regulations;

(B) Provisions of municipal sewer or water service will not impair the city’s long-term ability to service land within the city limits or urban growth boundary;

(C) The proposed extension of municipal sewer or water service will not serve any intervening land;

(D)     Extension of municipal sewer or water service shall not be a basis for future determination of commitment of the intervening rural lands; and

(E) The extension is limited to the needs of the existing rural industrial or resource-related use.

(c) Require in new residential developments that water, sewer, storm sewer, paved streets, curbs, parks and other improvements are installed as part of the initial construction. Encourage the placement of underground utilities whenever feasible.

(d) Ensure that capacities and patterns of utilities and other facilities are adequate to support the residential densities and land use patterns of the Comprehensive Plan.

(e) Require the nuisance-free storage of solid wastes, provide for the efficient collection of solid wastes through the franchising of private industries, and encourage the recovery of usable material through recycling.

(f) Rehabilitate old sewer lines and extend new ones as funding permits.

(g) Have all new subdivisions within the urban area connect to public sewer and water systems.

(h) Implement master water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer and transportation system plans in coordination with the public facilities plan.

(i) Update the public facilities plan every five years and update the master water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer and transportation system plans periodically, but no less than every 15 years.

(j) Require new developments to provide adequate drainage at the time of initial construction; however, discourage the removal of streamside vegetation, the alteration of streams and the drainage or contamination of wetlands that are identified as significant wildlife habitats.

(k) Strive to ensure that adequately sized water mains and sewer lines are installed initially to avoid costly expansion when the area becomes intensively developed.

(l) Discourage the expansion of local service districts when this would stimulate development in areas outside the urban growth boundary or create conditions leading to the need for sewage or other urban facilities.

(m) Discourage the leapfrog development of industrial lands, unless there is a program to provide sewer and water to intervening properties.

(n) Design public recreation facilities to meet the recreational needs of the populace by providing the widest practicable range of compatible activities and programs to meet the needs of diverse groups.

(o) Develop a program whereby the city’s park system can be maintained or expanded to serve the needs of the anticipated growth. This program could include, but not necessarily be limited to, acquisition of tax foreclosed properties, donations or required dedication of land to existing parks, donation or required dedication of land for new parks or a payment in-lieu-of dedication by developers for new development that would impact the city’s recreational system.

(p) Acquire sites for future parks as identified on the Comprehensive Plan map as far in advance as possible and have those sites be within one-half mile of residential areas.

(q) Investigate grant and loan opportunities from various private, state and federal agencies for park acquisition, development and expansion; where appropriate apply for these funds.

(r) Develop a plan to preserve canyons that have steep slopes for public uses.

(s) Encourage coordination between the school district’s planning and capital improvement program and the city’s land use program.

(t) Encourage the continued development of the library to meet the expanding needs of the community.

(u) Take necessary actions to help ensure the area maintains its current fire and police quality; specifically take into consideration the effects of fire and police protection in the siting and design of all new development.

(v) Continue coordination between the fire district’s planning and capital improvement program and the city’s land use planning program.

(w) Encourage cooperation between the health care facilities planning and capital improvements program and the city’s land use planning program.

(x) Work with all utility providers to locate and design power transmission lines and substations so they have a minimum impact on the environment.

(y) Encourage energy conservation and renewable energy resources.

(z) Make energy conservation and waste reduction a regular practice in purchasing, operation and maintaining its buildings, vehicles, equipment and facilities as well as take advantage of renewable energy opportunities.

(aa) Encourage residents and businesses to take action to conserve energy and use renewable resources; these efforts shall be coordinated with utilities, state and federal agencies and other organizations. (Ord. 2980 § 2, 2006)


19.08.040 Transportation goals and policies.

(Ref: Statewide Planning Goal 12)

(1) Preface. Transportation is all about moving people, goods and services within a defined geographic area. The city of St. Helens is like many communities which have started with a small area and expanded into areas with county-type roads. Many of our roads are gravel and many are substandard based upon current requirements. Overall the system of roads, bike paths, and pedestrian paths serves the community adequately in most areas. There are some areas lacking in pedestrian paths between new developments and existing developments. Most of the transportation system is addressed in the public facilities plan, and there are general schedules and estimated costs for bringing the transportation facilities into compliance with current standards.

(2) Goals.

(a) To develop and maintain methods for moving people and goods which are:

(i) Responsive to the needs and preferences of individuals, business and industry;

(ii) Suitably integrated into the fabric of the urban communities; and

(iii) Safe, rapid, economical and convenient to use.

(b) To remove existing congestion and prevent future congestion so that accidents and travel times would both be reduced.

(c) To create relatively traffic-free residential areas.

(d) To strengthen the economy by facilitating the means for transporting industrial goods.

(e) To maintain a road network that is an asset to existing commercial areas.

(f) To provide a more reliable basis for planning new public and private developments whose location depends upon transportation.

(g) To cooperate closely with the county and state on transportation matters.

(h) To assure that roads have the capacity for expansion and extension to meet future demands.

(i) To ensure future arterial rights-of-way are not encroached upon.

(j) To encourage energy-conserving modes of transit.

(k) To increase appropriate walking and bicycling opportunities.

(3) Policies. It is the policy of the city of St. Helens to:

(a) Require all newly established streets and highways are of proper width, alignment, design and construction and are in conformance with the development standards adopted by the city.

(b) Review diligently all subdivision plats and road dedications to ensure the establishment of a safe and efficient road system.

(c) Support and adopt by reference road projects listed in the Six-Year Highway Improvement Program; specifically, work towards attaining left turn lanes and traffic lights on Highway 30.

(d) Control or eliminate traffic hazards along road margins through building setbacks, dedications or regulation of access at the time of subdivision, zone change or construction.

(e) Regulate signs and sign lighting to avoid distractions for motorists.

(f) Work with the railroad owners and operators to improve the safety at railroad crossings.

(g) Plan and develop street routes to alleviate Highway 30’s traffic load.

(h) Regulate or prevent development within areas required for future arterials or widening of rights-of-way.

(i) Follow good access management techniques on all roadway systems within the city.

(j) Develop a plan for walking trails.

(k) Maintain, implement, and update the bikeway plan.

(l) Work with Columbia County and other agencies in their efforts to meet the needs of the transportationally disadvantaged in the community.

(m) Encourage increased opportunities for public local and regional transit facilities.

(n) Support public transit planning in Columbia County. Transit improvements within city limits shall be guided by the findings and recommendations of the Columbia County community-wide transit plan, or the equivalent, as adopted by Columbia County.

(o) Work in partnership with the county in planning for public transit facilities located within city limits and, when feasible, facilitate the placement of such facilities.

(p) Support connectivity in the transportation network by permitting cul-de-sacs only when environmental or topographical constraints or existing development patterns preclude local street connectivity. Where cul-de-sacs are proposed and built, there shall be pedestrian and bicyclist connections and pathways provided to the surrounding street system. (Ord. 3150 § 3 (Att. B), 2011; Ord. 3144 § 2 (Att. A), 2011; Ord. 2980 § 2, 2006)


19.08.050 Housing goals and policies.

(Ref: Statewide Planning Goal 10)

(1) Preface. Residents of the city of St. Helens are demographically in different stages of socioeconomics. As such, they vary in their family sizes, economic capabilities and interests and will desire different types of housing. The strategy is to ensure that sufficient lands are designated for those different phases and desires of current and future residents and to encourage policies and decisions to allow all residents the ability to find affordable housing.

(2) Goals.

(a) To promote safe, adequate, and affordable housing for all current and future members of the community.

(b) To locate housing so that it is fully integrated with land use, transportation and public facilities as set forth in the Comprehensive Plan.

(3) Policies. It is the policy of the city of St. Helens to:

(a) Maintain adequate development and building codes to achieve the city’s housing goals.

(b) Encourage the distribution of low income and/or multifamily housing throughout the city rather than limiting them to a few large concentrations.

(c) Work with all interested agencies to facilitate housing conservation and construction, and to improve substandard dwellings where cost effective.

(d) Encourage and cooperate with all efforts to provide adequate housing for those with special needs.

(e) Permit multifamily developments which conform to the following general conditions and criteria:

(i) They should not be constructed within areas which are established and recognized as substantially well maintained single-family areas.

(ii) They should have safe and appropriate arrangement of buildings, open spaces, and parking access.

(iii) They should not be so large or close to single-family homes as to block their view or sunlight or to unduly interfere with an established single-family character; where conditionally used, they thus shall be subject to density criteria.

(iv) They should include adequate open space.

(v) They should include ample off-street parking.

(vi) They should not be located where undue noise or other factors will adversely affect residential living.

(vii) They shall be subject to a site design review process and minimum landscaping requirements.

(f) Permit mobile home park development which conforms to the following general conditions and criteria:

(i) They should not be constructed within areas which are established and recognized as substantially well maintained single-family areas.

(ii) They should include adequate open space.

(iii) They should include ample off-street parking.

(iv) They should not be located where undue noise or other factors will not adversely affect residential living.

(v) They shall be subject to a site design review process and minimum landscaping requirements and possibly fencing or screening requirements.

(vi) They should provide internal vehicular and pedestrian circulation and landscaping.

(g) Re-evaluate city ordinances and, where possible, streamline administration and requirements in order to reduce development costs.

(h) Encourage energy-efficient housing patterns in residential developments. (Ord. 2980 § 2, 2006)


19.08.060 Natural factors and local resources goals and policies.

(Ref: Statewide Planning Goals 5, 6, and 7)

(1) Preface. This city’s history is all about resources. Water, land, aggregate and forests were the mainstay of the community for at least the first hundred years. Now the natural factors and local resources are all about quality of life and are part of why people choose to live in our community. As our community continues to grow the challenge is to preserve as much of the natural resources of trees, water, and land while accommodating new development and all of its impacts.

(2) Goals.

(a) To maintain and, where possible, enhance the air, water, and land resources of the St. Helens area.

(b) To assure proper and safe development, use and protection of the area’s significant soil, mineral and geological resources.

(c) To ensure that unique geological areas are protected from development that could degrade the area.

(d) To ensure the conservation of substantial fish and wildlife habitats.

(e) To preserve open spaces within and between urban living areas.

(f) To encourage the protection of the forest area within the urban growth boundary.

(g) To preserve for the public benefit outstanding scenic areas.

(3) Policies. It is the policy of the city of St. Helens to:

(a) Participate in resource management planning through participation in collective federal, state, and regional agency planning programs.

(b) Consider airshed and water resources capacities in reviewing all plans, ordinances and permits for land development actions.

(c) Support the recycling of solid wastes.

(d) Work with the county in the management of solid wastes to prevent the contamination of local resources.

(e) Encourage the preservation of those forest lands between Columbia City and St. Helens.

(f) Encourage the preservation, restoration, and functionality of the open space corridors or rezone to open space zone the following lands:

(i) The canyon area adjoining Godfrey Park.

(ii) The unimproved gullies and creekbed systems. 

(iii) The lands along significant riparian corridors and connecting wetlands.

(g) Direct development away from the Willamette River Greenway to the maximum extent possible; provided, however, lands committed to the urban uses within the greenway shall be allowed to continue and to intensify, provided the activity is water related or water dependent. The city shall prohibit new non-water-related or non-water-dependent uses from within 150 feet of the Willamette River Greenway.

(h) Take exception to LCDC’s Agricultural Goal and Forest Goal on the preservation of Class I – IV soils and soils that have good woodland capability as one of such lands will be needed for future city growth and included in the urban growth boundary.

(i) Development in a hazardous area is required to meet strict standards to reduce or eliminate public harm.

(j) Balance development rights of property owners and protection of public views of the Columbia River, Scappoose Bay and Multnomah Channel.

(k) Subject proposed alteration of the city’s historic resources to design review and historic documentation to encourage preservation of historical assets.

(l) Devise a program for attempting to preserve those historic resources that are threatened with demolition.

(m) Encourage adaptive reuse of historic resources.

(n) Utilize zoning, buffer zones, and design review procedures to protect noise-sensitive areas from noise-producing areas.

(o) Institute design review procedures to protect the area’s archaeological resources.

(p) Comply with applicable state and federal environmental regulations.

(q) Revise all land development standards to encourage solar access, establish criteria for approval of energy facilities, remove obstacles to energy-efficient design, and require energy-efficient development when ownership is to be transferred to the city upon completion.

(r) Develop protection programs for the following St. Helens significant resources: wetlands, riparian corridors, wildlife habitats, groundwater resources, natural areas, wilderness areas, mineral and aggregate resources, energy sources, and cultural areas. (Ord. 3215 § 4 (Att. D), 2017; Ord. 3144 § 2 (Att. A), 2011; Ord. 2980 § 2, 2006)


Chapter 19.12 SPECIFIC LAND USE GOALS AND POLICIES

Sections:

19.12.010    Urban growth boundary goals and policies.

19.12.020    General residential category goals and policies.

19.12.030    Suburban residential category goals and policies.

19.12.040    Mobile home residential category goals and policies.

19.12.050    Unincorporated general and multifamily residential category goals and policies (UGR and UGMFR).

19.12.060    Rural suburban unincorporated residential category goals and policies.

19.12.070    General commercial category goals and policies.

19.12.080    Highway commercial category goals and policies.

19.12.090    Light industrial category goals and policies.

19.12.100    Heavy industrial category goals and policies.

19.12.110    Public and semi-public land category goals and policies.

19.12.120    Open space category goals and policies.

19.12.130    Hazard area category goals and policies.


19.12.010 Urban growth boundary goals and policies.

(Ref: Statewide Planning Goal 14)

(1) Preface. The intent of the city’s urban growth boundary is to provide for an economic and efficient transition from rural to urban land use, to guide development to fit our natural resources and to preserve as much as possible the “quality of life” as experienced by people today.

(2) Goals.

(a) To create within St. Helens and its growth area optimal conditions of livability.

(b) To avoid the extension of urban services, particularly water and sewer systems, into outlying, sparsely settled areas.

(c) To locate all major public and private developments such as schools, roads, shopping centers and places of employment so that they do not tend to attract residential development to locations outside the designated urban growth boundary.

(d) To include within the urban growth boundary ample land for future development.

(3) Policies. It is the policy of the city of St. Helens to:

(a) Work with the county in establishing and maintaining an urban growth boundary.

(b) Create an urban growth boundary taking into account the following considerations:

(i) Population growth rates and projections;

(ii) Suitability for residential, commercial and industrial land development;

(iii) Appropriate densities of residential development;

(iv) Physical features that are influential in determining and maintaining the identity of the St. Helens community;

(v) Existing city limits and recent trends in the area’s industrial, commercial and residential growth;

(vi) Areas intended for public acquisition, parks or preservation;

(vii) Effective provision of public facilities including the maximum feasible use of existing public facilities, and the timely, orderly and economically feasible extension of public facilities and services;

(viii) Compatibility of proposed urban uses with nearby agricultural activities and resources;

(ix) Existing industrial, commercial and residential developments that have been identified as potential health hazard areas or otherwise in need of the city’s services;

(x) Recommendations and desires of affected property owners, private citizens, public agencies, citizen involvement committee members, and public agencies; and

(xi) Prevention of abnormally irregular boundaries.

(c) Require that changes in the UGB comply with State Land Use Goal 14 and with the procedures of Goal 2. 

(i) Establishment and change of urban growth boundaries shall be based on the following:

(A) Demonstrated need to accommodate long-range urban population, consistent with a 20-year population forecast coordinated with affected local governments; and

(B) Demonstrated need for housing, employment opportunities, livability or uses such as public facilities, streets and roads, schools, parks, or open space, or any combination of the need categories in this subsection.

Note: In determining need, local government may specify characteristics, such as parcel size, topography, or proximity, necessary for land to be suitable for an identified need. Prior to expanding an urban growth boundary, local governments shall demonstrate that needs cannot reasonably be accommodated on land already inside the urban growth boundary.

(ii) The location of the urban growth boundary and changes to the boundary shall be determined by evaluating alternative boundary locations consistent with ORS 197.298 and with consideration of the following factors:

(A) Efficient accommodation of identified land needs;

(B) Orderly and economic provision of public facilities and services;

(C) Comparative environmental, energy, economic and social consequences; and

(D) Compatibility of the proposed urban uses with nearby agricultural and forest activities occurring on farm and forest land outside the urban growth boundary.

(iii) Land within urban growth boundaries shall be considered available for urban development consistent with plans for the provision of urban facilities and services. Comprehensive plans and implementing measures shall manage the use and division of urbanizable land to maintain its potential for planned urban development until appropriate public facilities and services are available or planned.

(d) Cooperate with the county in establishing a process to manage the St. Helens urban growth area by:

(i) Establishing joint review procedures with the county planning commission, the citizens planning advisory committee and the St. Helens planning commission for conditional use permits, land partitioning, annexations and service extensions; and

(ii) Working with the county planning commission, Department of Environmental Quality and potential developers on a case-by-case basis to ensure the proper siting of buildings on developable parcels.

(e) Review all subdivision plats in the growth area to ensure the establishment of a safe and efficient road system. (Ord. 2980 § 2, 2006)


19.12.020 General residential category goals and policies.

(1) Goals. To create conditions suitable for higher concentrations of people in proximity to public services, shopping, transportation and other conveniences.

(2) Policies. It is the policy of the city of St. Helens to:

(a) Require undeveloped public ways of record to be improved to applicable city standards as a condition to the issuance of building permits for lots that front these ways.

(b) Encourage the infilling of areas presently undeveloped due to topographical limitations to achieve a more efficient use of the land.

(c) Allow for the convenient location of grocery stores by the conditional use process.

(d) Develop rules for multifamily dwellings which are consistent with housing policies.

(e) Designate general residential lands as R-5, General Residential or AR, Apartment Residential on the city zoning map. (Ord. 2980 § 2, 2006)


19.12.030 Suburban residential category goals and policies.

(1) Goals. To establish conditions which will maintain attractive, convenient residential living typical of moderate density semi-suburban areas.

(2) Policies. It is the policy of the city of St. Helens to:

(a) Allow for the convenient location of grocery stores by the conditional use process.

(b) Permit a degree of flexibility in residential site design and a mixture of housing, including multi-dwelling units, through the planned development procedures.

(c) Promote the development of homesites at a density and standard consistent with: the level of services that can reasonably be provided and the characteristics of the natural environment.

(d) Review diligently all subdivision plats in the suburban residential category to ensure the establishment of a safe and efficient road system.

(e) Designate suburban residential lands as R-7, Moderate Residential, or R-10, Suburban Residential, on the city zoning map. (Ord. 2980 § 2, 2006)


19.12.040 Mobile home residential category goals and policies.

(1) Goals. To provide conditions suitable for concentrations of people living in mobile homes and in areas where a wide range of public services would be made available.

(2) Policies. It is the policy of the city of St. Helens to:

(a) Permit mobile home park developments in areas designated as mobile home residential.

(b) Make sure such parks conform to local and state regulations with regard to density, open space areas, landscaping and parking facilities.

(c) Manufactured or mobile homes are to be permitted in areas that allow single dwelling units.

(d) In the urban growth area, the county shall allow mobile homes or manufactured homes on individual lots only if the mobile home or manufactured home meets the following requirements:

(i) The mobile home or manufactured home shall be multi-sectional and enclose a minimum of 1,000 square feet.

(ii) The mobile home or manufactured home must have a pitched roof of at least 3:12.

(iii) The mobile home or manufactured home must have a composition shake, wood shake or metal shake roof similar to that found on single-family dwellings located in the city and urban growth boundary.

(iv) The mobile home or manufactured home must have siding which in color, material and appearance is similar to that found on single-family dwellings located in the city and urban growth boundary.

(v) The mobile home or manufactured home must be affixed to an excavated and backfilled foundation and enclosed at the perimeter with cement or cement block such that the mobile home or manufactured home is located not more than 12 inches above grade.

(vi) A minimum of two off-street parking spaces must be provided for each mobile home or manufactured home.

(e) Designate mobile home-residential designated lands as MHR on the city zoning map. (Ord. 2980 § 2, 2006)


19.12.050 Unincorporated general and multifamily residential category goals and policies (UGR and UGMFR).

(1) Goals. To ensure that the city provides housing opportunities for all members of its community.

(2) Policies. It is the policy of the city of St. Helens to:

(a) Work with the county on partition and subdivision applications for these lands to ensure that they are divided in a manner that does not hinder future urbanization.

(b) Zone the unincorporated general residential lands as R-5 or AR upon annexation.

(c) Zone the unincorporated multifamily residential lands as AR upon annexation.

(d) Re-evaluate the appropriateness of the unincorporated general and multifamily residential designation upon the specifically designated lands if:

(i) Other lands area annexed and zoned R-5 or AR prior to annexation of these lands; or

(ii) The county and city determine, due to the pattern of development in the city and within the urban growth area, that other lands are more appropriate for these designations. (Ord. 2980 § 2, 2006)


19.12.060 Rural suburban unincorporated residential category goals and policies.

(1) Goals. To provide sufficient area for urban development that will accommodate a variety of housing types.

(2) Policies. It is the policy of the city of St. Helens to:

(a) Work with the county on partition and subdivision applications for these lands to ensure that they are divided in a manner that does not hinder future urbanization.

(b) Zone the rural suburban-unincorporated residential as R-7 or R-10 upon annexation to the city unless circumstances listed in subsection (2)(c) of this section exist.

(c) Consider zoning lands with the rural suburban-unincorporated residential category for R-5 or AR if the following conditions are found:

(i) The parcel is vacant and larger than two acres in size.

(ii) The carrying capacity of the public services including but not limited to streets, sewer, and water are sufficient for higher density development.

(iii) The county and city determine, due to the pattern of development in the city and within the urban growth area, that other lands are more appropriate for these designations. (Ord. 2980 § 2, 2006)


19.12.070 General commercial category goals and policies.

(1) Goals. To establish commercial areas which provide maximum service to the public and are properly integrated into the physical pattern of the city.

(2) Policies. It is the policy of the city of St. Helens to:

(a) Encourage new commercial development in and adjacent to existing, well-established business areas taking into account the following considerations:

(i) Making shopping more convenient for patrons;

(ii) Cutting down on street traffic;

(iii) Maximizing land through the joint use of vehicular access and parking at commercial centers; and

(iv) Encouraging locations that enjoy good automobile access and still minimize traffic hazards.

(b) Designate sufficient space for business so that predictable commercial growth can be accommodated and so that an adequate choice of sites exists.

(c) Ensure that all commercial enterprises maintain sufficient off-street parking to accommodate their patrons, workers and loading requirements.

(d) Emphasize and support existing town centers as business places. When areas are developed adjacent or next to existing town centers, ensure that the new development is compatible with and will complement existing development.

(e) Improve the general appearance, safety and convenience of commercial areas by encouraging greater attention to the design of buildings, parking, vehicle and pedestrian circulation, and landscaping through a site design review procedure.

(f) Preserve areas for business use by limiting incompatible uses within them.

(g) Encourage a variety of retail shopping activities to concentrate in the core commercial areas to enhance their attractiveness for a broad range of shoppers; additionally, encourage in this area the development of public spaces such as broad sidewalks, small squares, etc., to facilitate easy, safe, pleasant pedestrian circulation. When located along the waterfront, such public spaces shall facilitate public access to and enjoyment of the Columbia River and Multnomah Channel to the maximum extent possible.

(h) Encourage in-filling of vacant lands within commercial areas.

(i) Encourage redevelopment of waterfront property that is not designated industrial and can be integrated with existing nearby commercial or mixed use areas. (Ord. 3215 § 4 (Att. D), 2017; Ord. 2980 § 2, 2006)


19.12.080 Highway commercial category goals and policies.

(1) Goals.

(a) To create opportunities for the orderly business development along selected portions of arterials.

(b) To establish conditions which will assure that arterial traffic flows are not disrupted and that access to and from these locations is designed for safety.

(c) To prevent highway frontage from becoming a strip of mixed commercial, residential and other unrelated uses.

(2) Policies. It is the policy of the city of St. Helens to:

(a) Designate as highway commercial such areas along portions of US 30 where highway business has already become well established.

(b) Designate as highway commercial such areas at major road intersections where access to business sites does not conflict with safe traffic movement.

(c) Encourage enterprises which cater to the traveling public to locate in this designation.

(d) Encourage curbing along Highway 30 and limit the number of curb-cuts to minimize traffic hazards as a result of conflicts between through traffic and shopper traffic.

(e) Preserve areas for business use by limiting incompatible uses within them. 

(f) Improve the appearance and safety of US 30 and sites along US 30, through means such as landscaped medians, banner poles, landscaping along the highway right-of-way, and landscaping in parking lots.

(g) Encourage undergrounding of overhead utilities. (Ord. 3181 § 4 (Att. C), 2015; Ord. 3144 § 2 (Att. A), 2011; Ord. 2980 § 2, 2006)


19.12.090 Light industrial category goals and policies.

(1) Goals. To provide a place for smaller and/or less intensive industrial activities where their service and transportation requirements can be met, and where their environmental effects will have minimal impact upon the community.

(2) Policies. It is the policy of the city of St. Helens to:

(a) Apply this category where light industrial concerns have become established and where vacant industrial sites have been set aside for this purpose.

(b) Encourage preserving such designated areas for light manufacturing, wholesaling, processing and similar operations by excluding unrelated uses which would reduce available land and restrict the growth and expansion of industry.

(c) Ensure that light industry operations have adequate space with respect to employee and truck parking, loading, maneuvering and storage.

(d) Follow a site design review process for light industrial activity to ensure proper setbacks as well as screening and buffering, particularly for unsightly areas which can be viewed from arterials or from adjoining residential areas; in contemplating the setbacks, consideration should be given to the effect of the activity on significant fish and wildlife areas. (Ord. 2980 § 2, 2006)


19.12.100 Heavy industrial category goals and policies.

(1) Goals.

(a) To establish large tracts of land where manufacturing and industrial operations of an intensive or heavy character may be carried out with minimal impact upon the community.

(b) To provide suitable sites where transportation, including employee carpooling, public utilities, and other special industrial requirements, such as the disposal of waste materials, can be met.

(2) Policies. It is the policy of the city of St. Helens to:

(a) Apply this category to areas that already have existing heavy industry or can serve such industry with adequate rail, river or highway access.

(b) Ensure that the size, location and boundary conditions of heavy industrial areas are such that surrounding residential areas are protected.

(c) Follow a site design review process for heavy industrial activity to ensure proper setback, screening and buffering, and adequate consideration of significant fish and wildlife habitats; screening and buffering are particularly important for unsightly areas which can be viewed from arterials or adjoining residential areas.

(d) Ensure that heavy industrial operations have sufficient space for employee and truck parking, loading, maneuvering and storage.

(e) Designate sufficient land for heavy industrial purposes to meet estimated future needs and preserve these areas for such activities by excluding unrelated uses which would reduce available land and restrict the growth and expansion of industry and consider adding additional lands when the need for a specific site becomes known.

(f) Activities which have no off-site effects will be allowed in this area; heavy industrial activities with off-site noise, odor, air pollution or vibrating effects may be required to increase the setback from a property line. (Ord. 2980 § 2, 2006)


19.12.110 Public and semi-public land category goals and policies.

(1) Goals.

(a) To integrate public facilities with land use, transportation, recreation and other community objectives and plans in order to realize their optimum value for the citizenry.

(b) To identify sites for public and semi-public activities.

(2) Policies. It is the policy of the city of St. Helens to:

(a) Cooperate with public and semi-public organizations to acquire and develop properties designated for public use as soon as funding is available.

(b) Follow the process to amend the Comprehensive Plan map as public and semi-public agencies designate which sites they propose to utilize for future development.

(c) Require all development, whether private or public, to conform to the zoning ordinance standards. (Ord. 2980 § 2, 2006)


19.12.120 Open space category goals and policies.

(1) Goals.

(a) To conserve open space and protect natural and scenic resources.

(b) To promote healthy and visually attractive environments in harmony with the natural landscape character.

(2) Policies. It is the policy of the city of St. Helens to:

(a) Attempt to acquire, where feasible, such identified lands for open spaces. Possible mechanisms include outright purchase, the acquisition of developmental rights or easements, the attainment of Bureau of Outdoor Recreation and HUD grants or loans, property exchanges, donations, and the acquisition of tax-foreclosed lands.

(b) Subject private development on such identified land to a site design review procedure.

(c) Upon annexation to the city, zone Dalton Lake as open space.

(d) Encourage the development and redevelopment of lands which include or border all riparian corridors such as Scappoose Bay north to Willamette Greenway and west to Gable Road along Milton Creek through the use of development agreements and/or planned developments with flexible and innovative design techniques, transferable development rights, density transfer, including residential density bonuses and authorized mixed-use development.

(e) Encourage the development of planned developments for those lands that border or include open space area; developers can utilize these lands in their density calculations. (Ord. 2980 § 2, 2006)


19.12.130 Hazard area category goals and policies.

(1) Goals. To protect against all loss of life or property by closely regulating construction, investment and activities in designated hazard areas.

(2) Policies. It is the policy of the city of St. Helens to:

(a) Prohibit development on lands within the 100-year floodplain (i.e., special flood hazard areas subject to inundation by at least one percent annual flood probability), on slopes exceeding 20 percent, or with recognized drainage problems unless showing that design and construction techniques can minimize potential loss of life or property; specifically:

(i) All development within the 100-year floodplain (i.e., special flood hazard areas subject to inundation by at least one percent annual flood probability) shall conform to the standards set by FEMA;

(ii) All development plans on slopes greater than 20 percent shall be reviewed and approved by the city engineer;

(iii) All development plans on lands with recognized drainage problems shall be reviewed and approved by the city engineer.

For development on such designated lands, the city may impose whatever conditions it deems necessary to protect life and property. (Ord. 3138 § 3 (Att. B), 2010; Ord. 2980 § 2, 2006)


Chapter 19.16 AMENDMENTS TO THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN

Sections:

19.16.010    Amendments to the Comprehensive Plan.


19.16.010 Amendments to the Comprehensive Plan.

(1) Preface. It is the intent of this section to give direction for amending the St. Helens Comprehensive Plan. 

(2) Goal. To create a process that complies with state and local laws for amending the acknowledged St. Helens Comprehensive Plan.

(3) Policy. All proposed amendments to this plan shall follow state laws and local laws. In particular they shall comply with ORS Chapters 195 and 215. See SHMC 17.08.060 for transportation planning rule compliance. (Ord. 3150 § 3 (Att. B), 2011; Ord. 2980 § 2, 2006)


Chapter 19.20 MAPS

Sections:

19.20.010    Comprehensive Plan maps.

19.20.020    Comprehensive Plan map – Boundaries and designations.

19.20.030    Map and list of significant historic resources.

19.20.040    Map and list of planned development overlay zones.

19.20.050    Map and list of significant riparian corridors.

19.20.060    Map and list of significant wetlands.

19.20.070    Map and list of cultural sites (archeological).

19.20.080    Map and list of established and developing overlay zones (since 1999).

19.20.090    Map and study of special flood hazard areas.


19.20.010 Comprehensive Plan maps.

(1) Preface. It is the intent of this section to identify which maps are part of the St. Helens Comprehensive Plan. 

(2) Goal. To make available maps to help understand this plan.

(3) Policy. Maps listed in this section shall be considered part of the St. Helens Comprehensive Plan and changes to the maps will be in accordance with any amendment to the plan.

(a) All lands within the urban growth boundary shall be identified on a map with designations in accordance with policies stated here in this Comprehensive Plan and changes made by amendment.

(b) Other maps that are required by policies herein shall be incorporated into this plan by amendment. (Ord. 2980 § 2, 2006)


19.20.020 Comprehensive Plan map – Boundaries and designations.*


[IMAGE]


*    Code reviser’s note: The Comprehensive Plan map is constantly changing, and this map may not be the most up to date. The current map is available at City Hall.

(Ord. 2980 § 2, 2006)


19.20.030 Map and list of significant historic resources.*


[IMAGE]


Primary Historic Structures 

	Tax No.	Lot and Block	Address	Owner	Date

	201-410501414500	L3-6 Block White Subdivision	2364 Columbia Boulevard	Charles Ross	1859 and 1900

	—	2194 Columbia Boulevard	Burlington North	1923

	201-41040130455	L17-19 B123	255 North 14th Street	Caroline Raffin	1936

	201-410401302500	L22 B112	1320 St. Helens Street	Dominic Piano	1932

	201-410302103300	L16 B17	145 South First Street	Frances Craver	1905

	201-410302209800	L1-3 B47	560 Columbia Boulevard	Methodist Church	1924

	201-410302103100	L12 B17	105 South First Street	Stanley Hopkins	1905

	201-410302102800	L9 B12	120 South First Street	Wayne Hawkins	1913

	201-410302107400	John Gumm School	251 St. Helens Street	St. Helens School District	1919

	Plaza Square and County Courthouse	The Plaza	Columbia County	1903

	201-410302100700	L18 B11	265 Strand Street	City St. Helens	1908

	201-410302101500	L5 B11	61 Plaza	Lyle Pieper	1898

	201-410302101300	L3 B11	280 South First Street	Robert Israel	1890

	201-410302106800	L22 B26	295 South Second Street	Bernard Chabala	1911

	201-410302103500	L19 B20	175 South First Street	J & M Harris	1888

	201-410302400200	L13 B10	315 Strand Street	Grace Sonneland	1912

	201-410302206300	L17 B43	155 South Fourth Street	Lester Johanson	1848

	Stone Wall on Columbia Boulevard from North Seventh Street to North Tenth Street	1933

	201-410403116500	—	205 DuBois Lane	Daniel Bentler	1930

	201-410302401800	L12 B19	305 South First Street	Phil Oliver	1912

	201-410302103200	L13 B17	115 South First Street	James Chisum	1926

(Ord. 2980 § 2, 2006)


19.20.040 Map and list of planned development overlay zones.

(1) Columbia Heights Zoning Overlay.
[IMAGE]


(2) Shadow Canyon Planned Development.
[IMAGE]


(3) Gable Road North Planned Community Development.
[IMAGE]


(4) The Wetlands Planned Community Development.
[IMAGE]


(5) Ridgecrest Planned Community Development.
[IMAGE]


(6) Meadowbrook Planned Development.
[IMAGE]


(Ord. 2980 § 2, 2006)


19.20.050 Map and list of significant riparian corridors.*


[IMAGE]


List of Significant Riparian Corridor Resources 

As shown on the Pacific Habitat Services, Inc. maps identified as Attachment B*, and based upon the criteria chosen by the city council, the following riparian resources are considered as Significant Goal 5 Riparian Corridor Resources:

This list includes the riparian inventory that has two or more assessed functions rated as high and are considered fish-bearing waterways.

R-MC-5b

R-MC-7R

R-MC-7L

R-MC-8L

R-MC-10

R-MC-12

R-MC-13R

R-MC-13L

R-MC-15

R-MC-16a

R-MC-16b

R-MI-21

R-MI-22

R-MI-23R

R-MI-23L

R-MI-24

R-MI-26a

R-D-34

Note: The above-listed reaches are included in different form in the Pacific Habitat Services, Inc. report dated February 4, 2000, and amended March 24, 2000, to adjust for labeling errors on the maps and in the report.

(Ord. 2980 § 2, 2006)

*    Code reviser’s note: The maps identified as Attachment B are available from the Planning Department at City Hall.


19.20.060 Map and list of significant wetlands.

(1) Map. See Wetland Riparian Protection Zones map in SHMC 19.20.050.

(2) List of Significant Wetlands.

Significant Wetlands Inventory 

	Drainage Name and Unit

	Dalton	McNulty Creek

	D1	MC1

	D2	MC2

	D3	MC3

	D4	MC5

	D6	MC8

	D7	MC9

	D8	MC10

	D10	MC16

	D11	MC17

	D16	MC20

	D17	MC21

	D18	MC22

	D19	MC25

	D20	MC26

	D21

	D22



	Frogmore Slough	Unnamed Creek A

	F2	UA2

	F4



	Jackass Canyon	Unnamed Creek B

	J3	UB5A

	J6	UB5B

	UB6



	Milton Creek

	M3

	M5

	M7

	M8

	M10

	M11

	M12

	M15

(Ord. 2980 § 2, 2006)


19.20.070 Map and list of cultural sites (archeological).

(1) Archaeological Sites. A list of identified archaeological sites is located in the vault at City Hall. (Ord. 2980 § 2, 2006)


19.20.080 Map and list of established and developing overlay zones (since 1999).

See Comprehensive Plan map. The current map is available at City Hall. (Ord. 2980 § 2, 2006)


19.20.090 Map and study of special flood hazard areas.

The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled “The Flood Insurance Study for Columbia County, Oregon and Incorporated Areas,” dated November 26, 2010, with accompanying flood insurance rate map (FIRM) are on file at City Hall. (Ord. 3138 § 3 (Att. B), 2010)


Chapter 19.24 ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITIES ANALYSIS

Sections:

19.24.010    Economic opportunities analysis.


19.24.010 Economic opportunities analysis.

The city hereby adopts the economic opportunities analysis, attached to the ordinance codified in this section as Attachment “A” and made part of this reference, as an addendum to the St. Helens Comprehensive Plan (this title). (Ord. 3101 § 2, 2009)


Chapter 19.28 WATERFRONT DEVELOPMENT PRIORITIZATION PLAN

Sections:

19.28.010    Waterfront development prioritization plan adoption by reference.


19.28.010 Waterfront development prioritization plan adoption by reference.

The city hereby adopts the waterfront development prioritization plan, attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as Attachment “A” and made part of this reference, as an addendum to the St. Helens Comprehensive Plan (this title). (Ord. 3148 § 2, 2011)


Chapter 19.30 TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS PLAN

Sections:

19.30.010    Transportation systems plan adoption by reference.

19.30.020    Transportation systems plan revision adoption by reference.


19.30.010 Transportation systems plan adoption by reference.

The city hereby adopts the transportation systems plan, attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as Attachment “A” and made part of this reference, as an addendum to the St. Helens Comprehensive Plan (this title). (Ord. 3181 § 4 (Att. C), 2015)


19.30.020 Transportation systems plan revision adoption by reference.

The city hereby adopts a revision to Section 2 of the transportation systems plan, attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as Attachment “B” and made part of this reference, as an addendum to the St. Helens Comprehensive Plan (this title). (Ord. 3181 § 4 (Att. C), 2015)


Chapter 19.32 US 30 AND COLUMBIA BOULEVARD/ST. HELENS STREET CORRIDOR MASTER PLAN

Sections:

19.32.010    US 30 and Columbia Boulevard/St. Helens Street corridor master plan adoption by reference.


19.32.010 US 30 and Columbia Boulevard/St. Helens Street corridor master plan adoption by reference.

The city hereby adopts the US 30 and Columbia Boulevard/St. Helens Street corridor master plan, attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as Attachment “A” and made part of this reference, as an addendum to the St. Helens Comprehensive Plan (this title). (Ord. 3181 § 4 (Att. C), 2015)


Chapter 19.34 PARKS AND TRAILS MASTER PLAN

Sections:

19.34.010 Parks and trails master plan adoption by reference.


19.34.010 Parks and trails master plan adoption by reference.

The city hereby adopts the parks and trails master plan, attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as Attachment “A” and made part of this reference, as an addendum to the St. Helens Comprehensive Plan (this title). (Ord. 3191 § 2, 2015)


Cross-Reference Table

This table lists the sections of Ordinance 2875 (the Community Development Code), as amended, and provides their current location in the St. Helens Municipal Code. Thus, Section 1.010.010 of Ordinance 2875 appears in this code as SHMC 17.04.010.

	Ord. 2875 §	Herein

	1.010.010	17.04.010

	1.010.020	17.04.020

	1.010.030	17.04.030

	1.010.040	17.04.040

	1.010.050	17.04.050

	1.010.060	17.04.060

	1.010.070	17.04.070

	1.010.080	17.04.080

	1.010.090	17.04.090

	1.020.010	17.08.010

	1.020.020	17.08.020

	1.020.030	17.08.030

	1.020.040	17.08.040

	1.020.050	17.08.050

	1.030.010	17.12.010

	1.030.020	17.12.020

	1.030.030	17.12.030

	1.030.040	17.12.040

	1.030.050	17.12.050

	1.030.060	17.12.060

	1.040	17.16.010

	1.060.010	17.20.010

	1.060.020	17.20.020

	1.060.030	17.20.030

	1.060.040	17.20.040

	1.060.050	17.20.050

	1.060.060	17.20.060

	1.060.070	17.20.070

	1.060.080	17.20.080

	1.060.090	17.20.090

	1.060.100	17.20.100

	1.060.110	17.20.110

	1.060.120	17.20.120

	1.060.130	17.20.130

	1.060.140	17.20.140

	1.060.150	17.20.150

	1.060.155	17.20.155

	1.060.160	17.20.160

	1.060.170	17.20.170

	1.070.010	17.24.010

	1.070.020	17.24.020

	1.070.030	17.24.030

	1.070.040	17.24.040

	1.070.050	17.24.050

	1.070.055	17.24.055

	1.070.060	17.24.060

	1.070.070	17.24.070

	1.070.080	17.24.080

	1.070.090	17.24.090

	1.070.110	17.24.110

	1.070.120	17.24.120

	1.070.130	17.24.130

	1.070.140	17.24.140

	1.070.150	17.24.150

	1.070.155	17.24.155

	1.070.160	17.24.160

	1.070.165	17.24.165

	1.070.170	17.24.170

	1.070.180	17.24.180

	1.070.200	17.24.200

	1.070.210	17.24.210

	1.070.220	17.24.220

	1.070.230	17.24.230

	1.070.250	17.24.250

	1.070.260	17.24.260

	1.070.270	17.24.270

	1.070.275	17.24.275

	1.070.280	17.24.280

	1.070.290	17.24.290

	1.070.300	17.24.300

	1.070.310	17.24.310

	1.070.320	17.24.320

	1.070.330	17.24.330

	1.070.340	17.24.340

	1.070.345	17.24.345

	1.070.350	17.24.350

	1.070.360	17.24.360

	1.070.370	17.24.370

	1.070.380	17.24.380

	1.070.390	17.24.390

	1.070, Table A	17.24.400

	1.075.010	17.28.010

	1.075.020	17.28.020

	1.075.030	17.28.030

	1.075.040	17.28.040

	1.080.010	17.32.010

	1.080.020	17.32.020

	1.080.030	17.32.030

	1.080.040	17.32.040

	1.080.050	17.32.050

	1.080.060	17.32.060

	1.080.070	17.32.070

	1.080.080	17.32.080

	1.080.090	17.32.090

	1.080.095	17.32.095

	1.080.100	17.32.100

	1.080.110	17.32.110

	1.080.120	Repealed by 3215

	1.080.130	17.32.130

	1.080.140	17.32.140

	1.080.150	17.32.150

	1.080.160	17.32.160

	1.080.170	17.32.172

	1.090.010	17.36.010

	1.090.015	17.36.015

	1.090.020	17.36.020

	1.090.030	17.36.030

	1.090.035	17.36.035

	1.090.040	17.36.040

	1.090.050	17.36.050

	1.090.060	17.36.060

	1.090.070	17.36.070

	1.090.080	17.36.080

	1.090.090	17.36.090

	1.090.100	17.36.100

	1.090.110	17.36.110

	1.091.005	17.40.005

	1.091.010	17.40.010

	1.091.015	17.40.015

	1.091.020	17.40.020

	1.091.025	17.40.025

	1.091.030	17.40.030

	1.091.035	17.40.035

	1.091.040	17.40.040

	1.091.045	17.40.045

	1.091.050	17.40.050

	1.091.055	17.40.055

	1.091.060	17.40.060

	1.091.065	17.40.065

	1.091.070	17.40.070

	1.091.075	17.40.075

	1.092.010	17.44.010

	1.092.015	17.44.015

	1.092.020	17.44.020

	1.092.025	17.44.025

	1.092.026	Repealed by 3031

	1.092.028	17.44.028

	1.092.030	17.44.030

	1.092.040	17.44.040

	1.092.050	17.44.050

	1.092.060	17.44.060

	1.092.070	17.44.070

	1.092.080	17.44.080

	1.092.090	17.44.090

	1.092.100	17.44.100

	1.093.010	17.46.010

	1.093.020	17.46.020

	1.093.030	17.46.030

	1.093.040	17.46.040

	1.093.050	17.46.050

	1.096.010	17.48.010

	1.096.020	17.48.020

	1.096.030	17.48.030

	1.096.040	17.48.040

	1.096.050	17.48.050

	1.098.010	17.52.010

	1.098.020	17.52.020

	1.098.030	17.52.030

	1.098.040	17.52.040

	1.098.050	17.52.050

	1.098.060	17.52.060

	1.098.070	17.52.070

	1.098.080	17.52.080

	1.100.010	17.56.010

	1.100.020	17.56.020

	1.100.030	17.56.030

	1.100.040	17.56.040

	1.102.010	17.60.010

	1.102.020	17.60.020

	1.102.030	17.60.030

	1.102.040	17.60.040

	1.104.010	17.64.010

	1.104.020	17.64.020

	1.104.030	17.64.030

	1.104.040	17.64.040

	1.104.050	17.64.050

	1.106.010	17.68.010

	1.106.020	17.68.020

	1.106.040	17.68.040

	1.108.010	17.72.010

	1.108.015	17.72.015

	1.108.020	17.72.020

	1.108.030	17.72.030

	1.108.035	17.72.035

	1.108.040	17.72.040

	1.108.050	17.72.050

	1.108.060	17.72.060

	1.108.070	17.72.070

	1.108.080	17.72.080

	1.108.090	17.72.090

	1.108.100	17.72.100

	1.108.110	17.72.110

	1.108.120	17.72.120

	1.108.130	17.72.130

	1.110.010	17.76.010

	1.110.015	17.76.015

	1.110.020	17.76.020

	1.110.030	17.76.030

	1.110.040	17.76.040

	1.110.050	17.76.050

	1.114.010	17.80.010

	1.114.015	17.80.015

	1.114.020	17.80.020

	1.114.030	17.80.030

	1.114.040	17.80.040

	1.114.050	17.80.050

	1.114.060	17.80.060

	1.114.065	17.80.065

	1.114.070	17.80.070

	1.114.080	17.80.080

	1.114.090	17.80.090

	1.116.010	17.84.010

	1.116.020	17.84.020

	1.116.025	17.84.025

	1.116.030	17.84.030

	1.116.040	17.84.040

	1.116.050	17.84.050

	1.116.060	17.84.060

	1.116.070	17.84.070

	1.116.080	17.84.080

	1.116.090	17.84.090

	1.116.100	17.84.100

	1.116.110	17.84.110

	1.116.120	17.84.120

	1.116.130	17.84.130

	1.116.140	17.84.140

	1.116.150	17.84.150

	1.116.160	17.84.160

	1.124.010	17.92.010

	1.124.020	17.92.020

	1.124.030	17.92.030

	1.124.040	17.92.040

	1.124.050	17.92.050

	1.124.060	17.92.060

	1.128.010	17.96.010

	1.128.020	17.96.020

	1.128.030	17.96.030

	1.128.040	17.96.040

	1.128.050	17.96.050

	1.128.060	17.96.060

	1.128.070	17.96.070

	1.128.080	17.96.080

	1.128.090	17.96.090

	1.128.100	17.96.100

	1.128.110	17.96.110

	1.128.120	17.96.120

	1.128.130	17.96.130

	1.128.140	17.96.140

	1.128.150	17.96.150

	1.128.160	17.96.160

	1.128.180	17.96.180

	1.140.010	17.100.010

	1.140.020	17.100.020

	1.140.030	17.100.030

	1.140.035	17.100.035

	1.140.040	17.100.040

	1.140.050	17.100.050

	1.140.060	17.100.060

	1.140.070	17.100.070

	1.140.080	17.100.080

	1.140.090	17.100.090

	1.140.100	17.100.100

	1.140.110	17.100.110

	1.140.120	17.100.120

	1.140.130	17.100.130

	1.140.140	17.100.140

	1.140.150	17.100.150

	1.142.010	17.104.010

	1.142.020	17.104.020

	1.142.030	17.104.030

	1.142.040	17.104.040

	1.142.050	17.104.050

	1.142.060	17.104.060

	1.144.010	17.108.010

	1.144.020	17.108.020

	1.144.030	17.108.030

	1.144.040	17.108.040

	1.144.050	17.108.050

	1.144.060	17.108.060

	1.144.070	17.108.070

	1.144.080	17.108.080

	1.150.010	17.112.010

	1.150.020	17.112.020

	1.150.030	17.112.030

	1.150.040	17.112.040

	1.150.050	17.112.050

	1.152.010	17.116.010

	1.152.020	17.116.020

	1.152.030	17.116.030

	1.152.040	17.116.040

	1.152.050	17.116.050

	1.152.060	17.116.060

	1.152.070	17.116.070

	1.152.080	17.116.080

	1.154.010	17.120.010

	1.154.020	17.120.020

	1.154.040	17.120.040

	1.154.050	17.120.050

	1.154.060	17.120.060

	1.154.070	17.120.070

	1.154.080	17.120.080

	1.154.090	17.120.090

	1.154.100	17.120.100

	1.154.110	17.120.110

	1.154.120	17.120.120

	1.156.010	17.124.010

	1.156.020	17.124.020

	1.156.030	17.124.030

	1.156.040	17.124.040

	1.156.050	17.124.050

	1.156.060	17.124.060

	1.156.070	17.124.070

	1.156.080	17.124.080

	1.158.010	17.128.010

	1.158.020	17.128.020

	1.158.030	17.128.030

	1.160.010	17.132.010

	1.160.020	17.132.020

	1.160.025	17.132.025

	1.160.030	17.132.030

	1.160.040	17.132.040

	1.160.045	17.132.045

	1.160.050	17.132.050

	1.160.060	17.132.060

	1.160.070	17.132.070

	1.170.010	17.136.010

	1.170.020	17.136.020

	1.170.030	17.136.030

	1.170.040	17.136.040

	1.170.050	17.136.050

	1.170.060	17.136.060

	1.170.070	17.136.070

	1.170.080	17.136.080

	1.170.090	17.136.090

	1.170.100	17.136.100

	1.170.110	17.136.110

	1.170.120	17.136.120

	1.170.130	17.136.130

	1.170.140	17.136.140

	1.170.150	17.136.150

	1.170.160	17.136.160

	1.170.170	17.136.170

	1.170.180	17.136.180

	1.170.190	17.136.190

	1.170.200	17.136.200

	1.170.210	17.136.210

	1.170.220	17.136.220

	1.172.010	17.140.010

	1.172.020	17.140.020

	1.172.030	17.140.030

	1.172.035	17.140.035

	1.172.040	17.140.040

	1.172.050	17.140.050

	1.172.055	17.140.055

	1.172.060	17.140.060

	1.172.070	17.140.070

	1.172.080	17.140.080

	1.172.085	17.140.085

	1.172.090	17.140.090

	1.172.100	17.140.100

	1.172.110	17.140.110

	1.172.120	17.140.120

	1.172.130	17.140.130

	1.176.010	17.144.010

	1.176.020	17.144.020

	1.176.030	17.144.030

	1.176.040	17.144.040

	1.176.050	17.144.050

	1.180.010	17.148.010

	1.180.015	17.148.015

	1.180.020	17.148.020

	1.180.030	17.148.030

	1.180.040	17.148.040

	1.180.050	17.148.050

	1.180.060	17.148.060

	1.180.070	17.148.070

	1.180.080	17.148.080

	1.180.090	17.148.090

	1.180.100	17.148.100

	1.180.110	17.148.110

	1.180.120	17.148.120

	1.180.130	17.148.130

	1.180.140	17.148.140

	1.180.150	17.148.150

	1.180.160	17.148.160

	1.180.170	17.148.170

	1.180.180	17.148.180

	1.180.190	17.148.190

	1.180.200	17.148.200

	1.184.010	17.152.010

	1.184.020	17.152.020

	1.184.030	17.152.030

	1.184.040	17.152.040

	1.184.050	17.152.050

	1.184.060	17.152.060

	1.184.070	17.152.070

	1.184.080	17.152.080

	1.184.090	17.152.090

	1.184.100	17.152.100

	1.184.110	17.152.110

	1.184.120	17.152.120

	1.184.130	17.152.130

	1.184.140	17.152.140

	1.184.150	17.152.150

	1.184.160	17.152.160

	1.184.170	17.152.170

	1.184.180	17.152.180

	1.184.190	17.152.190

	1.184.200	17.152.200

	Ord. 2875 Appx. §	Herein

	Abbreviations and Definitions	18.04.010

	110	18.08.005

	110.1	18.08.010

	110.2	18.08.020

	120.1	18.08.030

	120.2	18.08.040

	120.3	18.08.050

	120.4	18.08.060

	120.5	18.08.070

	120.6	18.08.080

	120.7	18.08.090

	120.8	18.08.100

	130.1	18.08.110

	130.2	18.08.120

	130.3	18.08.130

	130.4	18.08.140

	130.5	18.08.150

	130.6	18.08.160

	140.1	18.08.170

	140.2	18.08.180

	140.3	18.08.190

	140.4	18.08.200

	150.1	18.08.210

	160.1	18.08.220

	170.1	18.08.230

	170.2	18.08.240

	170.3	18.08.250

	170.4	18.08.260

	170.5	18.08.270

	170.6	18.08.280

	170.7	18.08.290

	170.8	18.08.300

	170.9	18.08.310

	170.10	18.08.320

	180.1	18.08.330

	180.2	18.08.340

	180.3	18.08.350

	180.4	18.08.360

	180.5	18.08.370

	180.6	18.08.380

	180.7	18.08.390

	180.8	18.08.400

	180.9	18.08.410

	190	18.08.420

	210.1	18.12.010

	210.2	18.12.020

	210.3	18.12.030

	210.4	18.12.040

	210.5	18.12.050

	210.6	18.12.060

	210.7	18.12.070

	210.8	18.12.080

	210.9	18.12.090

	210.10	18.12.100

	210.11	18.12.110

	210.12	18.12.120

	210.13	18.12.130

	210.14	18.12.140

	210.15	18.12.150

	210.16	18.12.160

	210.17	18.12.170

	310	18.16.005

	310.1	18.16.010

	310.2	18.16.020

	310.3	18.16.030

	310.4	18.16.040

	320	18.16.050

	330	18.16.060

	340	18.16.070

	350	18.16.080

	360.1	18.16.090

	360.2	18.16.100

	360.3	18.16.110

	370.1	18.16.120

	370.2	18.16.130

	370.3	18.16.140

	380	18.16.145

	380.1	18.16.150

	380.2	18.16.160

	380.3	18.16.170

	380.4	18.16.180

	380.5	18.16.190

	380.6	18.16.200

	380.7	18.16.210

	380.8	18.16.220

	380.9	18.16.230

	380.10	18.16.240

	390	18.16.245

	390.1	18.16.250

	390.2	18.16.260

	390.3	18.16.270

	390.4	18.16.280

	410	18.20.010

	420	18.20.020

	430	18.20.030

	440	18.20.040

	450	18.20.050

	510	18.24.005

	510.1	18.24.010

	510.2	18.24.020

	510.3	18.24.030

	510.4	18.24.040

	520.1	18.24.050

	520.2	18.24.060

	530.1	18.24.070

	530.2	18.24.080

	530.3	18.24.090

	540.1	18.24.100

	540.2	18.24.110

	540.3	18.24.120

	540.4	18.24.130

	550	18.24.135

	550.1	18.24.140

	550.2	18.24.150

	550.3	18.24.160

	550.4	18.24.170

	550.5	18.24.180

	550.6	18.24.190

	610	18.28.005

	610.1	18.28.010

	610.2	18.28.020

	610.3	18.28.030

	610.4	18.28.040

	610.5	18.28.050

	610.6	18.28.060

	620.1	18.28.070

	620.2	18.28.080

	710	18.32.010

	720	18.32.020

	810	18.36.010

	820	18.36.020

	830	18.36.030

	840	18.36.040

	850	18.36.050


Ordinance Table

Link to ordinances passed but not yet codified

	1 – 55	(Repealed by 698)

	56	(Inactive E)

	57	(Repealed by 698)

	58	(Repealed by 698)

	59	(Repealed by 698)

	60	(Repealed by 700)

	61	(Repealed by 698)

	62	(Repealed by 526)

	63	(Repealed by 700)

	64	(Repealed by 700)

	65	(Repealed by 699)

	66	(Repealed by 700)

	67	(Repealed by 699)

	68	(Repealed by 698)

	69	(Repealed by 570)

	70	(Repealed by 700)

	71	(Inactive C-2)

	72	(Inactive C-2)

	73	(Inactive C-2)

	74	(Repealed by 700)

	75	(Inactive E)

	76	(Repealed by 699)

	77	(Inactive C-1, C-2)

	78	(Repealed by 699)

	79	(Inactive H-2)

	80	(Inactive H-2)

	81	Franchise (Expired)

	82	(Inactive D)

	83	(Repealed by 570)

	84	(Repealed by 700)

	85	(Repealed by 162)

	86	(Inactive J-2)

	87	(Inactive E)

	88	(Inactive E)

	89	(Repealed by 700)

	90	(Inactive E)

	91	(Inactive J-2)

	92	(Repealed by 700)

	93	(Repealed by 542)

	94	(Repealed by 299)

	95	(Vetoed)

	96	(Repealed by 700)

	97	(Repealed by 699)

	98	(Repealed by 2234)

	99	(Inactive H-2)

	100	(Inactive J-2)

	101	(Inactive L)

	102	(Inactive L)

	103	(Repealed by 700)

	104	(Repealed by 349)

	105	(Inactive J-2)

	106	(Inactive E)

	107	(Repealed by 698)

	108	(Repealed by 700)

	109	(Repealed by 700)

	110	(Repealed by 2234)

	111	(Inactive C-1)

	112	(Repealed by 700)

	113	(Repealed by 124)

	114	(Repealed by 700)

	115	(Inactive J-1)

	116	(Inactive J-2)

	117	(Inactive I-2)

	118	(Inactive J-2)

	119	(Repealed by 700)

	120	(Repealed by 699)

	121	(Inactive J-2)

	122	(Inactive J-2)

	123	(Repealed by 700)

	124	(Inactive H-1)

	125	(Repealed by 699)

	126	(Inactive H-1)

	127	(Repealed by 570)

	128	(Inactive H-1)

	129	(Repealed by 700)

	130	(Inactive J-2)

	131	(Inactive J-2)

	132	(Repealed by 1229)

	133	(Repealed by 700)

	134	(Inactive J-2)

	135	(Inactive J-2)

	136	(Repealed by 1229)

	137	(Inactive J-2)

	138	(Rejected by voters)

	139	(Inactive J-2)

	140	(Inactive H-1)

	141	Repeals Ord. 97 (Repealer)

	142	(Repealed by 700)

	143	(Repealed by 161)

	144	(Repealed by 700)

	145	(Repealed by 700)

	146	(Repealed by 699)

	147	(Inactive H-1)

	148	(Inactive H-1)

	149	(Inactive H-1)

	150	(Inactive H-1)

	151	(Inactive H-1)

	152	(Inactive H-1)

	153	(Inactive H-1)

	154	(Inactive H-1)

	155	(Inactive C-1, C-2)

	156	(Repealed by 700)

	157	(Repealed by 700)

	158	(Repealed by 699)

	159	(Repealed by 570)

	160	(Repealed by 699)

	161	(Repealed by 700)

	162	(Repealed by 2234)

	163	(Inactive I-1)

	164	(Repealed by 700)

	165	(Inactive J-2)

	166	(Repealed by 178)

	167	(Inactive J-2)

	168	(Repealed by 175)

	169	(Repealed by 542)

	170	(Inactive H-1)

	171	(Repealed by 2760)

	172	(Inactive L)

	173	(Inactive J-2)

	174	(Inactive H-1)

	175	(Repealed by 700)

	176	(Repealed by 181)

	177	(Inactive E)

	178	(Repealed by 185)

	179	(Inactive J-2)

	180	(Repealed by 503)

	181	(Inactive H-1)

	182	(Repealed by 699)

	183	(Inactive H-1)

	184	(Repealed by 270)

	185	(Repealed by 731)

	186	(Inactive B)

	187	(Inactive H-1)

	188	(Repealed by 699)

	189	(Inactive I-2)

	190	(Repealed by 2234)

	191	(Inactive H-1)

	192	(Repealed by 570)

	193	(Repealed by 700)

	194	(Inactive B)

	195	(Inactive I-2)

	196	(Inactive I-2)

	197	(Inactive A)

	198	(Inactive C-1, C-2)

	199	(Repealed by 700)

	200	(Repealed by 700)

	201	(Inactive L)

	202	(Repealed by 2234)

	203	(Inactive B)

	204	(Repealed by 699)

	205	(Inactive J-2)

	206	(Inactive I-2)

	207	(Repealed by 570)

	208	(Inactive L)

	209	(Repealed by 700)

	210	(Repealed by 700)

	211	(Repealed by 214, 570)

	212	(Repealed by 699)

	213	(Repealed by 1229)

	214	(Inactive A)

	215	(Inactive C-2, G-2(b))

	216	(Repealed by 699)

	217	(Repealed by 526)

	218	(Repealed by 700)

	219	(Repealed by 699)

	220	(Repealed by 699)

	221	(Repealed by 699)

	222	(Repealed by 700)

	223	(Repealed by 570)

	224	Lease (Expired)

	225	(Repealed by 543)

	226	(Repealed by 699)

	227	(Repealed by 700)

	228	(Repealed by 570)

	229	(Inactive B)

	230	(Inactive I-2)

	231	(Repealed by 700)

	232	(Inactive J-2)

	233	(Repealed by 2755)

	234	(Repealed by 246)

	235	Franchise (Special)

	236	(Inactive J-2)

	237	(Inactive J-2)

	238	(Inactive E)

	239	(Inactive H-1)

	240	(Repealed by 277)

	241	(Inactive J-2)

	242	(Inactive E)

	243	(Inactive A)

	244	(Repealed by 700)

	245	(Inactive A)

	246	Repeals Ord. 234 (Repealer)

	247	(Inactive G-2(b))

	248	(Inactive C-1)

	249	(Inactive G-2(a))

	250	(Inactive J-2)

	251	(Inactive J-2)

	252	(Repealed by 266)

	253	(Inactive J-2)

	254	(Inactive J-2)

	255	(Inactive J-2)

	256	(Inactive B)

	257	(Repealed by 699)

	258	(Inactive A)

	259	(Repealed by 699)

	260	(Inactive A)

	261	(Repealed by 699)

	262	(Inactive E)

	263	(Inactive J-2)

	264	(Inactive J-2)

	265	(Inactive B)

	266	(Inactive B)

	267	(Repealed by 2234)

	268	(Inactive B)

	269	(Inactive C-1)

	270	(Repealed by 360)

	271	(Repealed by 570)

	272	(Inactive J-2)

	273	(Repealed by 700)

	274	(Inactive J-2)

	275	(Repealed by 700)

	276	(Inactive A)

	277	(Repealed by 326)

	278	(Repealed by 2236)

	279	(Inactive J-2)

	280	(Inactive J-2)

	281	(Repealed by 543)

	282	(Inactive G-2(a))

	283	(Inactive A)

	284	(Inactive J-2)

	285	(Inactive H-1)

	286	(Inactive J-2)

	287	(Repealed by 700)

	288	(Inactive B)

	289	Lease (Expired)

	290	(Repealed by 700)

	291	(Repealed by 319)

	292	(Repealed by 320)

	293	(Inactive L)

	294	(Repealed by 321)

	295	(Inactive G-1)

	296	(Inactive G-1)

	297	(Inactive G-1)

	298	(Inactive H-1)

	299	(Repealed by 700)

	300	(Inactive D)

	301	(Inactive A)

	302	(Repealed by 2234)

	303	(Repealed by 700)

	304	(Repealed by 700)

	305	(Repealed by 699)

	306	(Repealed by 700)

	307	(Inactive E)

	308	(Repealed by 700)

	309	(Repealed by 1229)

	310	(Inactive C-1)

	311	(Inactive G-1)

	312	(Inactive H-1)

	313	(Repealed by 700)

	314	(Repealed by 548)

	315	(Inactive B)

	316	(Inactive D)

	317	(Repealed by 570)

	318	(Repealed by 570)

	319	Repeals Ord. 291 (Repealer)

	320	Repeals Ord. 292 (Repealer)

	321	Repeals Ord. 294 (Repealer)

	322	(Inactive G-1)

	323	(Inactive B)

	324	(Inactive B)

	325	(Inactive I-1)

	326	(Repealed by 700)

	327	(Repealed by 700)

	328	(Repealed by 329)

	329	(Repealed by 339)

	330	(Inactive J-2)

	331	(Inactive J-2)

	332	(Inactive J-2)

	333	(Repealed by 700)

	334	(Repealed by 699)

	335	(Repealed by 699)

	336	(Repealed by 699)

	337	(Repealed by 700)

	338	(Repealed by 700)

	339	(Inactive C-1)

	340	(Inactive J-2)

	341	(Inactive A)

	342	(Inactive J-2)

	343	Franchise (Expired)

	344	(Inactive J-2)

	345	(Inactive L)

	346	(Repealed by 454)

	347	(Repealed by 570)

	348	(Inactive I-1)

	349	(Repealed by 700)

	350	(Inactive B)

	351	(Inactive B)

	352	(Repealed by 700)

	353	(Repealed by 535)

	354	(Repealed by 356)

	355	(Repealed by 359)

	356	Repeals Ord. 354 (Repealer)

	357	(Inactive I-1)

	358	(Inactive I-1, I-2)

	359	(Inactive I-1)

	360	(Repealed by 700)

	361	(Inactive D)

	362	(Inactive J-2)

	363	(Inactive B)

	364	(Inactive G-2(b))

	365	(Inactive I-1)

	366	(Inactive D)

	367	(Inactive G-1)

	368	(Repealed by 700)

	369	(Repealed by 699)

	370	(Repealed by 699)

	371	(Repealed by 699)

	372	(Repealed by 699)

	373	(Repealed by 446)

	374	(Inactive E)

	375	(Inactive B)

	376	(Inactive I-2)

	377	(Inactive I-2)

	378	(Inactive I-2)

	379	(Inactive I-2)

	380	(Inactive D)

	381	(Inactive D)

	382	(Inactive B)

	383	(Inactive J-2)

	384	(Inactive I-1)

	385	(Inactive I-1)

	386	(Inactive I-1)

	387	(Inactive J-2)

	388	(Inactive G-2(a))

	389	(Inactive J-2)

	390	(Inactive H-1)

	391	(Inactive I-1)

	392	(Inactive I-1)

	393	(Inactive I-1)

	394	(Inactive I-1)

	395	(Inactive J-2)

	396	(Inactive J-2)

	397	(Inactive J-2)

	398	(Repealed by 700)

	399	(Repealed by 699)

	400	(Inactive I-1)

	401	(Inactive J-2)

	402	(Inactive B)

	403	(Inactive G-2(a))

	404	(Repealed by 699)

	405	(Repealed by 699)

	406	(Repealed by 699)

	407	(Repealed by 699)

	408	(Repealed by 699)

	409	(Repealed by 699)

	410	(Repealed by 699)

	411	(Inactive J-2)

	412	(Repealed by 2234)

	413	(Inactive J-2)

	414	(Inactive J-2)

	415	(Inactive J-2)

	416	(Inactive J-2)

	417	(Inactive J-2)

	418	(Inactive J-2)

	419	(Inactive K-2)

	420	(Repealed by 550)

	421	Development regulations (Repealed)

	422	(Inactive F)

	423	(Inactive D)

	424	(Inactive B)

	425	(Inactive B)

	426	(Inactive I-2)

	427	(Inactive J-2)

	428	(Repealed by 700)

	429	(Inactive I-1)

	430	(Inactive H-1)

	431	(Inactive J-2)

	432	(Inactive H-1)

	433	(Inactive J-2)

	434	(Inactive B)

	435	(Inactive J-2)

	436	(Inactive I-1)

	437	(Inactive F)

	438	(Repealed by 699)

	439	(Repealed by 699)

	440	(Inactive B)

	441	(Inactive J-2)

	442	(Inactive B)

	443	(Inactive H-1)

	444	(Inactive H-1)

	445	(Inactive J-2)

	446	(Repealed by 700)

	447	(Repealed by 449)

	448	(Inactive H-1)

	449	(Inactive B)

	450	(Repealed by 700)

	451	(Inactive H-1)

	452	(Repealed by 700)

	453	(Repealed by 699)

	454	(Inactive L)

	455	(Inactive B)

	456	(Inactive H-1)

	457	(Repealed by 699)

	458	(Repealed by 699)

	459	(Repealed by 699)

	460	(Repealed by 699)

	461	(Repealed by 699)

	462	(Repealed by 699)

	463	(Repealed by 699)

	464	(Repealed by 699)

	465	(Repealed by 700)

	466	(Repealed by 700)

	467	(Inactive J-2)

	468	(Inactive B)

	469	(Inactive J-2)

	470	(Repealed by 700)

	471	(Inactive J-2)

	472	(Repealed by 700)

	473	(Inactive H-1)

	474	(Inactive H-1)

	475	(Repealed by 700)

	476	(Inactive C-2)

	477	(Inactive B)

	478	(Repealed by 699)

	479	(Repealed by 699)

	480	(Repealed by 699)

	481	(Repealed by 699)

	482	(Repealed by 699)

	483	(Repealed by 544)

	484	(Inactive J-2)

	485	(Repealed by 699)

	486	(Repealed by 699)

	487	(Repealed by 700)

	488	(Repealed by 2234)

	489	(Inactive J-2)

	490	(Repealed by 699)

	491	(Repealed by 699)

	492	(Repealed by 699)

	493	(Repealed by 699)

	494	(Repealed by 699)

	495	(Repealed by 699)

	496	(Repealed by 699)

	497	(Repealed by 700)

	498	(Repealed by 700)

	499	(Repealed by 2234)

	500	(Failed to pass)

	501	(Repealed by 523)

	502	(Repealed by 513)

	503	(Repealed by 700)

	504	(Repealed by 529)

	505	(Repealed by 1790)

	506	(Repealed by 700)

	507	(Repealed by 543)

	508	(Repealed by 2226)

	509	(Repealed by 523)

	510	(Repealed by 2234)

	511	(Repealed by 537)

	512	(Inactive G-2(b))

	513	(Repealed by 529)

	514	(Repealed by 699)

	515	(Repealed by 699)

	516	(Repealed by 699)

	517	(Repealed by 699)

	518	(Repealed by 699)

	519	(Repealed by 533, 570)

	520	(Repealed by 570)

	521	(Inactive B)

	522	(Inactive G-2(a))

	523	(Repealed by 700)

	524	(Repealed by 2234)

	525	Franchise (Expired)

	526	(Repealed by 700)

	527	(Repealed by 626)

	528	(Repealed by 700)

	529	(Repealed by 2234)

	530	(Repealed by 549)

	531	(Inactive G-2(a))

	532	(Inactive D)

	533	(Repealed by 699)

	534	(Inactive G-2(a))

	535	(Repealed by 700)

	536	(Inactive G-2(a))

	537	(Repealed by 1147)

	538	(Repealed by 1229)

	539	(Inactive G-2(a))

	540	(Repealed by 1225)

	541	(Inactive G-2(a))

	542	(Repealed by 700)

	543	(Repealed by 700)

	544	(Inactive J-2)

	545	(Repealed by 700)

	546	(Inactive G-2(a), G-2(b))

	547	(Repealed by 700)

	548	(Repealed by 700)

	549	(Repealed by 700)

	550	(Repealed by 700)

	551	(Inactive C-2)

	552	(Inactive I-1)

	553	(Repealed by 700)

	554	(Inactive G-2(a))

	555	(Inactive G-2(a), G-2(b))

	556	(Inactive I-1)

	557	(Inactive I-1)

	558	(Inactive I-1)

	559	(Inactive I-1)

	560	(Inactive J-2)

	561	(Repealed by 700)

	562	(Repealed by 700)

	563	(Repealed by 700)

	564	(Inactive I-1)

	565	(Inactive G-2(a))

	566	(Repealed by 700)

	567	(Inactive I-1)

	568	(Inactive J-2)

	569	(Repealed by 700)

	570	(Repealed by 700)

	571	(Inactive I-1)

	572	(Inactive I-1)

	573	(Inactive J-2)

	574	(Inactive I-1)

	575	(Inactive I-1)

	576	(Repealed by 2234)

	577	(Inactive G-2(b))

	578	(Inactive J-2)

	579	(Repealed by 700)

	580	(Inactive C-1)

	581	(Inactive C-2(a))

	582	(Inactive C-1, C-2, K-1, K-2, L)

	583	(Inactive I-1)

	584	(Inactive J-2)

	585	(Inactive J-2)

	586	(Inactive G-2(a))

	587	(Repealed by 700)

	588	(Repealed by 699)

	589	(Inactive A, G-2(a))

	590	Lease (Expired)

	591	(Inactive B)

	592	(Inactive B)

	593	(Inactive G-2(a))

	594	(Repealed by 627)

	595	(Inactive G-2(a))

	596	(Inactive G-2(a))

	597	(Inactive G-2(a))

	598	(Inactive B)

	599	(Inactive G-2(a))

	600	(Inactive G-2(a))

	601	(Repealed by 700)

	602	(Inactive G-2(a))

	603	(Inactive G-2(a))

	604	(Repealed by 2352)

	605	(Inactive G-2(a))

	606	(Inactive G-2(a))

	607	(Inactive E)

	608	(Repealed by 700)

	609	(Repealed by 700)

	610	(Inactive G-2(a))

	611	(Repealed by 612)

	612	(Repealed by 700)

	613	(Repealed by 614)

	614	(Repealed by 615)

	615	(Repealed by 616)

	616	(Repealed by 618)

	617	(Repealed by 2322)

	618	(Repealed by 619)

	619	Repeals Ord. 618 (Repealer)

	620	(Inactive G-2(a))

	621	(Inactive G-2(a))

	622	(Repealed by 700)

	623	(Inactive G-2(a))

	624	(Repealed by 637)

	625	(Inactive L)

	626	(Repealed by 2234)

	627	(Inactive A)

	628	(Inactive G-2(b))

	629	(Inactive G-2(a))

	630	(Inactive G-2(a))

	631	(Repealed by 700)

	632	(Inactive G-2(a))

	633	(Inactive G-2(b))

	634	(Inactive G-2(b))

	635	(Inactive G-2(a))

	636	(Inactive I-1)

	637	Grant of easement (Special)

	638	(Inactive G-2(a))

	639	(Inactive G-2(a))

	640	(Inactive G-2(a))

	641	(Inactive G-2(a))

	642	(Inactive A, L)

	643	(Inactive G-2(a))

	644	(Inactive G-2(a))

	645	(Inactive G-2(a))

	646	(Inactive L)

	647	(Inactive G-2(b))

	648	(Inactive I-1)

	649	(Repealed by 700)

	650	(Inactive J-2)

	651	(Inactive G-2(a))

	652	(Inactive G-2(a))

	653	(Inactive C-1)

	654	(Inactive A, J-2)

	655	(Inactive J-2)

	656	(Inactive L)

	657	(Repealed by 1381)

	658	(Inactive E)

	659	(Inactive L)

	660	(Inactive G-2(a))

	661	(Inactive A)

	662	(Inactive G-2(a))

	663	(Inactive G-2(a))

	664	(Inactive G-2(a))

	665	(Inactive G-2(a))

	666	(Inactive G-2(a))

	667	(Inactive L)

	668	(Inactive G-2(a))

	669	(Inactive L)

	670	(Inactive G-2(a))

	671	(Inactive J-2)

	672	(Repealed by 2234)

	673	(Repealed by 1229)

	674	(Inactive J-2(b))

	675	(Inactive J-2(a))

	676	(Inactive A)

	677	(Inactive G-2(a))

	678	(Repealed by 1073)

	679	(Inactive G-2(a))

	680	(Repealed by 1165)

	681	(Repealed by 1268)

	682	(Repealed by 2234)

	683	(Repealed by 1684, 2021 and 2146)

	684	(Repealed by 2234)

	685	(Repealed by 1457)

	686	(Repealed by 2285)

	687	(Repealed by 1825)

	688	(Repealed by 2233)

	689	(Repealed by 2146)

	690	(Repealed by 2234)

	691	(Repealed by 1996)

	692	(Repealed by 1919 and 1943)

	693	(Repealed by 1063)

	694	(Repealed by 2240)

	695	(Repealed by 941)

	696	(Repealed by 2234)

	697	(Repealed by 2245)

	698	(Repealer)

	699	(Repealer)

	700	(Repealer)

	701	(Inactive A)

	702	(Inactive G-2(a))

	703	(Inactive L)

	704	(Repealed by 706)

	705	(Inactive C-2)

	706	(Repealed by 1034)

	707	(Inactive G-2(a))

	708	(Inactive G-2(a))

	709	(Inactive G-2(a))

	710	(Inactive G-2(b))

	711	Finance (Special)

	712	(Repealed by 716)

	713	(Inactive G-2(a))

	714	(Inactive G-2(a))

	715	(Inactive G-2(a))

	716	(Repealed by 721)

	717	(Inactive G-2(a))

	718	(Repealed by 1919 and 1943)

	719	(Repealed by 2234)

	720	(Inactive G-2(b))

	721	Repeals Ord. 716 (Repealer)

	722	(Inactive G-2(a), G-2(b))

	723	(Repealed by 941)

	724	(Repealed by 2235)

	725	(Repealed by 2234)

	726	(Repealed by 2234)

	727	(Repealed by 1919 and 1943)

	728	Public ways (Special)

	729	Property transaction (Special)

	730	(Repealed by 941)

	731	(Repealed by 1423)

	732	(Repealed by 1577)

	733	Property transaction (Special)

	734	Finance (Special)

	735	(Repealed by 2234)

	736	Property transaction (Special)

	737	Public ways (Special)

	738	Property transaction (Special)

	739	Property transaction (Special)

	740	Property transaction (Special)

	741	Property transaction (Special)

	742	Property transaction (Special)

	743	(Repealed by 2234)

	744	(Repealed by 2234)

	745	Miscellaneous (Special)

	746	Property transaction (Special)

	747	(Repealed by 1919 and 1943)

	748	(Repealed by 2234)

	749	(Repealed by 2234)

	750	Public improvements (Special)

	751	Public improvements (Special)

	752	Property transaction (Special)

	753	(Repealed by 1195)

	754	Property transaction (Special)

	755	Property transaction (Special)

	756	Property transaction (Special)

	757	Property transaction (Special)

	758	Property transaction (Special)

	759	Property transaction (Special)

	760	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	761	Property transaction (Special)

	762	Property transaction (Special)

	763	Property transaction (Special)

	764	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	765	(Repealed by 958)

	766	Property transaction (Special)

	767	Property transaction (Special)

	768	Property transaction (Special)

	769	Property transaction (Special)

	770	Property transaction (Special)

	771	Property transaction (Special)

	772	(Repealed by 776)

	773	Property transaction (Special)

	774	(Repealed by 777)

	775	Property transaction (Special)

	776	Property transaction (Special)

	777	Property transaction (Special)

	778	Property transaction (Special)

	779	Finance (Special)

	780	Property transaction (Special)

	781	Property transaction (Special)

	782	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	783	Property transaction (Special)

	784	Property transaction (Special)

	785	Public improvements (Special)

	786	(Repealed by 1034)

	787	Property transaction (Special)

	788	(Repealed by 2236)

	789	Property transaction (Special)

	790	Property transaction (Special)

	791	Property transaction (Special)

	792	Property transaction (Special)

	793	Property transaction (Special)

	794	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	795	Property transaction (Special)

	796	Finance (Special)

	797	Property transaction (Special)

	798	Property transaction (Special)

	799	Property transaction (Special)

	800	Property transaction (Special)

	801	Property transaction (Special)

	802	Property transaction (Special)

	803	Property transaction (Special)

	804	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	805	Miscellaneous (Special)

	806	Property transaction (Special)

	807	(Repealed by 1381)

	808	Property transaction (Special)

	809	Property transaction (Special)

	810	Property transaction (Special)

	811	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	812	Property transaction (Special)

	813	Property transaction (Special)

	814	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	815	Property transaction (Special)

	816	Property transaction (Special)

	817	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	818	Property transaction (Special)

	819	Property transaction (Special)

	820	Property transaction (Special)

	821	Property transaction (Special)

	822	Property transaction (Special)

	823	Property transaction (Special)

	824	Property transaction (Special)

	825	Property transaction (Special)

	826	Property transaction (Special)

	827	(Repealed by 1229)

	828	Property transaction (Special)

	829	Property transaction (Special)

	830	(Repealed by 1790)

	831	Property transaction (Special)

	832	Property transaction (Special)

	833	Property transaction (Special)

	834	Property transaction (Special)

	835	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	836	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	837	Property transaction (Special)

	838 –

	937	(Numbers not used)

	938	Property transaction (Special)

	939	Property transaction (Special)

	940	Property transaction (Special)

	941	(Repealed by 1034)

	942	Property transaction (Special)

	943	Property transaction (Special)

	944	Public ways (Special)

	945	Property transaction (Special)

	946	Property transaction (Special)

	947	Property transaction (Special)

	948	Property transaction (Special)

	949	Property transaction (Special)

	950	(Repealed by 1212)

	951	Property transaction (Special)

	952	Property transaction (Special)

	953	Property transaction (Special)

	954	Property transaction (Special)

	955	Property transaction (Special)

	956	Property transaction (Special)

	957	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	958	(Repealed by 987)

	959	Property transaction (Special)

	960	Property transaction (Special)

	961	Property transaction (Special)

	962	Property transaction (Special)

	963	Property transaction (Special)

	964	Property transaction (Special)

	965	Property transaction (Special)

	966	Property transaction (Special)

	967	Property transaction (Special)

	968	Property transaction (Special)

	969	Property transaction (Special)

	970	Property transaction (Special)

	971	Property transaction (Special)

	972	Property transaction (Special)

	973	Property transaction (Special)

	974	Property transaction (Special)

	975	Property transaction (Special)

	976	Property transaction (Special)

	977	Property transaction (Special)

	978	(Repealed by 986)

	979	Property transaction (Special)

	980	Property transaction (Special)

	981	Public ways (Special)

	982	Property transaction (Special)

	983	Property transaction (Special)

	984	Property transaction (Special)

	985	Property transaction (Special)

	986	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	987	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	988	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	989	Property transaction (Special)

	990	Property transaction (Special)

	991	Property transaction (Special)

	992	Property transaction (Special)

	993	Property transaction (Special)

	994	Property transaction (Special)

	995	Property transaction (Special)

	996	Property transaction (Special)

	997	Property transaction (Special)

	998	(Repealed by 1598)

	999	Property transaction (Special)

	1000	Property transaction (Special)

	1001	Property transaction (Special)

	1002	Property transaction (Special)

	1003	(Repealed by 1105)

	1004	Property transaction (Special)

	1005	(Repealed by 1034)

	1006	Property transaction (Special)

	1007	Property transaction (Special)

	1008	Property transaction (Special)

	1009	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1010	Property transaction (Special)

	1011	(Repealed by 1598)

	1012	Property transaction (Special)

	1013	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1014	Property transaction (Special)

	1015	Property transaction (Special)

	1016	Finance (Special)

	1017	Property transaction (Special)

	1018	Property transaction (Special)

	1019	Property transaction (Special)

	1020	Property transaction (Special)

	1021	Property transaction (Special)

	1022	Property transaction (Special)

	1023	Property transaction (Special)

	1024	Property transaction (Special)

	1025	(Repealed by 1034)

	1026	Property transaction (Special)

	1027	Property transaction (Special)

	1028	Property transaction (Special)

	1029	Property transaction (Special)

	1030	Property transaction (Special)

	1031	Property transaction (Special)

	1032	(Repealed by 1229)

	1033	Property transaction (Special)

	1034	(Repealed by 1137)

	1035	Property transaction (Special)

	1036	Public improvements (Special)

	1037	Public improvements (Special)

	1038	Public improvements (Special)

	1039	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1040	Property transaction (Special)

	1041	(Repealed by 1370)

	1042	Property transaction (Special)

	1043	Public improvements (Special)

	1044	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1045	Property transaction (Special)

	1046	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1047	Property transaction (Special)

	1048	Property transaction (Special)

	1049	Property transaction (Special)

	1050	Public improvements (Special)

	1051	(Repealed by 1229)

	1052	(Repealed by 2234)

	1053	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1054	Property transaction (Special)

	1055	(Repealed by 1423)

	1056	Property transaction (Special)

	1057	(Repealed by 1063)

	1058	Property transaction (Special)

	1059	(Repealed by 1067)

	1060	(Repealed by 1063)

	1061	Property transaction (Special)

	1062	(Repealed by 1137)

	1063	(Repealed by 1392)

	1064	(Repealed by 2234)

	1065	(Repealed by 1270)

	1066	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1067	(Repealer)

	1068	Property transaction (Special)

	1069	Public improvements (Special)

	1070	Public improvements (Special)

	1071	Public improvements (Special)

	1072	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1073	(Repealed by 2234)

	1074	(Repealed by 1137)

	1075	Property transaction (Special)

	1076	Finance (Special)

	1077	Public improvements (Special)

	1078	Public improvements (Special)

	1079	(Repealed by 2233)

	1080	Property transaction (Special)

	1081	Finance (Special)

	1082	Property transaction (Special)

	1083	Property transaction (Special)

	1084	Miscellaneous (Special)

	1085	Finance (Special)

	1086	Property transaction (Special)

	1087	Public improvements (Special)

	1088	Property transaction (Special)

	1089	(Repealed by 1287)

	1090	(Repealed by 1392)

	1091	Public improvements (Special)

	1092	Public improvements (Special)

	1093	Property transaction (Special)

	1094	Property transaction (Special)

	1095	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1096	Property transaction (Special)

	1097	Finance (Special)

	1098	(Repealed by 1229)

	1099	(Superseded by 1309)

	1100	(Repealed by 1598)

	1101	Property transaction (Special)

	1102	Property transaction (Special)

	1103	Property transaction (Special)

	1104	Property transaction (Special)

	1105	(Repealer)

	1106	(Repealed by 2234)

	1107	(Repealed by 1465)

	1108	Finance (Special)

	1109	Public improvements (Special)

	1110	Property transaction (Special)

	1111	Finance (Special)

	1112	Public improvements (Special)

	1113	Property transaction (Special)

	1114	(Repealed by 1423)

	1115	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1116	(Repealed by 1121)

	1117	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1118	(Repealed by 1137)

	1119	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1120	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1121	(Repealer)

	1122	(Repealed by 1507)

	1123	Finance (Special)

	1124	Public improvements (Special)

	1125	(Repealed by 1360)

	1126	Miscellaneous (Special)

	1127	(Repealed by 2021)

	1128	Property transaction (Special)

	1129	(Repealed by 1229)

	1130	Public ways (Special)

	1131	Public ways (Special)

	1132	Public improvements (Special)

	1133	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1134	Public improvements (Special)

	1135	Property transaction (Special)

	1136	Public ways (Special)

	1137	(Repealed by 1833)

	1138	(Repealed by 2238)

	1139	Public improvements (Special)

	1140	Public improvements (Special)

	1141	Property transaction (Special)

	1142	Miscellaneous (Special)

	1143	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1144	Public ways (Special)

	1145	Public ways (Special)

	1146	Property transaction (Special)

	1147	(Repealed by 2286)

	1148	(Repealed by 2234)

	1149	(Repealed by 2234)

	1150	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1151	Public ways (Special)

	1152	Public improvements (Special)

	1153	Public improvements (Special)

	1154	Public improvements (Special)

	1155	(Repealed by 1161)

	1156	Public improvements (Special)

	1157	Public improvements (Special)

	1158	Public improvements (Special)

	1159	Property transaction (Special)

	1160	Property transaction (Special)

	1161	(Repealer)

	1162	Public improvements (Special)

	1163	Property transaction (Special)

	1164	(Repealed by 1254)

	1165	(Repealed by 1254)

	1166	Property transaction (Special)

	1167	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1168	Property transaction (Special)

	1169	Property transaction (Special)

	1170	Miscellaneous (Special)

	1171	Public improvements (Special)

	1172	(Repealed by 1397)

	1173	Public improvements (Special)

	1174	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1175	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1176	Property transaction (Special)

	1177	Property transaction (Special)

	1178	Finance (Special)

	1179	Property transaction (Special)

	1180	Property transaction (Special)

	1181	(Repealed by 1285)

	1182	Public improvements (Special)

	1183	Property transaction (Special)

	1184	(Repealed by 1559)

	1185	Property transaction (Special)

	1186	(Repealed by 1833)

	1187	(Repealed by 1833 and 2146)

	1188	(Repealed by 1577)

	1189	(Repealed by 1197)

	1190	Property transaction (Special)

	1191	Property transaction (Special)

	1192	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1193	Traffic control (10.04)

	1194	(Repealed by 2234)

	1195	(Repealer)

	1196	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1197	(Repealed by 2285)

	1198	(Repealed by 2285)

	1199	(Repealed by 1236)

	1200	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1201	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1202	(Repealed by 1236)

	1203	Property transaction (Special)

	1204	(Repealed by 1215)

	1205	Public improvements (Special)

	1206	Public improvements (Special)

	1207	Public improvements (Special)

	1208	Public improvements (Special)

	1209	Property transaction (Special)

	1210	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1211	Property transaction (Special)

	1212	(Repealed by 2234)

	1213	Property transaction (Special)

	1214	Public improvements (Special)

	1215	Bond issues (Special)

	1216	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1217	Property transaction (Special)

	1218	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1219	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1220	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1221	Public improvements (Special)

	1222	Public improvements (Special)

	1223	(Failed to pass)

	1224	Property transaction (Special)

	1225	(Repealed by 2709)

	1226	(Repealed by 1392)

	1227	(Repealed by 1790)

	1228	(Repealed by 2322)

	1229	(Repealer)

	1230	Property transaction (Special)

	1231	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1232	Property transaction (Special)

	1233	Property transaction (Special)

	1234	Miscellaneous (Special)

	1235	Miscellaneous (Special)

	1236	(Repealer)

	1237	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1238	Property transaction (Special)

	1239	(Repealed by 1833)

	1240	(Repealed by 2021)

	1241	(Repealed by 1392)

	1242	Property transaction (Special)

	1243	(Repealed by 2021)

	1244	Public improvements (Special)

	1245	Property transaction (Special)

	1246	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1247	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1248	Property transaction (Special)

	1249	(Repealed by 1423)

	1250	Public improvements (Special)

	1251	(Repealed by 2234)

	1252	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1253	Property transaction (Special)

	1254	(Repealer)

	1255	Public improvements (Special)

	1256	Public improvements (Special)

	1257	(Repealed by 1382)

	1258	Property transaction (Special)

	1259	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1260	Public improvements (Special)

	1261	Property transaction (Special)

	1262	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1263	Property transaction (Special)

	1264	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1265	Public improvements (Special)

	1266	Property transaction (Special)

	1267	Property transaction (Special)

	1268	(Repealed by 1337 and 1445)

	1269	(Repealed by 1577)

	1270	(Repealed by 2219)

	1271	Property transaction (Special)

	1272	Property transaction (Special)

	1273	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1274	Public improvements (Special)

	1275	Property transaction (Special)

	1276	Public ways (Special)

	1277	Property transaction (Special)

	1278	Property transaction (Special)

	1279	Property transaction (Special)

	1280	Property transaction (Special)

	1281	(Repealed by 1833)

	1282	Property transaction (Special)

	1283	Property transaction (Special)

	1284	Property transaction (Special)

	1285	(Repealer)

	1286	Property transaction (Special)

	1287	(Repealed by 1773)

	1288	Property transaction (Special)

	1289	Property transaction (Special)

	1290	Public improvements (Special)

	1291	Public improvements (Special)

	1292	Public improvements (Special)

	1293	Property transaction (Special)

	1294	Property transaction (Special)

	1295	Property transaction (Special)

	1296	Property transaction (Special)

	1297	Property transaction (Special)

	1298	(Repealed by 2223 and 2298)

	1299	Property transaction (Special)

	1300	Public improvements (Special)

	1301	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1302	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1303	Public improvements (Special)

	1304	Property transaction (Special)

	1305	Public improvements (Special)

	1306	Charter amendment (Special)

	1307	Charter amendment (Special)

	1308	(Repealed by 1389)

	1309	(Superseded by 1610)

	1310	Public improvements (Special)

	1311	Public improvements (Special)

	1312	Public improvements (Special)

	1313	Public improvements (Special)

	1314	Public improvements (Special)

	1315	Public improvements (Special)

	1316	Property transaction (Special)

	1317	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1318	Property transaction (Special)

	1319	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1320	Public ways (Special)

	1321	Property transaction (Special)

	1322	Public improvements (Special)

	1323	Property transaction (Special)

	1324	(Repealed by 2233)

	1325	Charter amendment (Special)

	1326	Property transaction (Special)

	1327	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1328	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1329	Property transaction (Special)

	1330	Property transaction (Special)

	1331	Property transaction (Special)

	1332	Public improvements (Special)

	1333	Property transaction (Special)

	1334	Bond issues (Special)

	1335	Property transaction (Special)

	1336	Property transaction (Special)

	1337	(Repealed by 1445)

	1338	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1339	Charter amendment (Special)

	1340	Property transaction (Special)

	1341	Property transaction (Special)

	1342	Property transaction (Special)

	1343	(Repealed by 2234)

	1344	Property transaction (Special)

	1345	Property transaction (Special)

	1346	Property transaction (Special)

	1347	(Repealed by 1371)

	1348	Property transaction (Special)

	1349	Property transaction (Special)

	1350	Property transaction (Special)

	1351	Property transaction (Special)

	1352	Property transaction (Special)

	1353	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1354	Public improvements (Special)

	1355	Property transaction (Special)

	1356	Property transaction (Special)

	1357	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1358	Public improvements (Special)

	1359	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1360	(Repealer)

	1361	Public improvements (Special)

	1362	Property transaction (Special)

	1363	(Repealed by 2223 and 2228)

	1364	Public improvements (Special)

	1365	Public improvements (Special)

	1366	Public improvements (Special)

	1367	Public improvements (Special)

	1368	Public improvements (Special)

	1369	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1370	(Repealer)

	1371	Property transaction (Special)

	1372	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1373	Property transaction (Special)

	1374	Property transaction (Special)

	1375	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1375A	Public ways (Special)

	1376	Property transaction (Special)

	1377	Public improvements (Special)

	1378	Public improvements (Special)

	1379	Property transaction (Special)

	1380	Property transaction (Special)

	1381	(Repealed by 2528)

	1382	(Repealed by 2234)

	1383	Public improvements (Special)

	1384	Public improvements (Special)

	1385	Public ways (Special)

	1386	(Repealed by 1423)

	1386A	(Repealed by 2286)

	1387	Public ways (Special)

	1388	Property transaction (Special)

	1389	(Repealed by 1833)

	1390	Public improvements (Special)

	1391	(Repealed by 1423)

	1392	Business licenses (Repealed by 3061)

	1393	(Repealed by 2234)

	1394	(Repealed by 2223)

	1395	Public improvements (Special)

	1396	(Repealed by 2755)

	1397	(Repealed by 1625)

	1398	Public improvements (Special)

	1399	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1400	(Repealed by 2005)

	1401	Charter amendment (Special)

	1402	Miscellaneous (Special)

	1403	Public improvements (Special)

	1404	Public improvements (Special)

	1405	Public improvements (Special)

	1406	Public improvements (Special)

	1407	Public improvements (Special)

	1408	(Repealed by 2001)

	1409	(Repealed by 2234)

	1410	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1411	Public improvements (Special)

	1412	Public improvements (Special)

	1413	Public improvements (Special)

	1414	(Repealed by 2277)

	1415	Public improvements (Special)

	1416	(Repealed by 2234)

	1417	(Repealed by 2540)

	1418	Property transaction (Special)

	1419	Property transaction (Special)

	1420	(Repealed by 2352)

	1421	Public improvements (Special)

	1422	Property transaction (Special)

	1423	(Repealed by 2241)

	1424	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1425	(Repealed by 2755)

	1426	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1427	Property transaction (Special)

	1428	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1429	Annexation (Special)

	1430	Property transaction (Special)

	1431	Property transaction (Special)

	1432	Public improvements (Special)

	1433	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1434	Annexation (Special)

	1435	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1436	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1437	Public improvements (Special)

	1438	Business licenses (Repealed by 3061)

	1439	Public improvements (Special)

	1440	(Repealed by 2234)

	1441	Property transaction (Special)

	1442	Public improvements (Special)

	1443	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1444	Public improvements (Special)

	1445	(Repealed by 1883 and 2043)

	1446	Property transaction (Special)

	1447	(Repealed by 1943 and 2037)

	1448	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1449	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1450	Bond issues (Special)

	1451	(Repealed by 2065)

	1452	(Repealed by 2286)

	1453	Property transaction (Special)

	1454	Property transaction (Special)

	1455	Property transaction (Special)

	1456	Charter amendment (Special)

	1457	(Repealed by 2001)

	1458	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1459	Public improvements (Special)

	1460	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1461	Property transaction (Special)

	1462	Public improvements (Special)

	1463	Public improvements (Special)

	1464	Public improvements (Special)

	1465	(Repealed by 2234)

	1466	Public improvements (Special)

	1467	(Superseded by 2395)

	1468	Public ways (Special)

	1469	Public improvements (Special)

	1470	Public improvements (Special)

	1471	Public improvements (Special)

	1472	Public improvements (Special)

	1473	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1474	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1475	Public improvements (Special)

	1476	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1477	(Repealed by 2005)

	1478	Public improvements (Special)

	1478A	Property transaction (Special)

	1479	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1480	(Repealed by 2234)

	1481	Property transaction (Special)

	1482	Public improvements (Special)

	1483	(Repealed by 2241)

	1484	Property transaction (Special)

	1485	Public improvements (Special)

	1486	Public ways (Special)

	1487	(Repealed by 1507)

	1488	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1489	Annexation (Special)

	1490	(Repealed by 2275)

	1491	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1492	Public improvements (Special)

	1493	Property transaction (Special)

	1494	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1495	(Repealed by 2234)

	1496	Property transaction (Special)

	1497	Property transaction (Special)

	1498	Public improvements (Special)

	1499	Public improvements (Special)

	1500	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1501	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1502	Public improvements (Special)

	1503	Property transaction (Special)

	1504	Property transaction (Special)

	1505	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1506	(Repealed by 2146)

	1507	(Repealed by 1960)

	1508	Public improvements (Special)

	1509	Public improvements (Special)

	1510	(Repealed by 2286)

	1511	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1512	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1513	(Repealed by 2250)

	1514	Charter amendment (Special)

	1515	Property transaction (Special)

	1516	Property transaction (Special)

	1517	Property transaction (Special)

	1518	(Repealed by 2237)

	1519	Public ways (Special)

	1520	Bond issues (Special)

	1521	Property transaction (Special)

	1522	Property transaction (Special)

	1523	Property transaction (Special)

	1524	Property transaction (Special)

	1525	Property transaction (Special)

	1526	Public ways (Special)

	1527	Finance (Special)

	1528	(Repealed by 1614)

	1529	Property transaction (Special)

	1530	Property transaction (Special)

	1531	(Repealed by 1770)

	1532	Charter amendment (Special)

	1533	Charter amendment (Special)

	1534	Property transaction (Special)

	1535	Finance (Special)

	1536	Charter amendment (Special)

	1537	Public improvements (Special)

	1538	Public improvements (Special)

	1539	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1540	(Repealed by 2241)

	1541	Property transaction (Special)

	1542	(Number not used)

	1543	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1544	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1545	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1546	Public improvements (Special)

	1547	Public improvements (Special)

	1548	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1549	Property transaction (Special)

	1550	Property transaction (Special)

	1551	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1552	Public ways (Special)

	1553	Property transaction (Special)

	1554	Bond issues (Special)

	1555	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1556	Property transaction (Special)

	1557	Public improvements (Special)

	1558	Public improvements (Special)

	1559	(Repealed by 2285)

	1560	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1561	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1562	Public improvements (Special)

	1563	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1564	(Repealed by 2146)

	1565	Property transaction (Special)

	1566	Property transaction (Special)

	1567	Public improvements (Special)

	1568	Public improvements (Special)

	1569	Public improvements (Special)

	1570	Property transaction (Special)

	1571	(Repealed by 2285)

	1572	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1573	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1574	Public improvements (Special)

	1575	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1576	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1577	(Repealed by 2234)

	1578	(Repealed by 1585)

	1579	Property transaction (Special)

	1580	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1581	Property transaction (Special)

	1582	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1583	Finance (Special)

	1584	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1585	(Repealed by 2241)

	1586	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1587	Public ways (Special)

	1588	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1589	Public improvements (Special)

	1590	Property transaction (Special)

	1591	Property transaction (Special)

	1592	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1593	(Repealed by 2236)

	1594	(Repealed by 2224)

	1595	Property transaction (Special)

	1596	Public ways (Special)

	1597	Public ways (Special)

	1598	(Repealed by 2107)

	1599	(Repealed by 1613)

	1600	Property transaction (Special)

	1601	Public improvements (Special)

	1602	(Repealed by 1612)

	1603	(Repealed by 2286)

	1604	Property transaction (Special)

	1605	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1606	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1607	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1608	Property transaction (Special)

	1609	Property transaction (Special)

	1610	(Superseded by 1783)

	1611	Property transaction (Special)

	1612	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1613	(Repealed by 2234)

	1614	(Repealer)

	1615	Property transaction (Special)

	1616	(Repealed by 2146)

	1617	Public improvements (Special)

	1618	Public improvements (Special)

	1619	Public improvements (Special)

	1620	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1621	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1622	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1623	Property transaction (Special)

	1624	(Repealed by 2234)

	1625	(Repealed by 2234)

	1626	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1627	Public improvements (Special)

	1628	Public improvements (Special)

	1629	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1630	Property transaction (Special)

	1631	Property transaction (Special)

	1632	Public improvements (Special)

	1633	(Repealed by 2057)

	1634	Public improvements (Special)

	1635	Property transaction (Special)

	1636	Public improvements (Special)

	1637	Public improvements (Special)

	1638	Property transaction (Special)

	1639	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1640	Property transaction (Special)

	1641	Property transaction (Special)

	1642	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1643	(Repealed by 2755)

	1644	Public improvements (Special)

	1645	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1646	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1647	Property transaction (Special)

	1648	Finance (Special)

	1649	Public improvements (Special)

	1650	Property transaction (Special)

	1651	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1652	(Repealed by 1653)

	1653	(Repealer)

	1654	Public improvements (Special)

	1655	Public improvements (Special)

	1656	Public ways (Special)

	1657	Property transaction (Special)

	1658	Public ways (Special)

	1659	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1660	(Repealed by 2122)

	1661	Public improvements (Special)

	1662	Property transaction (Special)

	1663	Public ways (Special)

	1664	Property transaction (Special)

	1665	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1666	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1667	Public improvements (Special)

	1668	Public improvements (Special)

	1669	Public improvements (Special)

	1670	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1671	Public improvements (Special)

	1672	Public improvements (Special)

	1673	Public improvements (Special)

	1674	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1675	(Repealed by 1988)

	1676	(Repealed by 2233)

	1677	Charter amendment (Special)

	1678	Public improvements (Special)

	1679	Property transaction (Special)

	1680	(Repealed by 1758)

	1681	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1682	(Repealed by 2001)

	1683	Property transaction (Special)

	1684	(Repealed by 2234)

	1685	Bond issues (Special)

	1686	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1687	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1688	Public ways (Special)

	1689	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1690	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1691	Property transaction (Special)

	1692	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1693	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1694	Property transaction (Special)

	1695	Public ways (Special)

	1696	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1697	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1698	Bond issues (Special)

	1699	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1700	Public improvements (Special)

	1701	Annexation (Special)

	1702	Annexation (Special)

	1703	Annexation (Special)

	1704	Property transaction (Special)

	1705	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1706	Public improvements (Special)

	1707	Public improvements (Special)

	1708	Property transaction (Special)

	1709	Public improvements (Special)

	1710	Annexation (Special)

	1711	Annexation (Special)

	1712	Annexation (Special)

	1713	Public improvements (Special)

	1714	Public improvements (Special)

	1715	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1716	Property transaction (Special)

	1717	Property transaction (Special)

	1718	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1719	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1720	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1721	Finance (Special)

	1722	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1723	Annexation (Special)

	1724	Annexation (Special)

	1725	Annexation (Special)

	1726	Public improvements (Special)

	1727	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1728	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1729	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1730	Annexation (Special)

	1731	Annexation (Special)

	1732	Annexation (Special)

	1733	Public ways (Special)

	1734	(Repealed by 2234)

	1735	(Repealed by 2286)

	1736	Property transaction (Special)

	1737	(Repealed by 2001)

	1738	(Repealed by 2334)

	1739	(Repealed by 2334)

	1740	(Number not used)

	1741	Annexation (Special)

	1742	(Repealed by 2755)

	1743	Property transaction (Special)

	1744	Property transaction (Special)

	1745	Annexation (Special)

	1746	Annexation (Special)

	1747	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1748	Public improvements (Special)

	1749	Charter amendment (Special)

	1750	Charter amendment (Special)

	1751	(Repealed by 1988)

	1752	Public improvements (Special)

	1753	Property transaction (Special)

	1754	Annexation (Special)

	1755	Annexation (Special)

	1756	Public ways (Special)

	1757	(Repealer)

	1758	Public improvements (Special)

	1759	Public improvements (Special)

	1760	Public improvements (Special)

	1761	(Repealed by 2061)

	1762	(Repealed by 1932)

	1763	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1764	Public improvements (Special)

	1765	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1766	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1767	(Repealed by 1919 and 1943)

	1768	Public improvements (Special)

	1769	Property transaction (Special)

	1770	(Repealed by 2223)

	1771	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1772	Public improvements (Special)

	1773	(Repealed by 1898)

	1774	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1775	Public ways (Special)

	1776	(Repealed by 2655)

	1777	Annexation (Special)

	1778	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1779	Public improvements (Special)

	1780	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1781	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1782	Finance (Special)

	1783	(Superseded by 1872)

	1784	(Repealed by 2146)

	1785	Property transaction (Special)

	1786	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1787	Property transaction (Special)

	1788	(Repealed by 2655)

	1789	Public improvements (Special)

	1790	(Repealed by 2051)

	1791	(Repealed by 2223 and 2288)

	1792	Property transaction (Special)

	1793	Property transaction (Special)

	1794	Property transaction (Special)

	1795	(Repealed by 2223 and 2288)

	1796	(Number not used)

	1797	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1798	(Repealed by 2100)

	1799	Property transaction (Special)

	1800	Property transaction (Special)

	1801	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1802	Property transaction (Special)

	1803	Property transaction (Special)

	1804	(Repealed by 2223)

	1805	Public improvements (Special)

	1806	Property transaction (Special)

	1807	Public improvements (Special)

	1808	Property transaction (Special)

	1809	Annexation (Special)

	1810	Public improvements (Special)

	1811	Public improvements (Special)

	1812	Public improvements (Special)

	1813	Annexation (Special)

	1814	Public improvements (Special)

	1815	(Failed to pass)

	1816	Annexation (Special)

	1817	Property transaction (Special)

	1818	Property transaction (Special)

	1819	Property transaction (Special)

	1820	Public improvements (Special)

	1821	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1822	Annexation (Special)

	1823	(Repealed by 1988)

	1824	Finance (Special)

	1825	(Repealed by 1960)

	1826	(Repealed by 2054)

	1827	(Repealed by 2239)

	1828	Public improvements (Special)

	1829	Public improvements (Special)

	1830	(Repealed by 2234)

	1831	Property transaction (Special)

	1832	Property transaction (Special)

	1833	(Repealed by 2321)

	1834	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1835	Property transaction (Special)

	1836	Property transaction (Special)

	1837	Public improvements (Special)

	1838	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1839	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1840	Property transaction (Special)

	1841	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1842	Property transaction (Special)

	1843	Charter amendment (Special)

	1844	Public improvements (Special)

	1845	Property transaction (Special)

	1846	(Repealed by 1874)

	1847	(Repealed by 2233)

	1848	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1849	Property transaction (Special)

	1850	Property transaction (Special)

	1851	Finance; property transaction (Special)

	1852	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1853	Property transaction (Special)

	1854	Property transaction (Special)

	1855	Bond issues (Special)

	1856	(Repealed by 1919)

	1857	Bond issues (Special)

	1858	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1859	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1860	Public improvements (Special)

	1861	(Repealed by 1919 and 1943)

	1862	Property transaction (Special)

	1863	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1864	(Repealed by 2234)

	1865	(Repealed by 2234)

	1866	(Repealed by 2238)

	1867	Property transaction (Special)

	1868	Annexation (Special)

	1869	Annexation (Special)

	1870	(Repealed by 2285)

	1871	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1872	(Superseded by 1951)

	1873	Property transaction (Special)

	1874	(Repealed by 2001)

	1875	(Repealed by 2232)

	1876	Annexation (Special)

	1877	Annexation (Special)

	1878	(Superseded by 2373)

	1879	(Superseded by 2385)

	1880	Property transaction (Special)

	1881	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1882	Property transaction (Special)

	1883	(Repealed by 2072)

	1884	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1885	(Repealed by 2285)

	1886	Public improvements (Special)

	1887	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1888	Franchise (Expired)

	1889	Public improvements (Special)

	1890	(Repealed by 2234)

	1891	Property transaction (Special)

	1892	(Repealed by 2755)

	1893	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1894	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1895	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1896	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1897	Public improvements (Special)

	1898	(Repealed by 2234)

	1899	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1900	Charter amendment (Special)

	1901	Charter amendment (Special)

	1902	Public improvements (Special)

	1903	Charter amendment (Special)

	1904	Charter amendment (Special)

	1905	Property transaction (Special)

	1906	Charter amendment (Special)

	1907	Charter amendment (Special)

	1908	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1909	Finance (Special)

	1910	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1911	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1912	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1913	Property transaction (Special)

	1914	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1915	Bond issues (Special)

	1916	Bond issues (Special)

	1917	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1918	Public improvements (Special)

	1919	(Repealed by 2037)

	1920	Property transaction (Special)

	1921	Franchise (Expired)

	1922	Bond issues (Special)

	1923	(Repealed by 1988)

	1924	Bond issues (Special)

	1925	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1926	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1927	Public improvements (Special)

	1928	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1929	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1930	Finance (Special)

	1931	Property transaction (Special)

	1932	(Repealer)

	1933	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1934	Property transaction (Special)

	1935	(Repealed by 1996)

	1936	(Repealed by 1996)

	1937	Finance (Special)

	1938	(Repealed by 2069)

	1939	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1940	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1941	Property transaction (Special)

	1942	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1943	(Repealed by 2037)

	1944	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1945	(Repealed by 2234)

	1946	Property transaction (Special)

	1947	Property transaction (Special)

	1948	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1949	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1950	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1951	(Repealed by 2044)

	1952	Property transaction (Special)

	1953	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1954	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1955	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1956	(Repealed by 2051)

	1957	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1958	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1959	Property transaction (Special)

	1960	(Repealed by 2135)

	1961	(Repealed by 2134)

	1962	Property transaction (Special)

	1963	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1964	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1965	Property transaction (Special)

	1966	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1967	Property transaction (Special)

	1968	Property transaction (Special)

	1969	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1970	Property transaction (Special)

	1971	Property transaction (Special)

	1972	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1973	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1974	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1975	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1976	Property transaction (Special)

	1977	Property transaction (Special)

	1978	Property transaction (Special)

	1979	Property transaction (Special)

	1980	Property transaction (Special)

	1981	Property transaction (Special)

	1982	Property transaction (Special)

	1983	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1984	Annexation (Special)

	1985	Property transaction (Special)

	1986	Property transaction (Special)

	1987	Property transaction (Special)

	1988	(Repealed by 2073)

	1989	(Repealed by 2107)

	1990	Public ways (Special)

	1991	Property transaction (Special)

	1992	Property transaction (Special)

	1993	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1994	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1995	Property transaction (Special)

	1996	Comp. 5-3, Schedule B (10.04)

	1997	(Repealed by 2755)

	1998	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	1999	(Superseded by 2373)

	2000	(Superseded by 2385)

	2001	(Repealed by 2274)

	2002	Charter amendment (Special)

	2003	Large assemblies (Repealed by 3065)

	2004	Charter amendment (Special)

	2005	(Repealed by 2133)

	2006	(Repealed by 2286)

	2007	Property transaction (Special)

	2008	Property transaction (Special)

	2009	(Repealed by 2107)

	2010	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2011	Bond issues (Special)

	2012	Property transaction (Special)

	2013	(Repealed by 2274)

	2014	Property transaction (Special)

	2015	(Repealed by 2155)

	2016	Property transaction (Special)

	2017	Property transaction (Special)

	2018	Property transaction (Special)

	2019	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2020	Property transaction (Special)

	2021	(Repealed by 2246)

	2022	Property transaction (Special)

	2023	Property transaction (Special)

	2024	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2025	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2026	Property transaction (Special)

	2027	Property transaction (Special)

	2028	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2029	Property transaction (Special)

	2030	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2031	Public improvements (Special)

	2032	Property transaction (Special)

	2033	Property transaction (Special)

	2034	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2035	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2036	Property transaction (Special)

	2037	(Repealed by 2251)

	2038	Property transaction (Special)

	2039	Property transaction (Special)

	2040	Property transaction (Special)

	2041	Property transaction (Special)

	2042	Public improvements (Special)

	2043	(Repealed by 2236)

	2044	(Repealed by 2129)

	2045	(Repealed by 2755)

	2046	Property transaction (Special)

	2047	Property transaction (Special)

	2048	Property transaction (Special)

	2049	Property transaction (Special)

	2050	Property transaction (Special)

	2051	(Repealed by 2197)

	2052	Property transaction (Special)

	2053	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2054	(Repealed by 2241)

	2055	Property transaction (Special)

	2056	(Repealed by 2251)

	2057	(Repealed by 2285)

	2058	Annexation (Special)

	2059	(Superseded by 2281)

	2060	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2061	(Repealed by 2491)

	2062	Property transaction (Special)

	2063	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2064	(Repealed by 2107)

	2065	(Repealed by 2285)

	2066	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2067	(Repealer)

	2068	Property transaction (Special)

	2069	(Repealed by 2234)

	2070	Property transaction (Special)

	2071	(Repealed by 2375)

	2072	(Repealer)

	2073	(Repealed by 2165)

	2074	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2075	Property transaction (Special)

	2076	(Failed to pass)

	2077	Property transaction (Special)

	2078	(Repealed by 2375)

	2079	Annexation (Special)

	2080	Annexation (Special)

	2081	Property transaction (Special)

	2082	(Repealed by 2107)

	2083	Property transaction (Special)

	2084	Property transaction (Special)

	2085	Property transaction (Special)

	2086	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2087	(Repealed by 2107)

	2088	(Repealed by 2107 and 2209)

	2089	Property transaction (Special)

	2090	Expired building moratorium

	2091	Property transaction (Special)

	2092	Property transaction (Special)

	2093	(Repealed by 2107)

	2094	Charter amendment (Special)

	2095	Property transaction (Special)

	2096	Public improvements (Special)

	2097	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2098	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2099	Property transaction (Special)

	2100	(Repealed by 2241)

	2101	Charter amendment (Special)

	2102	Property transaction (Special)

	2103	(Repealed by 2223 and 2288)

	2104	(Repealed by 2251)

	2105	Public improvements (Special)

	2106	Property transaction (Special)

	2107	(Repealed by 2274)

	2108	Public improvements (Special)

	2109	(Repealed by 2223)

	2110	Bond issues (Special)

	2111	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2112	Property transaction (Special)

	2113	Contract review board (2.04)

	2114	(Repealed by 2234)

	2115	Public improvements (Special)

	2116	(Repealed by 2274 and 2275)

	2117	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2118	(Repealed by 2375)

	2119	Charter amendment (Special)

	2120	(Repealed by 2234)

	2121	Property transaction (Special)

	2122	(Repealed by 2286)

	2123	Property transaction (Special)

	2124	Property transaction (Special)

	2125	Property transaction (Special)

	2126	(Repealed by 2274)

	2127	Property transaction (Special)

	2128	(Repealed by 2274)

	2129	(Repealed by 2322)

	2130	(Repealed by 2274)

	2131	Property transaction (Special)

	2132	(Repealed by 2228)

	2133	Business licenses (Repealed by 3061)

	2134	(Repealed by 2286)

	2135	(Repealed by 2285)

	2136	Property transaction (Special)

	2137	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2138	Property transaction (Special)

	2139	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2140	(Repealed by 2151)

	2141	Property transaction (Special)

	2142	Property transaction (Special)

	2143	Public improvements (Special)

	2144	Public ways (Special)

	2145	Charter amendment (Special)

	2146	Nuisances (8.12)

	2147	Traffic control (10.04)

	2148	Property transaction (Special)

	2149	Property transaction (Special)

	2150	(Repealed by 2333)

	2151	Traffic control (10.04)

	2152	Taxicab licenses (Repealed by 3062)

	2153	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2154	Property transaction (Special)

	2155	(Repealed by 2285)

	2156	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2157	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2158	Property transaction (Special)

	2159	Annexation (Special)

	2160	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2161	Property transaction (Special)

	2162	Property transaction (Special)

	2163	(Repealer)

	2164	Traffic control (10.04)

	2165	(Repealed by 2755)

	2166	Property transaction (Special)

	2167	Annexation (Special)

	2168	Public ways (Special)

	2169	(Repealed by 2279)

	2170	Property transaction (Special)

	2171	Property transaction (Special)

	2172	(Repealed by 2176)

	2173	Property transaction (Special)

	2174	(Repealed)

	2175	Traffic control (10.04)

	2176	(Repealed by 2274)

	2177	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2178	Property transaction (Special)

	2179	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2180	Property transaction (Special)

	2181	(Repealed by 2241)

	2182	Annexation (Special)

	2183	Property transaction (Special)

	2184	Public improvements (Special)

	2185	Public improvements (Special)

	2186	Finance (Special)

	2187	(5/3/77) Property transaction (Special)

	2187	(6/7/77) Public improvements (Special)

	2188	Public improvements (Special)

	2189	Property transaction (Special)

	2190	(Repealed by 2281)

	2191	Property transaction (Special)

	2192	Property transaction (Special)

	2193	(Repealed by 2760)

	2194	Property transaction (Special)

	2195	Annexation (Special)

	2196	(Repealed by 2391)

	2197	Planning commission (2.08)

	2198	Property transaction (Special)

	2199	Property transaction (Special)

	2200	Traffic control (10.04)

	2201	Property transaction (Special)

	2202	Property transaction (Special)

	2203	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2204	(Repealed by 2321)

	2205	(Repealed by 2267)

	2206	Property transaction (Special)

	2207	Property transaction (Special)

	2208	Property transaction (Special)

	2209	(Repealed by 2275)

	2210	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2211	Annexation (Special)

	2212	Property transaction (Special)

	2213	Franchise (Special)

	2214	(Repealed by 2755)

	2215	Traffic control (10.04)

	2216	Property transaction (Special)

	2217	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2218	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2219	Repealed by 2525

	2220	City administrator (Repealed by 2991)

	2221	(Repealed by 2343)

	2222	(Repealed by 2413)

	2223	(Repealed by 2288 and 2348)

	2224	(Repealed by 2617)

	2225	Property transaction (Special)

	2226	(Repealed by 2755)

	2227	Property transaction (Special)

	2228	(Repealed by 2358)

	2229	Miscellaneous (Special)

	2230	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2231	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2232	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2233	(Repealed by 2755)

	2234	(Repealer)

	2235	(Repealed by 2564)

	2236	(Repealer)

	2237	(Repealed by 2544)

	2238	Sidewalk construction and repair (12.04)

	2239	(Repealed by 2755)

	2240	(Repealed by 2530)

	2241	(Repealed by 2364)

	2242	(Superseded by 2385)

	2243	Water purity (Repealed by 3000)

	2244	Premises serving alcoholic liquor (5.24)

	2245	(Repealed by 2755)

	2246	(Repealed by 2348)

	2247	Annexation (Special)

	2248	Property transaction (Special)

	2249	(Repealed by 2288)

	2250	Park regulations (8.24)

	2251	(Repealed by 2546)

	2252	Franchise (Special)

	2253	Street maintenance (12.08)

	2254	Public ways (Special)

	2255	Property transaction (Special)

	2256	(Repealed by 2755)

	2257	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2258	Finance (Special)

	2259	Traffic control (10.04)

	2260	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2261	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2262	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2263	(Repealed by 2288)

	2264	Development regulations (Repealed)

	2265	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2266	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2267	(Repealer)

	2268	Property transaction (Special)

	2269	Public ways (Special)

	2270	Property transaction (Special)

	2271	Traffic control (10.04)

	2272	(Repealed by 2585)

	2273	(Superseded by 2373)

	2274	Traffic control (10.04)

	2275	Traffic control (10.04)

	2276	Public ways (Special)

	2277	(Repealer)

	2278	Public ways (Special)

	2279	(Repealed by 2626)

	2280	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2281	(Repealed by 2507)

	2282	Property transaction (Special)

	2283	Traffic control (10.04)

	2284	Traffic control (10.04)

	2285	Water regulation and rates (13.02, 13.04)

	2286	(Repealed by 2570)

	2287	Planning (Special)

	2288	(Repealed by 2411)

	2289	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2290	Property transaction (Special)

	2291	Public improvements (Special)

	2292	Public ways (Special)

	2293	Signing of checks and warrants (2.40)

	2294	Repeals § 8.12.030, nuisances (Repealer)

	2295	Property transaction (Special)

	2296	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2297	(Repealed by 2348)

	2298	Business licenses (Repealed by 3061)

	2299	Planning (Special)

	2300	(Repealed by 2411)

	2301	Planning (Special)

	2302	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2303	Public improvements (Special)

	2304	Traffic control (10.04)

	2305	Finance (Special)

	2306	Traffic control (10.04)

	2307	Traffic control (10.04)

	2308	Traffic control (10.04)

	2309	Library fees and fines (3.04)

	2310	(Repealed by 2627)

	2311	(Repealed by 2322)

	2312	Annexation (Special)

	2313	Public ways (Special)

	2314	Business licenses (Repealed by 3061)

	2315	Public improvements (Special)

	2316	Property transaction (Special)

	2317	Property transaction (Special)

	2318	(Superseded by 2371)

	2319	Property transaction (Special)

	2320	Traffic control (10.04)

	2321	(Repealed by 2456)

	2322	Solid waste (8.04)

	2323	(Repealed by 2348)

	2324	(Repealed)

	2325	Property transaction (Special)

	2326	Annexation (Special)

	2327	Property transaction (Special)

	2328	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2329	Annexation (Special)

	2330	Public ways (Special)

	2331	Public ways (Special)

	2332	Public improvements (Special)

	2333	Traffic control (10.04)

	2334	(Repealed by 2570)

	2335	(Repealed by 2411)

	2336	Public ways (Special)

	2337	Public improvements (Special)

	2338	Property transaction (Special)

	2339	Property transaction (Special)

	2340	Finance (Special)

	2341	Planning (Special)

	2342	Street development charges (15.12)

	2343	(Repealer)

	2344	Traffic control (10.04)

	2345	Property transaction (Special)

	2346	Property transaction (Special)

	2347	(Repealer)

	2348	(Superseded by 2410)

	2349	Advertising benches (12.32)

	2350	Public improvements (Special)

	2351	Repeals § 5.24.200, premises serving alcoholic liquor (Repealer)

	2352	Parks and recreation commission (Repealed by 3229)

	2353	(Repealer)

	2354	Property transaction (Special)

	2355	Solid waste (8.04)

	2356	(Repealed by 2755)

	2357	Finance (Special)

	2358	(Repealed by 2631)

	2359	Water regulation and rates (13.02)

	2360	Business licenses (Repealed by 3061)

	2361	Traffic control (10.04)

	2362	(Superseded by 2395)

	2363	Property transaction (Special)

	2364	(Repealed by 2508)

	2365	Annexation (Special)

	2366	Annexation (Special)

	2367	Annexation (Special)

	2368	Annexation, planning (Special)

	2369	(Repealed by 2400)

	2370	Franchise (Special)

	2371	(Repealed by 2538)

	2372	Annexation, planning (Special)

	2373	Abandoned and discarded vehicles (8.40)

	2374	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2375	Improvement procedures (12.16)

	2376	Public ways (Special)

	2377	Water regulation and rates (13.02)

	2378	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2379	Development regulations (Repealed by 2785)

	2380	Public ways (Special)

	2381	Franchise (Special)

	2382	(Repealed by 2508)

	2383	Municipal judges (2.20)

	2384	Public ways (Special)

	2385	Abandoned and discarded vehicles (8.40)

	2386	Development regulations (Repealed)

	2387	Public ways (Special)

	2388	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2389	(Repealed by 2400)

	2390	Public ways (Special)

	2391	Unclaimed property disposition (3.08)

	2392	Franchise (Special)

	2393	Water regulation and rates (13.02)

	2394	Finance (Special)

	2395	(Repealed by 2755)

	2396	Cross-connections (Repealed by 2743)

	2397	Traffic control (10.04)

	2398	Traffic control (10.04)

	2399	Abandoned and discarded vehicles (8.40)

	2400	(Repealer)

	2401	Public ways (Special)

	2402	Franchise (Special)

	2403	Public improvements (Special)

	2404	Traffic control (10.04)

	2405	Noise regulations (8.16)

	2406	Traffic control (10.04)

	2407	Taxicab licenses; franchises, etc. (Special)

	2408	Water regulation and rates (13.02)

	2409	(Number not used)

	2410	(Repealed by 2529)

	2411	(Repealed by 2616)

	2412	Development regulations (Repealed)

	2413	(Repealed by 2615)

	2414	Taxicab licenses (Repealed by 2492)

	2415	Public ways (Special)

	2416	Traffic control (10.04)

	2417	Public improvements (Special)

	2418	(Repealed)

	2419	Development regulations (Repealed)

	2420	Water regulation and rates (13.02, 13.04)

	2421	(Repealed by 2570)

	2422	Business licenses (Repealed by 3061)

	2423	(Repealed by 2473)

	2424	(Repealed by 2546)

	2425	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2426	(Repealed by 2570)

	2427	Public ways (Special)

	2428	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2429	Public ways (Special)

	2430	Large assemblies; park regulations (8.24)

	2431	Development regulations (Repealed)

	2432	Property transaction (Special)

	2433	Finance (Special)

	2434	Public ways (Special)

	2435	Franchise (Special)

	2436	Planning (Special)

	2437	Solid waste (Superseded)

	2438	Solid waste (8.04)

	2439	(Repealed by 2755)

	2440	Development regulations (Repealed)

	2441	Public improvements (Special)

	2442	Traffic control (10.04)

	2443	Nuisances (8.12)

	2444	(Repealed by 2508)

	2445	Water regulation and rates (13.02)

	2446	Park regulations (8.24)

	2447	Public ways (Special)

	2448	Public ways (Special)

	2449	Nuisances (8.12)

	2450	(Repealed by 2456)

	2451	Development regulations (Repealed)

	2452	Traffic control (10.04)

	2453	Water regulation and rates (13.02)

	2454	(Repealed by 2546)

	2455	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2456	(Repealed by 2638)

	2457	(Repealed by 2646)

	2458	(Repealed by 2638)

	2459	Water regulation and rates (13.02)

	2460	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2461	(Repealed by 2529)

	2462	Public improvements (Special)

	2463	Public improvements (Special)

	2464	Finance (Special)

	2465	Franchise (Special)

	2466	(Repealed by 2570)

	2467	(Repealed by 2755)

	2468	Business licenses (Repealed by 3061)

	2469	Development regulations (Repealed)

	2470	Development regulations (Repealed)

	2471	Contract review board (2.04)

	2472	(Repealed by 2755)

	2473	(Repealer)

	2474	Traffic control (10.04)

	2475	(Repealed by 2508)

	2476	Public ways (Special)

	2477	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2478	Finance (Special)

	2479	Annexation (Special)

	2480	Utility privilege tax (3.12)

	2481	Public ways (Special)

	2482	Public ways (Special)

	2483	Property transaction (Special)

	2484	Property transaction (Special)

	2485	(Repealed by 2561)

	2486	(Repealed by 2508)

	2487	(Repealed by 2546)

	2488	Annexation (Special)

	2489	(Repealed by 2546)

	2490	Public ways (Special)

	2491	Secondhand dealers (5.16)

	2492	Repeals § 5.08.190, taxicab licenses; franchise (Repealer)

	2493	Planning (Special)

	2494	(Repealed by 2583)

	2495	(Repealed by 2508)

	2496	Comp. 3-5 (8.04)

	2497	Public ways (Special)

	2498	Planning (Special)

	2499	Solid waste (8.04)

	2500	Tax relief for enterprise zone investments (5.36)

	2501	Planning (Special)

	2502	Street development charges (15.12)

	2503	Finance (Special)

	2504	Nominating procedures for city officers (2.32)

	2505	Park regulations (8.24)

	2506	Solid waste (8.04)

	2507	Development regulations (Repealed)

	2508	(Repealed by 2611)

	2509	Public improvements (Special)

	2510	Water regulation and rates (13.02)

	2511	Franchise (Repealed)

	2512	Public improvements (Special)

	2513	Public improvements (Special)

	2514	Public improvements (Special)

	2515	Nominating procedures for city officers (2.32)

	2516	Public ways (Special)

	2517	Traffic control (10.04)

	2518	Development regulations (Repealed)

	2519	Public ways (Special)

	2520	Franchise (Special)

	2521	Property transaction (Special)

	2522	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2523	Finance (Special)

	2524	Development regulations (Repealed)

	2525	(Repealed by 2566)

	2526	(Repealed by 2565)

	2527	Development regulations (Repealed)

	2528	(Repealed by 2772)

	2529	(Repealed by 2725)

	2530	(Repealer)

	2531	Planning (Special)

	2532	Development regulations (Repealed)

	2533	Solid waste (8.04)

	2534	Tax relief for enterprise zone investments (5.36)

	2535	Public ways (Special)

	2536	Traffic control (10.04)

	2537	Public improvements (Special)

	2538	Development regulations (Repealed by 2785)

	2539	Public ways (Special)

	2540	(Repealer)

	2541	Water regulation and rates (13.02)

	2542	(Repealed by 2772)

	2543	(Repealed by 2570)

	2544	Juries and jury trials (2.24)

	2545	Franchise (Repealed)

	2546	(Repealed by 2757)

	2547	Franchise (Repealed)

	2548	Fireworks (Repealed by 3005)

	2549	Development regulations (Repealed)

	2550	Finance (Special)

	2551	(Repealed by 2685)

	2552	(Not enacted)

	2553	Development regulations (Repealed by 2785)

	2554	Development regulations (Repealed by 2785)

	2555	Development regulations (Repealed by 2785)

	2556	Development regulations (Repealed by 2785)

	2557	Development regulations (Repealed)

	2558	Traffic control (10.04)

	2559	Comp. 3-5 (8.04)

	2560	(Repealed by 2757)

	2561	(Repealed by 2590)

	2562	(Tabled)

	2563	Park regulations (8.24)

	2564	(Repealed by 2656)

	2565	Nuisances (8.12)

	2566	Solicitation (Repealed by 3014)

	2567	Solicitation (Repealed by 3014)

	2568	Park regulations (8.24)

	2569	(Repealed by 2610)

	2570	Sewer use regulations (Repealed by 3233)

	2571	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2572	Annexation (Special)

	2573	Annexation (Special)

	2574	Annexation (Special)

	2575	Annexation (Special)

	2576	Sewer use regulations (Repealed by 3233)

	2577	Finance (Special)

	2578	(Repealed by 2611)

	2579	Public ways (Special)

	2580	(Repealed by 2615)

	2581	Solid waste (Superseded)

	2582	(Not enacted)

	2583	Franchise (Repealed)

	2584	Sewer use regulations (Repealed by 3233)

	2585	(Repealer)

	2586	Public ways (Special)

	2587	Franchise (Repealed)

	2588	Franchise (Special)

	2589	Annexation (Special)

	2590	(Repealed by 2632)

	2591	(Repealed by 2645)

	2592	Solid waste (Superseded)

	2593	Belton Road advanced financial improvement district (13.28)

	2594	Traffic control (10.04)

	2595	Public improvements (Special)

	2596	(Repealed by 2675)

	2597	(Repealed by 2660)

	2598	(Not enacted)

	2599	Annexation (Special)

	2600	Park regulations (8.24)

	2601	Franchise (Special)

	2602	Finance (Special)

	2603	Utility privilege tax (3.12)

	2604	Annexation (Special)

	2605	Public improvements (Special)

	2606	Annexation (Special)

	2607	Franchise (Special)

	2608	(Repealed by 2615)

	2609	Annexation (Special)

	2610	(Repealed by 2760)

	2611	(Repealed by 2663)

	2612	Annexation (Special)

	2613	Water regulation and rates (13.02)

	2614	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2615	Comprehensive plan; repeals Ord. 2413 (Superseded by 2980)

	2616	Development regulations (Repealed by 2785)

	2617	Development regulations (Repealed by 2785)

	2618	(Repealed by 2663)

	2619	System development charges (Repealed by 2836)

	2620	Finance (Special)

	2621	Annexation (Special)

	2622	Water regulation and rates (13.04)

	2623	Sewer use regulations (Repealed by 3233)

	2624	Street development charges (15.12)

	2625	(Not enacted)

	2626	Alarm response fee (3.16)

	2627	City library and library board (2.28)

	2628	Water regulation and rates (13.04)

	2629	Franchise (Special)

	2630	Sewer use regulations (Repealed by 3233)

	2631	Development regulations (Repealed)

	2632	(Repealed by 2755)

	2633	Solid waste (8.04)

	2634	(Repealed by 2755)

	2635	Annexation (Special)

	2636	Street standards (Repealed by 3112)

	2637	Construction right-of-way permits (12.24)

	2638	(Repealer)

	2639	Finance (Special)

	2640	Annexation (Special)

	2641	Unclaimed property disposition (3.08)

	2642	Advance financing of public improvements (12.28)

	2643	Public improvements (Special)

	2644	Public ways (Special)

	2645	(Repealed by 2757)

	2646	(Repealer)

	2647	Planning (Special)

	2648	(Repealed by 2663)

	2649	Annexation (Special)

	2650	(Repealed by 2746)

	2651	Development regulations (Repealed)

	2652	Development regulations (Repealed by 2785)

	2653	Annexation (Special)

	2654	Annexation (Special)

	2655	(Repealed by 2771)

	2656	(Repealer)

	2657	Public ways (Special)

	2658	Annexation (Special)

	2659	Finance (Special)

	2660	Uniform Fire Code (Repealed by 2885)

	2661	Parking on North 12th Street (10.12)

	2662	Park regulations (8.24)

	2663	State building codes (Repealed by 2783)

	2664	Annexation (Special)

	2665	Annexation (Special)

	2666	Repeals § 3.08.030, unclaimed property disposition (Repealer)

	2667	Planning (Special)

	2668	Planning (Special)

	2669	Annexation (Special)

	2670	Annexation (Special)

	2671	Annexation (Special)

	2672	Development regulations (Repealed by 2785)

	2673	Development regulations (Repealed by 2785)

	2674	Annexation (Special)

	2675	(Repealed by 2755)

	2676	Secondhand dealers (5.16)

	2677	Annexation (Special)

	2678	Finance (Special)

	2679	Public ways (Special)

	2680	(Repealed by 2713)

	2681	(Repealed by 2725)

	2682	Planning (Special)

	2683	Planning (Special)

	2684	Franchise (Special)

	2685	City docks (Repealed by 2888)

	2686	(Repealed by 2765)

	2687	Traffic control (10.04)

	2688	Planning (Special)

	2689	Public improvements (Special)

	2690	(Repealed by 2755)

	2691	Traffic control (10.04)

	2692	Public ways (Special)

	2693	Traffic control (10.04)

	2694	Water regulation and rates (13.04)

	2695	Finance (Special)

	2696	Finance (Special)

	2697	Planning commission (2.08)

	2698	Finance (Special)

	2699	Annexation (Special)

	2700	Annexation (Special)

	2701	Planning (Special)

	2702	Planning (Special)

	2703	(Repealed by 2756)

	2704	Annexation (Special)

	2705	Not enacted

	2706	Annexation, planning (Special)

	2707	Planning (Special)

	2708	Annexation (Special)

	2709	(Repealer)

	2710	Development regulations (Repealed by 2785)

	2711	Annexation, planning (Special)

	2712	Annexation, planning (Special)

	2713	(Repealed by 2746)

	2714	Annexation, planning (Special)

	2715	(Repealed by 2760)

	2716	Street standards (Repealed by 3112)

	2717	(Repealed by 2755 and 2757)

	2718	(Repealed by 2758)

	2719	Public ways (Special)

	2720	Annexation, planning (Special)

	2721	Traffic control (10.04)

	2722	Traffic control (10.04)

	2723	Annexation, planning (Special)

	2724	Liquor license review (5.28)

	2725	Animal control (6.04)

	2726	Public ways (Special)

	2727	Finance (Special)

	2728	Annexation (Special)

	2729	Annexation, planning (Special)

	2730	Planning (Special)

	2731	Development regulations (Repealed by 2785)

	2732	Annexation, planning (Special)

	2733	Animal control (6.04)

	2734	Planning (Special)

	2735	Annexation, planning (Special)

	2736	Planning (Special)

	2737	Public ways (Special)

	2738	(Repealed by 2813)

	2739	Annexation (Special)

	2740	Planning (Special)

	2741	Public ways (Special)

	2742	State building codes (Repealed by 2813)

	2743	Cross-connections (13.08)

	2744	Water regulation and rates (13.04)

	2745	Right-of-way regulations (12.20)

	2746	Wastewater pretreatment regulations (Repealed by 2945)

	2747	Development regulations (Repealed by 2785)

	2748	Annexation, planning (Special)

	2749	Annexation, planning (Special)

	2750	Traffic control (10.04)

	2751	Annexation, planning (Special)

	2752	Planning (Special)

	2753	Finance (Special)

	2754	Franchises, etc. (Special)

	2755	(Repealer)

	2756	Impoundment of vehicles (9.16)

	2757	General offenses and penalties (Repealed by 2804)

	2758	Comp. 5-11 (9.16)

	2759	Public ways (Special)

	2760	Nuisances (8.12)

	2761	Annexation, planning (Special)

	2762	Public contracting rules (Repealed by 2821)

	2763	Annexation, planning (Special)

	2764	Public ways (Special)

	2765	Inventory searches of impounded vehicles (Repealed by 2889)

	2766	Development regulations (Repealed by 2785)

	2767	Annexation, planning (Special)

	2768	Public ways (Special)

	2769	Annexation, planning (Special)

	2770	Annexation, planning (Special)

	2771	Records retention and disposal (2.44)

	2772	(Repealer)

	2773	Traffic control (10.04)

	2774	Amends zoning map (Special)

	2775	Amends § 2.150 of Ord. 2616, zoning (Repealed by 2875)

	2776	Declares city’s election to receive state revenues (Special)

	2777	Amends §§ 7(e), 7(h) and 7(n) of Ord. 2322, solid waste (8.04)

	2778	Street vacation (Special)

	2779	Annexation (Special)

	2780	Amends Schedule H of Ord. 2687, traffic control (10.04)

	2781	Annexation (Special)

	2782	Amends Ord. 2779, annexation (Special)

	2783	Annexation (Special)

	2784	Annexation (Special)

	2785	Adopts new community development code; repeals Ords. 2252, 2256, 2379, 2507, 2518, 2538, 2553, 2554, 2555, 2556, 2616, 2617, 2636, 2652, 2673, 2710, 2731, 2747, 2766 and 2775 (Repealed by 2875)

	2786	Amends zoning, comprehensive plan map (Special)

	2787	Amends zoning, comprehensive plan map (Special)

	2788	Amends zoning, comprehensive plan map (Special)

	2789	Amends zoning, comprehensive plan map (Special)

	2790	Amends zoning map (Special)

	2791	Amends comprehensive plan map (Special)

	2792	Amends zoning, comprehensive plan map (Special)

	2793	Amends zoning, comprehensive plan map (Special)

	2794	Declares city’s election to receive state revenues (Special)

	2795	Amends Ord. 2784, annexation (Special)

	2796	Amends comprehensive plan (Special)

	2797	Amends § 20 of Ord. 2250, park regulations (8.24)

	2798	Establishes advanced financing improvement district (Special)

	2799	Annexation (Special)

	2800	Annexation (Special)

	2801	Annexation (Special)

	2802	Annexation (Special)

	2803	Annexation (Special)

	2804	Prescribes general offenses and penalties; repeals Ord. 2757 (Repealed by 2855)

	2805	Adopts Oregon Vehicle Code and ORS Chapter 153 (Repealed by 2856)

	2806	Public contracting rules (Repealed by 2821)

	2807	Amends comprehensive plan (Special)

	2808	Establishes procedures and criteria for review of wrecking certificates (5.32)

	2809	Establishes emergency operations procedures (2.48)

	2810	Street vacation (Special)

	2811	Adds § 24 to Ord. 2146, nuisances (8.12)

	2812	Amends zoning, comprehensive plan map (Special)

	2813	Adopts new building codes; repeals Ords. 2738 and 2742 (Repealed by 3011)

	2814	Prohibits discharge of firearms and certain weapons (9.12)

	2815	Prohibits motor vehicles on Rutherford Road Parkway (10.16)

	2816	Adds §§ 9(3), 9(4), 9(5) and a new section to Ord. 2146, nuisances (8.12)

	2817	Amends §§ 3 and 4 of Ord. 2309, library fees and fines (3.04)

	2818	Renews garbage drop box franchise; repeals Ord. 2583 (Repealed by 3140)

	2819	Declares city’s election to receive state revenues (Special)

	2820	Street vacation (Special)

	2821	Public contracting rules; repeals Ords. 2762 and 2806 (2.04)

	2822	Amends comprehensive plan map (Special)

	2823	Annexation (Special)

	2824	Amends comprehensive plan (Special)

	2825	Annexation (Special)

	2826	Annexation (Special)

	2827	Annexation (Special)

	2828	Annexation (Special)

	2829	Annexation (Special)

	2830	Annexation (Special)

	2831	Annexation (Special)

	2832	Amends § 2 of Ord. 2808, wrecking certificates (5.32)

	2833	Establishes procedures and requirements for review of just compensation claims (Repealed by 2879)

	2834	Prohibits smoking in public places, and establishes smoke-free workplaces (Repealed by 3103)

	2835	Amends Ord. 2833, providing for a delay in effectiveness (Repealed by 2879)

	2836	Provides for system development charges; repeals Ord. 2619 (13.24)

	2837	Grants utility franchise to Columbia River PUD (Special)

	2838	Amends § 8 of Ord. 2834, smoking pollution control (Repealed by 3103)

	2839	Street vacation (Special)

	2840	Declares city’s election to receive state revenues (Special)

	2841	Street vacation (Special)

	2842	Amends §§ 3 and 4 of Ord. 2274, traffic control (10.04)

	2843	Adopts transient room fee (3.20)

	2844	Street vacation (Special)

	2845	Street vacation (Special)

	2846	Amends zoning map (Special)

	2847	Repeals Ords. 2668, 2669, 2670 and 2706 (Repealer)

	2848	Annexation (Special)

	2849	Adds § 9.02.090.020 to Ord. 2813, state building codes (Repealed by 3011)

	2850	Annexation (Special)

	2851	Renames a portion of Alpine Avenue (Special)

	2852	(Number not used)

	2853	Grants gas utility franchise to Northwest Natural Gas Company (Special)

	2854	Street vacation (Special)

	2855	Prescribes general offenses and penalties; repeals Ord. 2804 (Repealed by 2898)

	2856	Adopts Oregon Vehicle Code and ORS Chapter 153; repeals Ord. 2805 (Repealed by 2897)

	2857	Street vacation (Special)

	2858	Amends Ord. 2853, gas utility franchise (Special)

	2859	Amends Ord. 2845, street vacation (Special)

	2860	Adds § 23 to Ord. 2250, park regulations (8.24)

	2861	Amends § (f) of Ord. 2405, noise regulations (8.16)

	2862	Annexation (Special)

	2863	Amends § 8 of Ord. 2834, smoking pollution control (Repealed by 3103)

	2864	Adopts police officer training fee (3.24)

	2865	Declares city’s election to receive state revenues (Special)

	2866	Annexation (Special)

	2867	Prescribes general offenses and penalties (Repealed by 2896)

	2868	Street vacation (Special)

	2869	Amends Ord. 2857, street vacation (Special)

	2870	Annexation (Special)

	2871	Establishes installment payment fee (3.28)

	2872	Annexation (Special)

	2873	Street vacation (Special)

	2874	Street vacation (Special)

	2875	Adopts community development code; repeals Ord. 2785 (17.04, 17.08, 17.12, 17.16, 17.20, 17.24, 17.28, 17.32, 17.40, 17.44, 17.46, 17.48, 17.52, 17.56, 17.60, 17.64, 17.68, 17.72, 17.76, 17.80, 17.84, 17.88, 17.92, 17.96, 17.100, 17.104, 17.108, 17.112, 17.116, 17.120, 17.124, 17.128, 17.132, 17.136, 17.140, 17.144, 17.148, 17.152, 18.04, 18.08, 18.12, 18.16, 18.20, 18.24, 18.28, 18.32, 18.36)

	2876	Street vacation (Special)

	2877	Renames platted street from Oakway Street to Ha Lane (Special)

	2878	Amends Ord. 2869, street vacation (Special)

	2879	Repeals Ords. 2833 and 2835 (Repealer)

	2880	Establishes municipal court administration fees (3.32)

	2881	Amends § 9.01.100.050(5) of Ord. 2813, state building codes (Repealed by 3011)

	2882	Prohibits outdoor burning (8.36)

	2883	Amends Meadowbrook Planned Development Overlay Zone boundaries (Special)

	2884	Adopts Uniform Fire Code; repeals Ord. 2660 (Repealed by 2961)

	2885	Establishes new fees for land use applications and actions; repeals Ord. 2631 (Repealed by 3095)

	2886	Declares city’s election to receive state revenues (Special)

	2887	Establishes storm drainage utility (13.20)

	2888	Establishes regulations for use of city docks; repeals Ord. 2685 (8.28)

	2889	Authorizes adoption of administrative program for inventory searches; repeals Ord. 2765 (9.20)

	2890	Amends community development code (17.40, 17.44)

	2891	Amends § 3.D. of Ord. 2871, installment payment fee (3.28)

	2892	Amends Ord. 2250, park fees (8.24)

	2893	Amends Ord. 2743, cross connection control program (Cancelled)

	2894	Amends § 16(4) of Ord. 2003, large assemblies (Repealed by 3065)

	2895	Amends comprehensive plan (Special)

	2896	Prescribes general offenses and penalties; repeals Ord. 2867 (Repealed by 2928)

	2897	Adopts Oregon Vehicle Code and ORS Chapter 153; repeals Ord. 2856 (Repealed by 2928)

	2898	Prescribes general offenses and penalties; repeals Ord. 2855 (Repealed by 2910)

	2899	Amends § 2 of Ord. 2725, animal control (6.04)

	2900	Annexation (Special)

	2901	Annexation (Special)

	2902	Annexation (Special)

	2903	Amends § 9.02.050.010 of Ord. 2813, state building codes (Repealed by 3011)

	2904	Amends § 9.5. of Ord. 2725, animal control (6.04)

	2905	Amends Ord. 2813, state building codes (Repealed by 3011)

	2906	Adopts public contracting rules (Repealed by 2942)

	2907	Amends § 18 of Ord. 2003, large assemblies (Repealed by 3065)

	2908	Amends § 7 of Ord. 2888, city docks (8.28)

	2909	Amends comprehensive plan map (Special)

	2910	Prescribes general offenses and penalties; repeals Ord. 2898 (Repealed by 2928)

	2911	Declares city’s election to receive state revenues (Special)

	2912	Amends § 9.01.090.020 of Ord. 2813, state building codes (Repealed by 3011)

	2913	Annexation (Special)

	2914	Annexation (Special)

	2915	Annexation (Special)

	2916	Annexation (Special)

	2917	Annexation (Special)

	2918	Amends § 5 of Ord. 2906; repeals Res. 1312, contract review board (Repealed by 2942)

	2919	Amends §§ 8 and 9.A. of Ord. 2888, city docks (8.28)

	2920	Annexation (Special)

	2921	Establishes public arts and cultural commission (2.36)

	2922	Annexation (Special)

	2923	Amends Ord. 2875, community development code (Repealed by 3215)

	2924	Measure 37 claims (Repealed by 3078)

	2925	Pollution control (8.06)

	2926	Approves Elk Ridge Estates development agreement (Special)

	2927	Measure 37 voluntary assessment district (Repealed by 3078)

	2928	Prescribes general penalties and offenses; repeals Ords. 2896, 2897 and 2910 (Repealed by 2977)

	2929	Amends Ord. 2864, police officer training fee (3.24)

	2930	Amends Ord. 2352, parks commission (Repealed by 3229)

	2931	Amends Ord. 2894, dogs in City Hall (Repealed by 3065)

	2932	Municipal court (Repealed by 2940)

	2933	Amends Ord. 2809, emergency operations procedures (2.48)

	2934	Street vacation (Special)

	2935	Amends Ord. 2928, criminal code (9.04)

	2936	Amends Ord. 2875, community development code (17.32)

	2937	Amends zoning map (Special)

	2938	Amends Ord. 2920, annexation (Special)

	2939	Amends zoning map (Special)

	2940	Repeals Ord. 2932, municipal court (Repealer)

	2941	Municipal court (2.18)

	2942	Public contracting rules; repeals Ords. 2906 and 2918 (2.04)

	2943	Amends § 4 of Ord. 2627, city library and library board (2.28)

	2944	Amends Ord. 2813, building code (Repealed by 3011)

	2945	Wastewater pretreatment regulations; repeals Ord. 2746 (Repealed by 3085)

	2946	(Not adopted)

	2947	Municipal court judge, judges pro tem (2.20)

	2948	Amends Ord. 2928, general penalties and offenses (Special)

	2949	Amends §§ 3 and 4 of Ord. 2921, public arts and cultural commission (2.36)

	2950	Amends zoning map (Special)

	2951	Annexation (Special)

	2952	Establishes standards for review of public art proposals (2.36)

	2953	Declares city’s election to receive state revenues (Special)

	2954	Amends zoning map (Special)

	2955	Amends § 5 of Ord. 2882, outdoor burning (8.36)

	2956	Amends § 1 of Ord. 2921, public arts and cultural commission (2.36)

	2957	Amends § 12 of Ord. 2250, park regulations (8.24)

	2958	Amends Ord. 2250, park regulations (8.24)

	2959	Amends Ord. 2725, animal control (6.04)

	2960	Amends Ord. 2813, building code (Repealed by 3011)

	2961	Adopts fire code; repeals Ord. 2884 (15.08)

	2962	Amends Ord. 2813, building code (Repealed by 3011)

	2963	Approves wetland planned development agreement (Special)

	2964	Approves Elk Ridge Estates subdivision development agreement (Special)

	2965	Amends Ord. 2934, street vacation (Repealed by 2968)

	2966	Annexation (Special)

	2967	Amends Ord. 2813, building code (Repealed by 3011)

	2968	Amends Ord. 2934, street vacation; repeals Ord. 2965 (Repealed by 2970)

	2969	Street vacation (Special)

	2970	Amends Ord. 2934, street vacation; repeals Ord. 2968 (Special)

	2971	Approves Bell’s Construction development agreement (Special)

	2972	Amends Ord. 2809, emergency operations procedures (2.48)

	2973	Street vacation (Special)

	2974	Amends § 1 of Ord. 2146, nuisances (8.12)

	2975	Annexation (Special)

	2976	Annexation (Special)

	2977	Prescribes general penalties and offenses; repeals Ord. 2928 (9.04)

	2978	Amends Ord. 2952, standards for review of public art proposals (2.36)

	2979	Street vacation (Special)

	2980	Amends comprehensive plan (19.04, 19.08, 19.12, 19.16, 19.20)

	2981	Amends comprehensive plan map (Special)

	2982	Amends comprehensive plan map (Special)

	2983	Amends comprehensive plan map (Special)

	2984	Amends comprehensive plan map (Special)

	2985	Annexation (Special)

	2986	Annexation (Special)

	2987	Annexation (Special)

	2988	Annexation (Special)

	2989	Annexation (Special)

	2990	Street vacation (Special)

	2991	City administrator; repeals Ord. 2220 (Repealed by 3030)

	2992	Amends zoning, comprehensive plan map (Special)

	2993	Amends Ord. 2146, nuisances (8.12)

	2994	Amends Ord. 2853, gas utility franchise to Northwest Natural Gas Company (Special)

	2995	Amends zoning map (Special)

	2996	Annexation (Special)

	2997	Trespass to city watershed properties (9.24)

	2998	Amends zoning map (Special)

	2999	Street vacation (Special)

	3000	Purity of city water supply and watershed; repeals Ord. 2243 (8.20)

	3001	Amends Ord. 2244, premises serving alcoholic liquor (5.24)

	3002	Declares city’s election to receive state revenues (Special)

	3003	(Number not used)

	3004	Amends Ord. 2814, discharge of firearms and certain weapons (9.12)

	3005	Amends Ord. 2250, park regulations; repeals Ord. 2548 (8.24)

	3006	Amends § 1 of Ord. 2977, general penalties and offenses; repeals § 18 of Ord. 2146, nuisances (9.04)

	3007	Amends comprehensive plan map (Special)

	3008	Annexation (Special)

	3009	Annexation (Special)

	3010	Amends zoning map (Special)

	3011	Building code; repeals Ords. 2813, 2849, 2881, 2903, 2905, 2944, 2960, 2962 and 2967 (15.04, 15.16, 15.20)

	3012	(Number not used)

	3013	Weapons possession (9.10)

	3014	Solicitation; repeals Ord. 2566 (5.20)

	3015	Approves Eagle Lake Bluffs Planned Community Development development agreement (Special)

	3016	Annexation (Special)

	3017	Street vacation (Special)

	3018	(Number not used)

	3019	Street vacation (Special)

	3020	Approves Hall subdivision development agreement (Special)

	3021	Approves AEH subdivision development agreement (Special)

	3022	Amends zoning map (Special)

	3023	Approves ABC Planned Community Development development agreement (Special)

	3024	Amends Ord. 2964, Elkridge Estates subdivision development agreement (Special)

	3025	Amends Ord. 3021, AEH subdivision development agreement (Special)

	3026	Amends Ord. 2882, outdoor burning (8.36)

	3027	Annexation (Special)

	3028	Annexation (Special)

	3029	Amends zoning map (Special)

	3030	City administrator; repeals Ord. 2991 (2.12)

	3031	Amends Ord. 2875, community development code (17.44, 17.46)

	3032	Amends Ord. 2875, community development code (17.16, 17.32, 17.108)

	3033	Parking (10.12)

	3034	Drop boxes, waste receptacles (8.44)

	3035	Amends zoning map (Special)

	3036	Approves Columbia River Foursquare Church development agreement (Special)

	3037	Adds Chs. 1.01, 1.04 and 1.06, code adoption, definitions and enforcement (1.01, 1.04, 1.06)

	3038	Amends Ord. 2725, animal control (6.04)

	3039	Amends Ord. 2146, nuisances (8.12)

	3040	Adds § 6.04.065; amends §§ 6.04.010, 6.04.030(2) and 6.04.040(5), animal control (6.04)

	3041	Annexation (Special)

	3042	Amends zoning map (Special)

	3043	Adds § 1.080.170 to Ord. 2875, community development code (17.32)

	3044	Amends § 2.28.090, gifts and bequests (2.28)

	3045	Amends §§ 2.52.030, 2.52.100 and 2.56.010, land use (Repealed by 3078)

	3046	Tourism committee; repeals definition of “tourism committee” in § 3.20.020 and repeals § 3.20.060(3), transient room fee (3.20)

	3047	Amends §§ 3.12.060 and 3.12.070, utility privilege tax (3.12)

	3048	Street vacation (Special)

	3049	Street vacation (Repealed by 3155)

	3050	Street vacation (Special)

	3051	Annexation (Special)

	3052	Corrects scrivener’s error in Ord. 2980, comprehensive plan (Title 19)

	3053	Right-of-way vacation (Special)

	3054	Amends §§ 3.20.040, 3.20.080, 3.20.150 and 3.20.160, transient room fee (3.20)

	3055	Adds §§ 5.16.055, 5.16.155 and 5.16.165; amends §§ 5.16.040, 5.16.050, 5.16.150, 5.16.160 and 5.16.170, secondhand dealers (5.16)

	3056	Amends §§ 5.28.020, 5.28.030, 5.28.040, 5.28.050 and 5.28.060, liquor license review (5.28)

	3057	Amends § 5.24.010, alcoholic liquor (5.24)

	3058	Amends § 6.04.040, animal noises (6.04)

	3059	Amends §§ 5.36.020 and 5.36.030, enterprise zones (5.36)

	3060	Amends §§ 8.04.030(9), 8.04.040(2)(d) and 8.04.090, solid waste (8.04)

	3061	Business licenses; repeals Ch. 5.04 (5.04)

	3062	Taxicab companies, drivers, and taxicabs; repeals Ch. 5.08 (5.08)

	3063	Amends Ord. 3028, annexation (Special)

	3064	Amends Ch. 8.40, abandoned vehicles (8.40)

	3065	Large assemblies; repeals Ch. 8.08 (8.08)

	3066	Amends §§ 2.04.090(3)(d) and (3)(h)(ii) [(3)(i)(ii)], public contracting (2.04)

	3067	Amends §§ 8.36.040 and 8.36.050, outdoor burning (8.36)

	3068	Amends §§ 8.32.090 and 8.32.110, smoking pollution control (Repealed by 3103)

	3069	Adds § 5.20.050, solicitation penalties (5.20)

	3070	Amends § 2.60.030, tourism committee (Repealed by 3199)

	3071	Annexation (Special)

	3072	Amends § 9.04.010, criminal code (9.04)

	3073	Amends § 9.12.060, firearms and weapons discharge (9.12)

	3074	Amends § 8.16.050, noise (8.16)

	3075	Amends § 9.16.030(1), impoundment of vehicles (9.16)

	3076	Approved development agreement (Special)

	3077	Street vacation (Denied)

	3078	Repeals Chs. 2.52 and 2.56, Ballot Measure 37 (Repealer)

	3079	Amends § 2.08.020, planning commission (2.08)

	3080	Amends §§ 8.12.080(5) and (6), obstruction of passageways (8.12)

	3081	Right-of-way vacation (Special)

	3082	Amends §§ 13.24.030, 13.24.050, 13.24.060, 13.24.080, 13.24.090, 13.24.110, 13.24.130, 13.24.140 and 13.24.160, system development charges (13.24)

	3083	Annexation zoning (Special)

	3084	Amends §§ 17.08.030(2), 17.24.090(5), 17.24.130, 17.24.260(1)(d), 17.24.290(3) and (3)(a), 17.24.300(1), 17.24.310(3), 17.24.390(4) and 17.24.400 Table A; repeals and replaces Ch. 17.36, historic sites and overlay district (17.08, 17.24, 17.36)

	3085	Adds Ch. 13.18 [13.16]; repeals Ch. 13.16, wastewater pretreatment regulations (Repealed by 3233)

	3086	Amends §§ 15.04.110, 15.04.120, 15.04.130, 15.04.140, 15.04.150 and 15.08.010, building codes (15.04, 15.08)

	3087	Adds §§ 8.28.052, 8.28.054, 8.28.056, 8.28.072, 8.28.074 and 8.28.110; amends §§ 8.28.020, 8.28.030, 8.28.040, 8.28.050, 8.28.060, 8.28.070, 8.28.090 and 8.28.100, city docks (8.28)

	3088	Amends § 8.24.200, campground rules for parks (8.24)

	3089	Amends zoning map (Special)

	3090	Establishes bicycle and pedestrian commission (Repealed by 3229)

	3091	Amends Ch. 17.88, signs (17.88)

	3092	Annexation (Special)

	3093	Establishes urban renewal agency (2.68)

	3094	Right-of-way vacation (Special)

	3095	Sets planning department and engineering department fees by resolution; repeals Ord. 2885 (Special)

	3096	Right-of-way vacation (Special)

	3097	Amends §§ 2.36.080 and 2.36.090(5), arts and cultural commission (2.36)

	3098	(Number not used)

	3099	Amends § 6.04.040, pets in city parks (6.04)

	3100	Amends § 10.12.030, parking (10.12)

	3101	Adopts economic opportunities analysis as addendum to comprehensive plan (19.24)

	3102	Amends § 2.60.030, tourism committee membership (Repealed by 3199)

	3103	Repeals Ch. 8.32 (Repealer)

	3104	Rescinds incorrect version of Ord. 1868, street vacation (Repealer)

	3105	Adds § 17.124.070(3); amends §§ 17.124.020, 17.124.030, 17.124.050 and 17.136.040(2), community development code (17.124, 17.136)

	3106	Amends Ord. 2964, Elk Ridge Estates subdivision development agreement (Special)

	3107	Adds § 17.32.180, waterfront redevelopment overlay district (17.32)

	3108	Amends §§ 6.04.010, 6.04.060 and 6.04.065, animal control (6.04)

	3109	Adds § 8.12.082, sidewalk vendors (8.12)

	3110	Adds § 17.32.175; amends comprehensive plan map, zoning district map and § 17.32.010, Houlton business district (17.32)

	3111	Amends Ord. 3036, Columbia River Foursquare Church development agreement (Special)

	3112	Repeals Ch. 12.12 (Repealer)

	3113	Adds § 8.12.212, visual clearance area (8.12)

	3114	Street vacation (Special)

	3115	Annexation (Special)

	3116	Annexation (Special)

	3117	Adds Ch. 9.14, social games (9.14)

	3118	Annexation (Special)

	3119	Annexation (Special)

	3120	Apportions, levies and assesses cost of sanitary sewer (Special)

	3121	Amends comprehensive plan map (Special)

	3122	Amends § 8.36.030(3)(a) through (c), outdoor burning exemptions (8.36)

	3123	Windy Ridge advanced financing improvement district (Special)

	3124	Amends §§ 15.04.080, 15.04.090 and 15.04.220, building code (15.04)

	3125	Annexation (Special)

	3126	Criminal history record check policies (2.72)

	3127	Adds § 13.04.020(7), water service (13.04)

	3128	Annexation (Special)

	3129	Amends comprehensive plan map (Special)

	3130	Amends § 6.04.080(7) and (9), animal facility licensing (6.04)

	3131	Right-of-way vacation (Special)

	3132	Right-of-way vacation (Special)

	3133	Amends § 8.12.212, visual clearance area (8.12)

	3134	Amends § 15.04.100, building code (15.04)

	3135	Amends § 8.36.030(3), outdoor burning (8.36)

	3136	Adds new section to Ch. 8.24, smoking in city parks (8.24)

	3137	Amends § 12.04.070, required sidewalk work (12.04)

	3138	Adds § 19.20.090; amends Ch. 17.46 and § 19.12.130, floodplain regulations (17.46, 19.12, 19.20)

	3139	Amends §§ 9.14.040(4), (6), (7) and (8) and 9.14.080, social games (9.14)

	3140	Renews garbage drop box franchise; repeals Ord. 2818 (Special)

	3141	Adds Ch. 12.06, street trees and street improvements (12.06)

	3142	Annexation and zoning designation (Repealed by 3154)

	3143	Amends § 2.36.110, arts and cultural commission hearings (2.36)

	3144	Adds § 17.36.065; amends §§ 17.12.030, 17.16.010, 17.24.040, 17.24.120, 17.24.130, 17.32.060, 17.32.070, 17.32.080, 17.32.090, 17.32.095, 17.32.120, 17.32.150, 17.32.170, 17.36.020, 17.36.040, 17.72.090, 17.84.050, 17.84.070, 17.88.040, 17.88.045, 17.88.050, 17.88.055, 17.88.060, 17.96.180, 17.124.050, 17.132.020, 17.132.025, 17.132.045, 17.136.070, 17.140.035, 17.152.070, 19.08.040, 19.08.060 and 19.12.080, development code (17.12, 17.16, 17.24, 17.32, 17.36, 17.72, 17.84, 17.88, 17.96, 17.124, 17.132, 17.136, 17.140, 17.152, 19.08, 19.12)

	3145	Adds §§ 10.12.020(13) and 10.12.030(15); amends §§ 1.04.010(18), 10.12.020(6) and 10.12.030(2) and (13), parking (1.04, 10.12)

	3146	Amends comprehensive plan map (Special)

	3147	Amends §§ 8.28.040, 8.28.060 and 8.28.090, city docks (8.28)

	3148	Adopts waterfront development prioritization plan as addendum to comprehensive plan (19.28)

	3149	Amends §§ 6.04.040, 8.24.190 and 8.24.240(2) and provides for a sunset date, animal control (6.04, 8.24)

	3150	Adds § 17.08.060 and Ch. 17.156; amends §§ 17.20.080, 17.20.120, 17.24.040, 17.24.120, 17.24.130, 17.24.250, 17.72.060, 17.84.030, 17.84.040, 17.84.050, 17.84.070, 17.84.080, 17.84.120, 17.84.150, 17.96.180, 17.108.020, 17.136.070, 17.140.040, 17.152.030, 17.152.060, 17.152.080, 17.152.090, 17.152.100, 17.152.110, 19.08.040 and 19.16.010, development code (17.08, 17.20, 17.24, 17.72, 17.84, 17.96, 17.108, 17.136, 17.140, 17.152, 17.156, 19.08, 19.16)

	3151	Amends § 8.28.040, moorage time limitations (8.28)

	3152	Adds § 2.28.045, library rules (2.28)

	3153	Street vacation (Special)

	3154	Annexation and zoning designation; repeals Ord. 3142 (Special)

	3155	Street vacation; repeals Ord. 3049 (Special)

	3156	Annexation and zoning designation (Special)

	3157	Amends § 9.04.010, criminal code (9.04)

	3158	Amends §§ 2.04.090, 2.04.100 and 2.04.120, contracting procedures (2.04)

	3159	Amends § 5.16.155(3), pawnbrokers (5.16)

	3160	Amends § 2.60.030, tourism committee (Repealed by 3199)

	3161	Amends §§ 2.60.030 and 2.60.050, tourism committee (Repealed by 3199)

	3162	Adds § 12.20.045; amends § 8.12.080, obstructions in rights-of-way (8.12, 12.20)

	3163	Street vacation (Special)

	3164	Adopts architectural guidelines for Olde Towne St. Helens; adds § 17.88.070; amends §§ 17.16.010, 17.32.100, 17.32.170, 17.64.020, 17.64.030, 17.68.020, 17.72.110, 17.88.015, 17.88.040, 17.88.045, 17.88.055, 17.88.060, 17.88.120, 17.88.135, 17.96.070, 17.120.040, 17.124.030, 17.124.070, 17.148.080, 17.152.030 and 18.12.110, development code (17.16, 17.32, 17.64, 17.68, 17.72, 17.88, 17.96, 17.120, 17.124, 17.148, 17.152, 18.12)

	3165	Amends § 10.04.100 and Schedule H of Ch. 10.04, skateboards and rollerblades (10.04)

	3166	Amends § 6.04.020(1)(k), dog license fee exceptions (6.04)

	3167	(On hold)

	3168	Amends §§ 17.36.020(1) and (2), historic landmarks commission (17.36)

	3169	Adds § 13.12.040(13), building sewers and connection (Repealed by 3233)

	3170	Amends §§ 9.24.030(9) and 9.24.040, trespass on watershed property (9.24)

	3171	Annexation (Special)

	3172	Annexation (Special)

	3173	Moratorium on medical marijuana facilities (Special)

	3174	Amends § 2.48.060, emergency operations (2.48)

	3175	Street vacation (Special)

	3176	Amends § 17.36.020(1), historic landmark commission (17.36)

	3177	Adds Ch. 5.30, marijuana tax (5.30)

	3178	Amends § 6.04.020(1), dog licensing requirements (6.04)

	3179	Amends § 6.04.080(5), animal facility license application fees (6.04)

	3180	Amends §§ 17.32.010, 17.32.170, 17.32.172, 17.32.180(10), 17.68.020(2), 17.88.050(2), 17.88.060, 17.88.070 and 17.124.070(3), riverfront district (17.32, 17.68, 17.88, 17.124)

	3181	Adopts US 30 and Columbia Boulevard/St. Helens Street corridor master plan; amends transportation systems plan and comprehensive plan, adds §§ 17.72.140, 17.152.210 and 18.12.190 and Chs. 19.30 and 19.32; amends §§ 8.12.010(1), 8.12.080, 17.16.010, 17.32.100(4), 17.72.030(2), 17.72.060(4), 17.72.110(1) and (2), 17.72.130, 17.80.020(22), 17.84.040(5), 17.84.050, 17.152.030(24), 18.04.010, 18.20.050, 19.08.020(3) and 19.12.080(2); development code (8.12, 17.16, 17.32, 17.72, 17.80, 17.84, 17.152, 18.04, 18.12, 18.20, 19.08, 19.12, 19.30, 19.32)

	3182	Right-of-way vacation (Special)

	3183	Amends §§ 8.12.250(1), (2), (3), (6), (13), (14) and (16), nuisance abatement (8.12)

	3184	(Number not used)

	3185	Youth council (2.70)

	3186	Amends §§ 2.44.010, 3.20.060, 3.28.020, 5.08.100(1), Ch. 5.32, §§ 8.04.040(2), 8.24.080, 9.04.010, 10.04.020(1), 10.04.040, 12.04.100, 13.12.080(6), 15.08.010, 15.08.020, 15.08.030, 15.08.040, 15.08.060, 15.08.070, 15.08.080, 15.08.110, 17.16.010, 17.92.030(2), 17.144.040(9) and 18.24.030(1), housekeeping amendments (2.44, 3.20, 3.28, 5.08, 5.32, 8.04, 8.24, 9.04, 10.04, 12.04, 15.08, 17.16, 17.92, 17.144, 18.24)

	3187	Amends §§ 6.04.010 and 6.04.040(5), animal control (6.04)

	3188	Adds Ch. 8.32; amends § 8.24.065, smoking, tobacco and marijuana (8.24, 8.32)

	3189	Amends §§ 17.24.120(1), 17.24.400, 17.84.120, 17.84.130(4) and (5), 17.84.140(1), 17.84.150, 17.108.010, 17.108.030(4) and (5) and 17.108.050, zoning (17.24, 17.84, 17.108)

	3190	Amends §§ 17.16.010, 17.32.095(3), 17.32.100(3), 17.32.110(3), 17.32.170(3), 17.32.175(3) and 17.100.150, marijuana (17.16, 17.32, 17.100)

	3191	Adopts parks and trails master plan (19.34)

	3192	Adds Ch. 8.14, property maintenance and abandoned buildings (8.14)

	3193	(Withdrawn)

	3194	Amends § 10.04.150, prohibited parking or standing (10.04)

	3195	Adds Ch. 13.02; amends Ch. 13.04, utility services (13.02, 13.04)

	3196	Amends §§ 5.04.100(1), 5.04.120(1)(a) and Ch. 5.30, marijuana business regulations (5.04, 5.30)

	3197	Adds § 17.80.066; amends §§ 17.32.175 and 17.80.065, zoning (17.32, 17.80)

	3198	Grants telecommunications service franchise to Astound Broadband, LLC (Special)

	3199	Repeals Ch. 2.60, tourism committee (Repealer)

	3200	Amends Ch. 13.08, cross-connections (13.08)

	3201	Amends § 2.04.110, public contracting code (2.04)

	3202	Amends Ch. 5.30, marijuana business regulations (5.30)

	3203	Amends §§ 17.16.010, 17.24.120(1), 17.32.140, 17.88.060(2)(c), 17.152.110 and 18.32.010(2), zoning (17.16, 17.24, 17.32, 17.88, 17.152, 18.32)

	3204	Annexation (Special)

	3205	Repeals § 8.24.190(7)(k), park regulations (8.24)

	3206	Deletes § 4 of Ord. 3149, McCormick Park pet off-leash area (6.04, 8.24)

	3207	Adds Ch. 5.38, recreational marijuana tax (5.38)

	3208	Adds § 12.20.060; amends § 12.20.010, right-of-way regulations (12.20)

	3209	Amends § 2.08.070, planning commission meetings (2.08)

	3210	Amends Ch. 5.16, secondhand dealers (5.16)

	3211	Amends zoning district map (Special)

	3212	Amends §§ 2.28.050 and 2.28.060, library board (2.28)

	3213	Amends comprehensive plan map and zoning district map (Special)

	3214	Amends comprehensive plan map and zoning district map (Special)

	3215	Adds §§ 17.32.170, 17.32.171 and 17.116.065; amends §§ 17.08.040(1)(a), 17.16.010, 17.20.120(1), 17.32.010, 17.32.050(5), 17.32.060(3) and (5), 17.32.070(5), 17.32.080(5), 17.32.090(5), 17.32.095(2), (3) and (5), 17.32.100(2), (3) and (5), 17.32.110(2), (3) and (5), 17.32.130, 17.32.140(4) and (5), 17.32.150(5), 17.36.020(6), 17.36.040(4), 17.36.050(3), 17.88.060(1), 17.88.070, 17.116.010, 17.116.030, 17.116.060, 19.08.060(3), 19.12.070, the comprehensive plan map and the zoning district map; amends and renumbers §§ 17.32.170 as 17.32.172, 17.32.172 as 17.32.179, 17.32.175 as 17.32.180 and 17.32.180 as 17.32.173; repeals § 17.32.120; adopts Waterfront Framework Plan, community development and comprehensive plan (17.08, 17.16, 17.20, 17.32, 17.36, 17.88, 17.116, 19.08, 19.12)

	3216	Annexation (Special)

	3217	Approves urban renewal plan (Special)

	3218	Amends §§ 15.04.110, 15.04.120, 15.04.130, 15.04.140, 15.04.150, 15.04.160, 15.04.180 and Ch. 15.20, buildings and construction (15.04, 15.20)

	3219	Amends §§ 2.32.030, 3.16.020, 5.08.140(3), 8.12.240(5), 10.04.240(6), 10.04.380(2), 12.32.030(3) and 15.08.100(6), fees and parking fines (2.32, 3.16, 5.08, 8.12, 10.04, 12.32, 15.08)

	3220	Amends comprehensive plan map and zoning district map (Special)

	3221	Right-of-way vacation (Special)

	3222	Street vacation (Special)

	3223	Amends § 8.12.090(3), trees, shrubs, weeds (8.12)

	3224	Amends comprehensive plan map and zoning district map (Special)

	3225	Amends Ch. 3.20, transient room fee (3.20)

	3226	Annexation (Special)

	3227	Amends zoning district map to add planned development overlay zone (Special)

	3228	Annexation (Special)

	3229	Adds Ch. 2.74; amends §§ 2.36.150, 8.24.060, 8.24.100 and 8.24.210; repeals Chs. 2.16 and 2.64, parks and trails commission (2.36, 2.74, 8.24)

	3230	Amends § 5.30.035; repeals § 5.30.030, marijuana business regulations (5.30)

	3231	Amends comprehensive plan map and zoning district map (Special)

	3232	Amends §§ 17.16.010, 17.24.040(4), 17.24.120(1), 17.32.050(2) and (3), 17.32.060(2) and (3), 17.32.070(2) and (3), 17.32.080(2) and (3), 17.32.090(2) and (3), 17.32.095(2) and (3), 17.32.100(2) and (3), 17.32.110(2), 17.32.171(2), 17.32.172(2), 17.32.173(2), 17.32.180(2) and (3), 17.96.020, 17.108.050(4), 17.120.020, 17.120.040, 17.120.050, 17.120.060, 17.120.070, 17.120.080 and Ch. 17.128, community development code (17.16, 17.24, 17.32, 17.96, 17.108, 17.120, 17.128)

	3233	Adds Ch. 13.14; repeals Chs. 13.12 and 13.16, sewer use and industrial pretreatment regulations (13.14)

	3234	Grants telecommunications franchise to Lightspeed Networks, Inc. (Special)

	3235	Right-of-way vacation (Special)

	3236	Adds § 13.14.085, use of portable privies (13.14)

	3237	Amends §§ 3.12.020 and 3.12.030, utility privilege tax (3.12)


Ordinances Pending Codification

 The following ordinances have not been codified yet. Click on the ordinance number to view the changes. Only codifiable ordinances can be viewed.(No uncodified ordinances at this time.)

 -->

	3238	Annexation (Special)

	3239	Amends §§ 8.28.020, 8.28.040, 8.28.060 and 8.28.100, city docks (8.28)

	3240	Adds Ch. 13.06, community recreation and parks fee (13.06)



-----------------------------

The St. Helens Municipal Code is current through Ordinance 3237, passed May 1, 2019.

Disclaimer: The City Recorder's Office has the official version of the St. Helens Municipal Code. Users should contact the City Recorder's Office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited above.

City Website: http://www.ci.st-helens.or.us/ City Telephone: (503) 366-8217

Code Publishing Company